{Here is a bunch of text that you should pay attention to: 'A very large part of that belongs to people who are in business, or
who have some other source of income than their own wages. There are
some exceptionally fortunate workers who happen to have good situations
and higher wages than the ordinary run of workmen. Then there are some
who are so placed--by letting lodgings, for instance--that they are
able to live rent free. Others whose wives go out to work; and others
again who have exceptional jobs and work a lot of overtime--but these
are all exceptional cases.' 'I say as no married workin' man can save any money at all!' shouted
Harlow, 'not unless 'e goes without some of even the few things we are
able to get--and makes 'is wife and kids go without as well.' ''Ear, 'ear,' said everybody except Crass and Slyme, who were both
thrifty working men, and each of them had some money saved in one or
other of the institutions mentioned. 'Then that means,' said Owen, 'that means that the wages the people in
division four receive is not equivalent to the work they do.' 'Why the 'ell don't yer talk
plain English without draggin' in a lot of long words wot nobody can't
understand?' 'I mean this,' replied Owen, speaking very slowly. 'Everything is
produced by the people in number four. In return for their work they
are given--Money, and the things they have made become the property of
the people who do nothing. Then, as the money is of no use, the
workers go to shops and give it away in exchange for some of the things
they themselves have made. They spend--or give back--ALL their wages;
but as the money they got as wages is not equal in value to the things
they produced, they find that they are only able to buy back a VERY
SMALL PART. So you see that these little discs of metal--this
Money--is a device for enabling those who do not work to rob the
workers of the greater part of the fruits of their toil.' The silence that ensued was broken by Crass. 'It sounds very pretty,' he sneered, 'but I can't make no 'ead or tail
of it, meself.' 'The producing class--these people in number
four are supposed to be paid for their work. Their wages are supposed
to be equal in value to their work. If it were, by
spending all their wages, the producing class would be able to buy back
All they had produced.' No one gave any
sign of understanding, or of agreeing or of disagreeing with what he
had said. Barrington's pipe had
gone out during the argument. He relit it from the fire with a piece
of twisted paper. 'If their wages were really equal in value to the product of their
labour,' Owen repeated, 'they would be able to buy back not a small
part--but the Whole.'... At this, a remark from Bundy caused a shout of laughter, and when
Wantley added point to the joke by making a sound like the discharge of
a pistol the merriment increased tenfold. 'Well, that's done it,' remarked Easton, as he got up and opened the
window. 'It's about time you was buried, if the smell's anything to go by,'
said Harlow, addressing Wantley, who laughed and appeared to think he
had distinguished himself. 'But even if we include the whole of the working classes,' continued
Owen, 'that is, the people in number three as well as those in number
four, we find that their combined wages are insufficient to buy the
things made by the producers. The total value of the wealth produced
in this country during the last year was L1,800,000,000, and the total
amount paid in wages during the same period was only L600,000,000. In
other words, by means of the Money Trick, the workers were robbed of
two-thirds of the value of their labour. All the people in numbers
three and four are working and suffering and starving and fighting in
order that the rich people in numbers one and two may live in luxury,
and do nothing. These are the wretches who cause poverty: they not
only devour or waste or hoard the things made by the worker, but as
soon as their own wants are supplied--they compel the workers to cease
working and prevent them producing the things they need. cried Owen, his usually pale face flushing red and his eyes
shining with sudden anger,'most of these people do not deserve to be
called human beings at all! They know that whilst
they are indulging in pleasures of every kind--all around them men and
women and little children are existing in want or dying of hunger.' The silence which followed was at length broken by Harlow:

'You say the workers is entitled to all they produce, but you forget
there's the raw materials to pay for. 'Of course the workers don't create the raw materials,' replied Owen. 'But I am not aware that the capitalists or the landlords do so either. The raw materials exist in abundance in and on the earth, but they are
of no use until labour has been applied to them.' 'But then, you see, the earth belongs to the landlords!' cried Crass,
unguardedly. 'I know that; and of course you think it's right that the whole country
should belong to a few people--'

'I must call the lecturer to horder,' interrupted Philpot. 'The land
question is not before the meeting at present.' 'You talk about the producers being robbed of most of the value of what
they produce,' said Harlow, 'but you must remember that it ain't all
produced by hand labour. What about the things what's made by
machinery?' 'The machines themselves were made by the workers,' returned Owen, 'but
of course they do not belong to the workers, who have been robbed of
them by means of the Money Trick.' 'That's more than you or I or anyone else can say,' returned Owen, 'but
it certainly wasn't the wealthy loafer class, or the landlords, or the
employers. Most of the men who invented the machinery lived and died
unknown, in poverty and often in actual want. The inventors too were
robbed by the exploiter-of-labour class. There are no men living at
present who can justly claim to have invented the machinery that exists
today. The most they can truthfully say is that they have added to or
improved upon the ideas of those who lived and worked before them. Even Watt and Stevenson merely improved upon steam engines and
locomotives already existing. Your question has really nothing to do
with the subject we are discussing: we are only trying to find out why
the majority of people have to go short of the benefits of
civilization. One of the causes is--the majority of the population are
engaged in work that does not produce those things; and most of what IS
produced is appropriated and wasted by those who have no right to it. If you walk through the streets of a
town or a city, and look around, Everything that you can
see--Factories, Machinery, Houses, Railways, Tramways, Canals,
Furniture, Clothing, Food and the very road or pavement you stand upon
were all made by the working class, who spend all their wages in buying
back only a very small part of the things they produce. Therefore what
remains in the possession of their masters represents the difference
between the value of the work done and the wages paid for doing it. This systematic robbery has been going on for generations, the value of
the accumulated loot is enormous, and all of it, all the wealth at
present in the possession of the rich, is rightly the property of the
working class--it has been stolen from them by means of the Money
Trick.'... The men stared with
puzzled, uncomfortable looks alternately at each other and at the
drawings on the wall. They were compelled to do a little thinking on
their own account, and it was a process to which they were
unaccustomed. In their infancy they had been taught to distrust their
own intelligence and to leave 'thinking' to their 'pastors' and masters
and to their 'betters' generally. All their lives they had been true
to this teaching, they had always had blind, unreasoning faith in the
wisdom and humanity of their pastors and masters. That was the reason
why they and their children had been all their lives on the verge of
starvation and nakedness, whilst their 'betters'--who did nothing but
the thinking--went clothed in purple and fine linen and fared
sumptuously every day. Several men had risen from their seats and were attentively studying
the diagrams Owen had drawn on the wall; and nearly all the others were
making the same mental efforts--they were trying to think of something
to say in defence of those who robbed them of the fruits of their toil. 'I don't see no bloody sense in always runnin' down the rich,' said
Harlow at last. 'There's always been rich and poor in the world and
there always will be.' 'It says in the Bible that the poor shall
always be with us.' 'What the bloody 'ell kind of system do you think we ought to 'ave?' 'If everything's wrong, 'ow's it goin' to be altered?' At this, everybody brightened up again, and exchanged looks of
satisfaction and relief. It wasn't necessary to think
about these things at all! Nothing could ever be altered: it had
always been more or less the same, and it always would be. 'It seems to me that you all HOPE it is impossible to alter it,' said
Owen. 'Without trying to find out whether it could be done, you
persuade yourselves that it is impossible, and then, instead of being
sorry, you're glad!' Some of them laughed in a silly, half-ashamed way. 'How do YOU reckon it could be altered?' 'The way to alter it is, first to enlighten the people as to the real
cause of their sufferings, and then--'

'Well,' interrupted Crass, with a self-satisfied chuckle, 'it'll take a
better bloody man than you to enlighten ME!' 'I don't want to be henlightened into Darkness!' 'But what sort of System do you propose, then?' 'After you've got 'em all enlightened--if you don't believe in sharing
out all the money equal, how ARE you goin' to alter it?' 'I don't know 'ow 'e's goin' to alter it,' sneered Crass, looking at
his watch and standing up, 'but I do know what the time is--two minits
past one!' 'The next lecture,' said Philpot, addressing the meeting as they all
prepared to return to work, 'the next lecture will be postponded till
tomorrer at the usual time, when it will be my painful dooty to call
upon Mr Owen to give 'is well-known and most hobnoxious address
entitled "Work and how to avoid it." Hall them as wants to be
henlightened kindly attend.' 'Or hall them as don't get the sack tonight,' remarked Easton grimly. Chapter 26

The Slaughter


During the afternoon, Rushton and Sweater visited the house, the latter
having an appointment to meet there a gardener to whom he wished to
give instructions concerning the laying out of the grounds, which had
been torn up for the purpose of putting in the new drains. Sweater had
already arranged with the head gardener of the public park to steal
some of the best plants from that place and have them sent up to 'The
Cave'. These plants had been arriving in small lots for about a week. They must have been brought there either in the evening after the men
left off or very early in the morning before they came. The two
gentlemen remained at the house for about half an hour and as they went
away the mournful sound of the Town Hall bell--which was always tolled
to summon meetings of the Council--was heard in the distance, and the
hands remarked to each other that another robbery was about to be
perpetrated. Hunter did not come to the job again that day: he had been sent by
Rushton to price some work for which the firm was going to tender an
estimate. There was only one person who felt any regret at his
absence, and that was Mrs White--Bert's mother, who had been working at
'The Cave' for several days, scrubbing the floors. As a rule, Hunter
paid her wages every night, and on this occasion she happened to need
the money even more than usual. As leaving off time drew near, she
mentioned the matter to Crass, who advised her to call at the office on
her way home and ask the young lady clerk for the money. As Hunter did
not appear, she followed the foreman's advice. When she reached the shop Rushton was just coming out. She explained
to him what she wanted and he instructed Mr Budd to tell Miss Wade to
pay her. The shopman accordingly escorted her to the office at the
back of the shop, and the young lady book-keeper--after referring to
former entries to make quite certain of the amount, paid her the sum
that Hunter had represented as her wages, the same amount that Miss
Wade had on the previous occasions given him to pay the charwoman. When
Mrs White got outside she found that she held in her hand half a crown
instead of the two shillings she usually received from Mr Hunter. At
first she felt inclined to take it back, but after some hesitation she
thought it better to wait until she saw Hunter, when she could tell him
about it; but the next morning when she saw the disciple at 'The Cave'
he broached the subject first, and told her that Miss Wade had made a
mistake. And that evening when he paid her, he deducted the sixpence
from the usual two shillings. The lecture announced by Philpot was not delivered. Anxiously awaiting
the impending slaughter the men kept tearing into it as usual, for they
generally keep working in the usual way, each one trying to outdo the
others so as not to lose his chance of being one of the lucky one...

Misery now went round and informed all the men with the exception of
Crass, Owen, Slyme and Sawkins--that they would have to stand off that
night. He told them that the firm had several jobs in view--work they
had tendered for and hoped to get, and said they could look round after
Christmas and he might--possibly--be able to start some of them again. They would be paid at the office tomorrow--Saturday--at one o'clock as
usual, but if any of them wished they could have their money tonight. The men thanked him, and most of them said they would come for their
wages at the usual pay-time, and would call round as he suggested,
after the holidays, to see if there was anything to do. In all, fifteen men--including Philpot, Harlow, Easton and Ned Dawson,
were to'stand off' that night. They took their dismissal stolidly,
without any remark, some of them even with an affectation of
indifference, but there were few attempts at conversation afterwards. The little work that remained to be done they did in silence, every man
oppressed by the same terror--the dread of the impending want, the
privation and unhappiness that they knew they and their families would
have to suffer during the next few months. Bundy and his mate Dawson were working in the kitchen fixing the new
range in place of the old one which they had taken out. They had been
engaged on this job all day, and their hands and faces and clothes were
covered with soot, which they had also contrived to smear and dab all
over the surfaces of the doors and other woodwork in the room, much to
the indignation of Crass and Slyme, who had to wash it all off before
they could put on the final coat of paint. 'You can't help makin' a little mess on a job of this kind, you know,'
remarked Bundy, as he was giving the finishing touches to the work,
making good the broken parts of the wall with cement, whilst his mate
was clearing away the debris. 'Yes; but there's no need to claw 'old of the bloody doors every time
you goes in and out,' snarled Crass, 'and you could 'ave put yer tools
on the floor instead of makin' a bench of the dresser.' 'You can 'ave the bloody place all to yerself in about five minutes,'
replied Bundy, as he assisted to lift a sack of cement weighing about
two hundredweight on to Dawson's back. When they had cleared away all the dirt and fragments of bricks and
mortar, while Crass and Slyme proceeded with the painting, Bundy and
Dawson loaded up their hand-cart with the old range and the bags of
unused cement and plaster, which they took back to the yard. Meantime,
Misery was wandering about the house and gounds like an evil spirit
seeking rest and finding none. He stood for some time gloomily
watching the four gardeners, who were busily at work laying strips of
turf, mowing the lawn, rolling the gravel paths and trimming the trees
and bushes. The boy Bert, Philpot, Harlow, Easton and Sawkins were
loading a hand-cart with ladders and empty paint-pots to return to the
yard. Just as they were setting out, Misery stopped them, remarking
that the cart was not half loaded--he said it would take a month to get
all the stuff away if they went on like that; so by his directions they
placed another long ladder on top of the pile and once more started on
their way, but before they had gone two dozen yards one of the wheels
of the cart collapsed and the load was scattered over the roadway. Bert was at the same side of the cart as the wheel that broke and he
was thrown violently to the ground, where he lay half stunned, in the
midst of the ladders and planks. When they got him out they were
astonished to find that, thanks to the special Providence that watches
over all small boys, he was almost unhurt--just a little dazed, that
was all; and by the time Sawkins returned with another cart, Bert was
able to help to gather up the fallen paint-pots and to accompany the
men with the load to the yard. At the corner of the road they paused
to take a last look at the 'job'. said Harlow, tragically, extending his arm towards
the house. A job that if they'd only have let us do
it properly, couldn't 'ave been done with the number of 'ands we've
'ad, in less than four months; and there it is, finished, messed up,
slobbered over and scamped, in nine weeks!' 'Yes, and now we can all go to 'ell,' said Philpot, gloomily. At the yard they found Bundy and his mate, Ned Dawson, who helped them
to hang up the ladders in their usual places. Philpot was glad to get
out of assisting to do this, for he had contracted a rather severe
attack of rheumatism when working outside at the 'Cave'. Whilst the
others were putting the ladders away he assisted Bert to carry the
paint-pots and buckets into the paint shop, and while there he filled a
small medicine bottle he had brought with him for the purpose, with
turpentine from the tank. He wanted this stuff to rub into his
shoulders and legs, and as he secreted the bottle in the inner pocket
of his coat, he muttered: 'This is where we gets some of our own back.' They took the key of the yard to the office and as they separated to go
home Bundy suggested that the best thing they could do would be to sew
their bloody mouths up for a few months, because there was not much
probability of their getting another job until about March. The next morning while Crass and Slyme were finishing inside, Owen
wrote the two gates. On the front entrance 'The Cave' and on the back
'Tradesmens Entrance', in gilded letters. In the meantime, Sawkins and
Bert made several journeys to the Yard with the hand-cart. Crass--working in the kitchen with Slyme--was very silent and
thoughtful. Ever since the job was started, every time Mr Sweater had
visited the house to see what progress was being made, Crass had been
grovelling to him in the hope of receiving a tip when the work was
finished. He had been very careful to act upon any suggestions that
Sweater had made from time to time and on several occasions had taken a
lot of trouble to get just the right tints of certain colours, making
up a number of different shades and combinations, and doing parts of
the skirtings or mouldings of rooms in order that Mr Sweater might see
exactly--before they went on with it--what it would look like when
finished. He made a great pretence of deferring to Sweater's opinion,
and assured him that he did not care how much trouble he took as long
as he--Sweater--was pleased. In fact, it was no trouble at all: it was
a pleasure. As the work neared completion, Crass began to speculate
upon the probable amount of the donation he would receive as the reward
of nine weeks of cringing, fawning, abject servility. He thought it
quite possible that he might get a quid: it would not be too much,
considering all the trouble he had taken. At
any rate, he felt certain that he was sure to get ten bob; a gentleman
like Mr Sweater would never have the cheek to offer less. The more he
thought about it the more improbable it appeared that the amount would
be less than a quid, and he made up his mind that whatever he got he
would take good care that none of the other men knew anything about it. HE was the one who had had all the worry of the job, and he was the
only one entitled to anything there was to be had. Besides, even if he
got a quid, by the time you divided that up amongst a dozen--or even
amongst two or three--it would not be worth having. At about eleven o'clock Mr Sweater arrived and began to walk over the
house, followed by Crass, who carried a pot of paint and a small brush
and made believe to be 'touching up' and finishing off parts of the
work. As Sweater went from one room to another Crass repeatedly placed
himself in the way in the hope of being spoken to, but Sweater took no
notice of him whatever. Once or twice Crass's heart began to beat
quickly as he furtively watched the great man and saw him thrust his
thumb and finger into his waistcoat pocket, but on each occasion
Sweater withdrew his hand with nothing in it. After a while, observing
that the gentleman was about to depart without having spoken, Crass
determined to break the ice himself. 'It's a little better weather we're 'avin' now, sir.' 'I was beginnin' to be afraid as I shouldn't be hable to git
heverything finished in time for you to move in before Christmas, sir,'
Crass continued, 'but it's hall done now, sir.' 'I've kept the fire agoin' in hall the rooms has you told me, sir,'
resumed Crass after a pause. 'I think you'll find as the place is nice
and dry, sir; the honly places as is a bit damp is the kitchen and
scullery and the other rooms in the basement, sir, but of course that's
nearly halways the case, sir, when the rooms is partly hunderground,
sir. 'But of course it don't matter so much about the basement, sir, because
it's honly the servants what 'as to use it, sir, and even down there
it'll be hall right hin the summer, sir.' One would scarcely think, from the contemptuous way in which he spoke
of'servants' that Crass's own daughter was 'in service', but such was
the case. 'Oh, yes, there's no doubt about that,' replied Sweater as he moved
towards the door; 'there's no doubt it will be dry enough in the
summer. 'Good morning to YOU, sir,' said Crass, following him. 'I 'opes as
you're pleased with all the work, sir; everything satisfactory, sir.' I think it looks very nice; very nice indeed; I'm very
pleased with it,' said Sweater affably. 'Good morning, sir,' replied the foreman with a sickly smile as Sweater
departed. When the other was gone, Crass sat down dejectedly on the bottom step
of the stairs, overwhelmed with the ruin of his hopes and expectations. He tried to comfort himself with the reflection that all hope was not
lost, because he would have to come to the house again on Monday and
Tuesday to fix the venetian blinds; but all the same he could not help
thinking that it was only a very faint hope, for he felt that if
Sweater had intended giving anything he would have done so today; and
it was very improbable that he would see Sweater on Monday or Tuesday
at all, for the latter did not usually visit the job in the early part
of the week. However, Crass made up his mind to hope for the best,
and, pulling himself together, he presently returned to the kitchen,
where he found Slyme and Sawkins waiting for him. He had not mentioned
his hopes of a tip to either of them, but they did not need any telling
and they were both determined to have their share of whatever he got. demanded Sawkins, going straight to the point. Slyme laughed in a sneering, incredulous way, but Sawkins was inclined
to be abusive. He averred that he had been watching Crass and Sweater
and had seen the latter put his thumb and finger into his waistcoat
pocket as he walked into the dining-room, followed by Crass. It took
the latter a long time to convince his two workmates of the truth of
his own account, but he succeeded at last, and they all three agreed
that Old Sweater was a sanguinary rotter, and they lamented over the
decay of the good old-fashioned customs. 'Why, at one time o' day,' said Crass, 'only a few years ago, if you
went to a gentleman's 'ouse to paint one or two rooms you could always
be sure of a bob or two when you'd finished.' By half past twelve everything was squared up, and, having loaded up
the hand-cart with all that remained of the materials, dirty paint-pots
and plant, they all set out together for the yard, to put all the
things away before going to the office for their money. Sawkins took
the handle of the cart, Slyme and Crass walked at one side and Owen and
Bert at the other. There was no need to push, for the road was
downhill most of the way; so much so that they had all to help to hold
back the cart, which travelled so rapidly that Bert found it difficult
to keep pace with the others and frequently broke into a trot to
recover lost ground, and Crass--being fleshy and bloated with beer,
besides being unused to much exertion--began to perspire and soon
appealed to the others not to let it go so fast--there was no need to
get done before one o'clock. Chapter 27

The March of the Imperialists


It was an unusually fine day for the time of year, and as they passed
along the Grand Parade--which faced due south--they felt quite warm. The Parade was crowded with richly dressed and bejewelled loafers,
whose countenances in many instances bore unmistakable signs of
drunkenness and gluttony. Some of the females had tried to conceal the
ravages of vice and dissipation by coating their faces with powder and
paint. Mingling with and part of this crowd were a number of
well-fed-looking individuals dressed in long garments of black cloth of
the finest texture, and broad-brimmed soft felt hats. Most of these
persons had gold rings on their soft white fingers and glove-like kid
or calfskin boots on their feet. They belonged to the great army of
imposters who obtain an easy living by taking advantage of the
ignorance and simplicity of their fellow-men, and pretending to be the
'followers' and'servants' of the lowly Carpenter of Nazareth--the Man
of Sorrows, who had not where to lay His head. None of these black-garbed 'disciples' were associating with the groups
of unemployed carpenters, bricklayers, plasterers, and painters who
stood here and there in the carriage-way dressed in mean and shabby
clothing and with faces pale with privation. Many of these latter were
known to our friends with the cart, and nodded to them as they passed. Now and then some of them came over and walked a little distance by
their side, inquiring whether there was any news of another job at
Rushton's. When they were about half-way down the Parade, just near the Fountain,
Crass and his mates encountered a number of men on whose arms were
white bands with the word 'Collector' in black letters. They carried
collecting boxes and accosted the people in the street, begging for
money for the unemployed. These men were a kind of skirmishers for the
main body, which could be seen some distance behind. As the procession drew near, Sawkins steered the cart into the kerb and
halted as they went past. There were about three hundred men
altogether, marching four abreast. They carried three large white
banners with black letters, 'Thanks to our Subscribers' 'In aid of
Genuine Unemployed', 'The Children must be Fed'. Although there were a
number of artisans in the procession, the majority of the men belonged
to what is called the unskilled labourer class. The skilled artisan
does not as a rule take part in such a procession except as a very last
resource... And all the time he strives to keep up an appearance of
being well-to-do, and would be highly indignant if anyone suggested
that he was really in a condition of abject, miserable poverty. Although he knows that his children are often not so well fed as are
the pet dogs and cats of his 'betters', he tries to bluff his
neighbours into thinking that he has some mysterious private means of
which they know nothing, and conceals his poverty as if it were a
crime. Most of this class of men would rather starve than beg. Consequently not more than a quarter of the men in the procession were
skilled artisans; the majority were labourers. There was also a sprinkling of those unfortunate outcasts of
society--tramps and destitute, drunken loafers. If the self-righteous
hypocrites who despise these poor wretches had been subjected to the
same conditions, the majority of them would inevitably have become the
same as these. Haggard and pale, shabbily or raggedly dressed, their boots broken and
down at heel, they slouched past. Some of them stared about with a
dazed or half-wild expression, but most of them walked with downcast
eyes or staring blankly straight in front of them. They appeared
utterly broken-spirited, hopeless and ashamed...

'Anyone can see what THEY are,' sneered Crass, 'there isn't fifty
genuine tradesmen in the whole crowd, and most of 'em wouldn't work if
they 'ad the offer of it.' 'That's just what I was thinkin',' agreed Sawkins with a laugh. 'There will be plenty of time to say that when they have been offered
work and have refused to do it,' said Owen. 'This sort of thing does the town a lot of 'arm,' remarked Slyme; 'it
oughtn't to be allowed; the police ought to stop it. It's enough to
drive all the gentry out of the place!' 'Bloody disgraceful, I call it,' said Crass,'marchin' along the Grand
Parade on a beautiful day like this, just at the very time when most of
the gentry is out enjoyin' the fresh hair.' 'I suppose you think they ought to stay at home and starve quietly,'
said Owen. 'I don't see why these men should care what harm they do to
the town; the town doesn't seem to care much what becomes of THEM.' 'Do you believe in this sort of thing, then?' I don't believe in begging as a favour for what
one is entitled to demand as a right from the thieves who have robbed
them and who are now enjoying the fruits of their labour. From the
look of shame on their faces you might think that they were the
criminals instead of being the victims.' 'Well you must admit that most of them is very inferior men,' said
Crass with a self-satisfied air. 'There's very few mechanics amongst
em.' 'They're human beings, and they have as much right to live as
anyone else. What is called unskilled labour is just as necessary and
useful as yours or mine. I am no more capable of doing the "unskilled"
labour that most of these men do than most of them would be capable of
doing my work.' 'Well, if they was skilled tradesmen, they might find it easier to get
a job,' said Crass. 'Do you mean to say you think that if all these men could be
transformed into skilled carpenters, plasterers, bricklayers, and
painters, that it would be easier for all those other chaps whom we
passed a little while ago to get work? Is it possible that you or any
other sane man can believe anything so silly as that?' 'If there is not enough work to employ all the mechanics whom we see
standing idle about the streets, how would it help these labourers in
the procession if they could all become skilled workmen?' Still Crass did not answer, and neither Slyme nor Sawkins came to his
assistance. 'If that could be done,' continued Owen, 'it would simply make things
worse for those who are already skilled mechanics. A greater number of
skilled workers--keener competition for skilled workmen's jobs--a
larger number of mechanics out of employment, and consequently,
improved opportunities for employers to reduce wages. That is probably
the reason why the Liberal Party--which consists for the most part of
exploiters of labour--procured the great Jim Scalds to tell us that
improved technical education is the remedy for unemployment and
poverty.' 'I suppose you think Jim Scalds is a bloody fool, the same as everybody
else what don't see things YOUR way?' 'I should think he was a fool if I thought he believed what he says. He says it because he thinks the
majority of the working classes are such fools that they will believe
him. If he didn't think that most of us are fools he wouldn't tell us
such a yarn as that.' 'And I suppose you think as 'is opinion ain't far wrong,' snarled Crass. 'We shall be better able to judge of that after the next General
Election,' replied Owen. 'If the working classes again elect a
majority of Liberal or Tory landlords and employers to rule over them,
it will prove that Jim Scalds' estimate of their intelligence is about
right.' 'Well, anyhow,' persisted Slyme, 'I don't think it's a right thing that
they should be allowed to go marchin' about like that--driving visitors
out of the town.' 'What do you think they ought to do, then?' 'Let the b--rs go to the bloody workhouse!' 'But before they could be received there they would have to be
absolutely homeless and destitute, and then the ratepayers would have
to keep them. It costs about twelve shillings a week for each inmate,
so it seems to me that it would be more sensible and economical for the
community to employ them on some productive work.' They had by this time arrived at the yard. The steps and ladders were
put away in their places and the dirty paint-pots and pails were placed
in the paint-shop on the bench and on the floor. With what had
previously been brought back there were a great many of these things,
all needing to be cleaned out, so Bert at any rate stood in no danger
of being out of employment for some time to come. When they were paid at the office, Owen on opening his envelope found
it contained as usual, a time sheet for the next week, which meant that
he was not'stood off' although he did not know what work there would
be to do. Crass and Slyme were both to go to the 'Cave' to fix the
venetian blinds, and Sawkins also was to come to work as usual. Chapter 28

The Week before Christmas


During the next week Owen painted a sign on the outer wall of one of
the workshops at the yard, and he also wrote the name of the firm on
three of the handcarts. These and other odd jobs kept him employed a few hours every day, so
that he was not actually out of work. One afternoon--there being nothing to do--he went home at three
o'clock, but almost as soon as he reached the house Bert White came
with a coffin-plate which had to be written at once. The lad said he
had been instructed to wait for it. Nora gave the boy some tea and bread and butter to eat whilst Owen was
doing the coffin-plate, and presently Frankie--who had been playing out
in the street--made his appearance. The two boys were already known to
each other, for Bert had been there several times before--on errands
similar to the present one, or to take lessons on graining and
letter-painting from Owen. 'I'm going to have a party next Monday--after Christmas,' remarked
Frankie. 'Mother told me I might ask you if you'll come?' 'All right,' said Bert; 'and I'll bring my Pandoramer.' No, of course not,' replied Bert with a superior air. 'It's a
show, like they have at the Hippodrome or the Circus.' 'Not very big: it's made out of a sugar-box. It's
not quite finished yet, but I shall get it done this week. There's a
band as well, you know. 'This' was a large mouth organ which he produced from the inner pocket
of his coat. Bert accordingly played, and Frankie sang at the top of his voice a
selection of popular songs, including 'The Old Bull and Bush', 'Has
Anyone seen a German Band? ', 'Waiting at the Church' and
finally--possibly as a dirge for the individual whose coffin-plate Owen
was writing--'Goodbye, Mignonette' and 'I wouldn't leave my little
wooden hut for you'. 'You don't know what's in that,' said Frankie, referring to a large
earthenware bread-pan which Nora had just asked Owen to help her to
lift from the floor on to one of the chairs. The vessel in question
was covered with a clean white cloth. 'We got the things out of
the Christmas Club on Saturday. We've been paying in ever since last
Christmas. We're going to mix it now, and you can have a stir too if
you like, for luck.' Whilst they were stirring the pudding, Frankie several times requested
the others to feel his muscle: he said he felt sure that he would soon
be strong enough to go out to work, and he explained to Bert that the
extraordinary strength he possessed was to be attributed to the fact
that he lived almost exclusively on porridge and milk. For the rest of the week, Owen continued to work down at the yard with
Sawkins, Crass, and Slyme, painting some of the ladders, steps and
other plant belonging to the firm. These things had to have two coats
of paint and the name Rushton & Co. As soon as they
had got some of them second-coated, Owen went on with the writing,
leaving the painting for the others, so as to share the work as fairly
as possible. Several times during the week one or other of them was
taken away to do some other work; once Crass and Slyme had to go and
wash off and whiten a ceiling somewhere, and several times Sawkins was
sent out to assist the plumbers. Every day some of the men who had been'stood off' called at the yard
to ask if any other 'jobs' had 'come in'. From these callers they
heard all the news. Old Jack Linden had not succeeded in getting
anything to do at the trade since he was discharged from Rushton's, and
it was reported that he was trying to earn a little money by hawking
bloaters from house to house. As for Philpot, he said that he had been
round to nearly all the firms in the town and none of them had any work
to speak of. Newman--the man whom the reader will remember was sacked for taking too
much pains with his work--had been arrested and sentenced to a month's
imprisonment because he had not been able to pay his poor rates, and
the Board of Guardians were allowing his wife three shillings a week to
maintain herself and the three children. Philpot had been to see them,
and she told him that the landlord was threatening to turn them into
the street; he would have seized their furniture and sold it if it had
been worth the expense of the doing. 'I feel ashamed of meself,' Philpot added in confidence to Owen, 'when
I think of all the money I chuck away on beer. If it wasn't for that,
I shouldn't be in such a hole meself now, and I might be able to lend
'em a 'elpin' 'and.' 'It ain't so much that I likes the beer, you know,' he continued; 'it's
the company. When you ain't got no 'ome, in a manner o' speakin', like
me, the pub's about the only place where you can get a little
enjoyment. But you ain't very welcome there unless you spends your
money.' 'Is the three shillings all they have to live on?' 'I think she goes out charin' when she can get it,' replied Philpot,
'but I don't see as she can do a great deal o' that with three young
'uns to look after, and from what I hear of it she's only just got over
a illness and ain't fit to do much.' 'I'll tell you what,' said Philpot. 'I've been thinking we might get
up a bit of a subscription for 'em. There's several chaps in work what
knows Newman, and if they was each to give a trifle we could get enough
to pay for a Christmas dinner, anyway. I've brought a sheet of
foolscap with me, and I was goin' to ask you to write out the heading
for me.' As there was no pen available at the workshop, Philpot waited till four
o'clock and then accompanied Owen home, where the heading of the list
was written. Owen put his name down for a shilling and Philpot his for
a similar amount. Philpot stayed to tea and accepted an invitation to spend Christmas Day
with them, and to come to Frankie's party on the Monday after. The next morning Philpot brought the list to the yard and Crass and
Slyme put their names down for a shilling each, and Sawkins for
threepence, it being arranged that the money was to be paid on
payday--Christmas Eve. In the meantime, Philpot was to see as many as
he could of those who were in work, at other firms and get as many
subscriptions as possible. At pay-time on Christmas Eve Philpot turned up with the list and Owen
and the others paid him the amounts they had put their names down for. From other men he had succeeded in obtaining nine and sixpence, mostly
in sixpences and threepences. Some of this money he had already
received, but for the most part he had made appointments with the
subscribers to call at their homes that evening. It was decided that
Owen should accompany him and also go with him to hand over the money
to Mrs Newman. It took them nearly three hours to get in all the money, for the places
they had to go to were in different localities, and in one or two cases
they had to wait because their man had not yet come home, and sometimes
it was not possible to get away without wasting a little time in talk. In three instances those who had put their names down for threepence
increased the amount to sixpence and one who had promised sixpence gave
a shilling. There were two items of threepence each which they did not
get at all, the individuals who had put their names down having gone
upon the drunk. Another cause of delay was that they met or called on
several other men who had not yet been asked for a subscription, and
there were several others--including some members of the Painters
Society whom Owen had spoken to during the week--who had promised him
to give a subscription. In the end they succeeded in increasing the
total amount to nineteen and ninepence, and they then put
three-halfpence each to make it up to a pound. The Newmans lived in a small house the rent of which was six shillings
per week and taxes. To reach the house one had to go down a dark and
narrow passage between two shops, the house being in a kind of well,
surrounded by the high walls of the back parts of larger
buildings--chiefly business premises and offices. The air did not
circulate very freely in this place, and the rays of the sun never
reached it. In the summer the atmosphere was close and foul with the
various odours which came from the back-yards of the adjoining
buildings, and in the winter it was dark and damp and gloomy, a
culture-ground for bacteria and microbes. The majority of those who
profess to be desirous of preventing and curing the disease called
consumption must be either hypocrites or fools, for they ridicule the
suggestion that it is necessary first to cure and prevent the poverty
that compels badly clothed and half-starved human beings to sleep in
such dens as this. The front door opened into the living-room or, rather, kitchen, which
was dimly lighted by a small paraffin lamp on the table, where were
also some tea-cups and saucers, each of a different pattern, and the
remains of a loaf of bread. The wallpaper was old and discoloured; a
few almanacs and unframed prints were fixed to the walls, and on the
mantelshelf were some cracked and worthless vases and ornaments. At
one time they had possessed a clock and an overmantel and some framed
pictures, but they had all been sold to obtain money to buy food. Nearly everything of any value had been parted with for the same
reason--the furniture, the pictures, the bedclothes, the carpet and the
oilcloth, piece by piece, nearly everything that had once constituted
the home--had been either pawned or sold to buy food or to pay rent
during the times when Newman was out of work--periods that had recurred
during the last few years with constantly increasing frequency and
duration. Now there was nothing left but these few old broken chairs
and the deal table which no one would buy; and upstairs, the wretched
bedsteads and mattresses whereon they slept at night, covering
themselves with worn-out remnants of blankets and the clothes they wore
during the day. In answer to Philpot's knock, the door was opened by a little girl
about seven years old, who at once recognized Philpot, and called out
his name to her mother, and the latter came also to the door, closely
followed by two other children, a little, fragile-looking girl about
three, and a boy about five years of age, who held on to her skirt and
peered curiously at the visitors. Mrs Newman was about thirty, and her
appearance confirmed the statement of Philpot that she had only just
recovered from an illness; she was very white and thin and
dejected-looking. When Philpot explained the object of their visit and
handed her the money, the poor woman burst into tears, and the two
smaller children--thinking that this piece of paper betokened some
fresh calamity--began to cry also. They remembered that all their
troubles had been preceded by the visits of men who brought pieces of
paper, and it was rather difficult to reassure them. That evening, after Frankie was asleep, Owen and Nora went out to do
their Christmas marketing. They had not much money to spend, for Owen
had brought home only seventeen shillings. He had worked thirty-three
hours--that came to nineteen and threepence--one shilling and
threehalfpence had gone on the subscription list, and he had given the
rest of the coppers to a ragged wreck of a man who was singing a hymn
in the street. The other shilling had been deducted from his wages in
repayment of a'sub' he had had during the week. There was a great deal to be done with this seventeen shillings. First
of all there was the rent--seven shillings--that left ten. Then there
was the week's bread bill--one and threepence. They had a pint of milk
every day, chiefly for the boy's sake--that came to one and two. Then
there was one and eight for a hundredweight of coal that had been
bought on credit. Fortunately, there were no groceries to buy, for the
things they had obtained with their Christmas Club money would be more
than sufficient for the ensuing week. Frankie's stockings were all broken and beyond mending, so it was
positively necessary to buy him another pair for fivepence
three-farthings. These stockings were not much good--a pair at double
the price would have been much cheaper, for they would have lasted
three or four times longer; but they could not afford to buy the dearer
kind. It was just the same with the coal: if they had been able to
afford it, they could have bought a ton of the same class of coal for
twenty-six shillings, but buying it as they did, by the hundredweight,
they had to pay at the rate of thirty-three shillings and fourpence a
ton. It was just the same with nearly everything else. This is how
the working classes are robbed. Although their incomes are the lowest,
they are compelled to buy the most expensive articles--that is, the
lowest-priced articles. Everybody knows that good clothes, boots or
furniture are really the cheapest in the end, although they cost more
money at first; but the working classes can seldom or never afford to
buy good things; they have to buy cheap rubbish which is dear at any
price. Six weeks previously Owen bought a pair of second-hand boots for three
shillings and they were now literally falling to pieces. Nora's shoes
were in much the same condition, but, as she said, it did not matter so
much about hers because there was no need for her to go out if the
weather were not fine. In addition to the articles already mentioned, they had to spend
fourpence for half a gallon of paraffin oil, and to put sixpence into
the slot of the gas-stove. This reduced the money to five and
sevenpence farthing, and of this it was necessary to spend a shilling
on potatoes and other vegetables. They both needed some new underclothing, for what they had was so old
and worn that it was quite useless for the purpose it was supposed to
serve; but there was no use thinking of these things, for they had now
only four shillings and sevenpence farthing left, and all that would be
needed for toys. They had to buy something special for Frankie for
Christmas, and it would also be necessary to buy something for each of
the children who were coming to the party on the following Monday. Fortunately, there was no meat to buy, for Nora had been paying into
the Christmas Club at the butcher's as well as at the grocer's. They stopped to look at the display of toys at Sweater's Emporium. For
several days past Frankie had been talking of the wonders contained in
these windows, so they wished if possible to buy him something here. They recognized many of the things from the description the boy had
given of them, but nearly everything was so dear that for a long time
they looked in vain for something it would be possible to buy. 'That's the engine he talks so much about,' said Non, indicating a
model railway locomotive; that one marked five shillings.' 'It might just as well be marked five pounds as far as we're
concerned,' replied Owen. As they were speaking, one of the salesmen appeared at the back of the
window and, reaching forward, removed the engine. It was probably the
last one of the kind and had evidently just been sold. Owen and Nora
experienced a certain amount of consolation in knowing that even if
they had the money they would not have been able to buy it. After lengthy consideration, they decided on a clockwork engine at a
shilling, but the other toys they resolved to buy at a cheaper shop. Nora went into the Emporium to get the toy and whilst Owen was waiting
for her Mr and Mrs Rushton came out. They did not appear to see Owen,
who observed that the shape of one of several parcels they carried
suggested that it contained the engine that had been taken from the
window a little while before. When Nora returned with her purchase, they went in search of a cheaper
place and after a time they found what they wanted. For sixpence they
bought a cardboard box that had come all the way from Japan and
contained a whole family of dolls--father, mother and four children of
different sizes. A box of paints, threepence: a sixpenny tea service,
a threepenny drawing slate, and a rag doll, sixpence. On their way home they called at a greengrocer's where Owen had ordered
and paid for a small Christmas tree a few weeks before; and as they
were turning the corner of the street where they lived they met Crass,
half-drunk, with a fine fat goose slung over his shoulder by its neck. He greeted Owen jovially and held up the bird for their inspection. 'Not a bad tanner's-worth, eh?' I won this and a box of cigars--fifty--for a tanner, and the
other one I got out of the Club at our Church Mission 'all: threepence
a week for twenty-eight weeks; that makes seven bob. But,' he added,
confidentially,''you couldn't buy 'em for that price in a shop, you
know. They costs the committee a good bit more nor that--wholesale;
but we've got some rich gents on our committee and they makes up the
difference,' and with a nod and a cunning leer he lurched off. Frankie was sleeping soundly when they reached home, and so was the
kitten, which was curled up on the quilt on the foot of the bed. After
they had had some supper, although it was after eleven o'clock, Owen
fixed the tree in a large flower-pot that had served a similar purpose
before, and Nora brought out from the place where it had been stored
away since last Christmas a cardboard box containing a lot of
glittering tinsel ornaments--globes of silvered or gilded or painted
glass, birds, butterflies and stars. Some of these things had done
duty three Christmases ago and although they were in some instances
slightly tarnished most of them were as good as new. In addition to
these and the toys they had bought that evening they had a box of
bon-bons and a box of small wax candles, both of which had
formed part of the things they got from the grocer's with the Christmas
Club money; and there were also a lot of little paper bags of
sweets, and a number of sugar and chocolate toys and animals which had
been bought two or three at a time for several weeks past and put away
for this occasion. There was something suitable for each child that
was coming, with the exception of Bert White; they had intended to
include a sixpenny pocket knife for him in their purchases that
evening, but as they had not been able to afford this Owen decided to
give him an old set of steel graining combs which he knew the lad had
often longed to possess. The tin case containing these tools was
accordingly wrapped in some red tissue paper and hung on the tree with
the other things. They moved about as quietly as possible so as not to disturb those who
were sleeping in the rooms beneath, because long before they were
finished the people in the other parts of the house had all retired to
rest, and silence had fallen on the deserted streets outside. As they
were putting the final touches to their work the profound stillness of
the night was suddenly broken by the voices of a band of carol-singers. The sound overwhelmed them with memories of other and happier times,
and Nora stretched out her hands impulsively to Owen, who drew her
close to his side. They had been married just over eight years, and although during all
that time they had never been really free from anxiety for the future,
yet on no previous Christmas had they been quite so poor as now. During
the last few years periods of unemployment had gradually become more
frequent and protracted, and the attempt he had made in the early part
of the year to get work elsewhere had only resulted in plunging them
into even greater poverty than before. But all the same there was much
to be thankful for: poor though they were, they were far better off
than many thousands of others: they still had food and shelter, and
they had each other and the boy. Before they went to bed Owen carried the tree into Frankie's bedroom
and placed it so that he would be able to see it in all its glittering
glory as soon as he awoke on Christmas morning. Chapter 29

The Pandorama


Although the party was not supposed to begin till six o'clock, Bert
turned up at half past four, bringing the 'Pandoramer' with him. At about half past five the other guests began to arrive. Elsie and
Charley Linden came first, the girl in a pretty blue frock trimmed with
white lace, and Charley resplendent in a new suit, which, like his
sister's dress, had been made out of somebody's cast-off clothes that
had been given to their mother by a visiting lady. It had taken Mrs
Linden many hours of hard work to contrive these garments; in fact,
more time than the things were worth, for although they looked all
right--especially Elsie's--the stuff was so old that it would not wear
very long: but this was the only way in which she could get clothes for
the children at all: she certainly could not afford to buy them any. So she spent hours and hours making things that she knew would fall to
pieces almost as soon as they were made. After these came Nellie, Rosie and Tommy Newman. These presented a
much less prosperous appearance than the other two. Their mother was
not so skilful at contriving new clothes out of old. Nellie was
wearing a grown-up woman's blouse, and by way of ulster she had on an
old-fashioned jacket of thick cloth with large pearl buttons. This was
also a grown-up woman's garment: it was shaped to fit the figure of a
tall woman with wide shoulders and a small waist; consequently, it did
not fit Nellie to perfection. The waist reached below the poor child's
hips. Tommy was arrayed in the patched remains of what had once been a good
suit of clothes. They had been purchased at a second-hand shop last
summer and had been his 'best' for several months, but they were now
much too small for him. Little Rosie--who was only just over three years old--was better off
than either of the other two, for she had a red cloth dress that fitted
her perfectly: indeed, as the district visitor who gave it to her
mother had remarked, it looked as if it had been made for her. 'It's not much to look at,' observed Nellie, referring to her big
jacket, but all the same we was very glad of it when the rain came on.' The coat was so big that by withdrawing her arms from the sleeves and
using it as a cloak or shawl she had managed to make it do for all
three of them. Tommy's boots were so broken that the wet had got in and saturated his
stockings, so Nora made him take them all off and wear some old ones of
Frankie's whilst his own were drying at the fire. Philpot, with two large paper bags full of oranges and nuts, arrived
just as they were sitting down to tea--or rather cocoa--for with the
exception of Bert all the children expressed a preference for the
latter beverage. Bert would have liked to have cocoa also, but hearing
that the grown-ups were going to have tea, he thought it would be more
manly to do the same. This question of having tea or cocoa for tea
became a cause of much uproarious merriment on the part of the
children, who asked each other repeatedly which they liked best, 'tea
tea?' They thought it so funny that they said it over
and over again, screaming with laughter all the while, until Tommy got
a piece of cake stuck in his throat and became nearly black in the
face, and then Philpot had to turn him upside down and punch him in the
back to save him from choking to death. This rather sobered the
others, but for some time afterwards whenever they looked at each other
they began to laugh afresh because they thought it was such a good joke. When they had filled themselves up with the 'cocoa-tea' and cakes and
bread and jam, Elsie Linden and Nellie Newman helped to clear away the
cups and saucers, and then Owen lit the candles on the Christmas tree
and distributed the toys to the children, and a little while afterwards
Philpot--who had got a funny-looking mask out of one of the
bon-bons--started a fine game pretending to be a dreadful wild animal
which he called a Pandroculus, and crawling about on all fours, rolled
his goggle eyes and growled out he must have a little boy or girl to
eat for his supper. He looked so terrible that although they knew it was only a joke they
were almost afraid of him, and ran away laughing and screaming to
shelter themselves behind Nora or Owen; but all the same, whenever
Philpot left off playing, they entreated him to 'be it again', and so
he had to keep on being a Pandroculus, until exhaustion compelled him
to return to his natural form. After this they all sat round the table and had a game of cards;
'Snap', they called it, but nobody paid much attention to the rules of
the game: everyone seemed to think that the principal thing to do was
to kick up as much row as possible. After a while Philpot suggested a
change to 'Beggar my neighbour', and won quite a lot of cards before
they found out that he had hidden all the jacks in the pocket of his
coat, and then they mobbed him for a cheat. He might have been
seriously injured if it had not been for Bert, who created a diversion
by standing on a chair and announcing that he was about to introduce to
their notice 'Bert White's World-famed Pandorama' as exhibited before
all the nobility and crowned heads of Europe, England, Ireland and
Scotland, including North America and Wales. Loud cheers greeted the conclusion of Bert's speech. The box was
placed on the table, which was then moved to the end of the room, and
the chairs were ranged in two rows in front. The 'Pandorama' consisted of a stage-front made of painted cardboard
and fixed on the front of a wooden box about three feet long by two
feet six inches high, and about one foot deep from back to front. The
'Show' was a lot of pictures cut out of illustrated weekly papers and
pasted together, end to end, so as to form a long strip or ribbon. Bert
had all the pictures with water-colours. Just behind the wings of the stage-front at each end of the box--was an
upright roller, and the long strip of pictures was rolled up on this. The upper ends of the rollers came through the top of the box and had
handles attached to them. When these handles were turned the pictures
passed across the stage, unrolling from one roller and rolling on to
the other, and were illuminated by the light of three candles placed
behind. The idea of constructing this machine had been suggested to Bert by a
panorama entertainment he had been to see some time before. 'The Style of the decorations,' he remarked, alluding to the painted
stage-front, 'is Moorish.' He lit the candles at the back of the stage and, having borrowed a
tea-tray from Nora, desired the audience to take their seats. When
they had all done so, he requested Owen to put out the lamp and the
candles on the tree, and then he made another speech, imitating the
manner of the lecturer at the panorama entertainment before mentioned. 'Ladies and Gentlemen: with your kind permission I am about to
hinterduce to your notice some pitchers of events in different parts of
the world. As each pitcher appears on the stage I will give a short
explanation of the subject, and afterwards the band will play a
suitable collection of appropriated music, consisting of hymns and all
the latest and most popular songs of the day, and the audience is
kindly requested to join in the chorus. 'Our first scene,' continued Bert as he turned the handles and brought
the picture into view,'represents the docks at Southampton; the
magnificent steamer which you see lying alongside the shore is the ship
which is waiting to take us to foreign parts. As we have already paid
our fare, we will now go on board and set sail.' As an accompaniment to this picture Bert played the tune of 'Goodbye,
Dolly, I must leave you', and by the time the audience had finished
singing the chorus he had rolled on another scene, which depicted a
dreadful storm at sea, with a large ship evidently on the point of
foundering. The waves were running mountains high and the inky clouds
were riven by forked lightning. To increase the terrifying effect,
Bert rattled the tea tray and played 'The Bay of Biscay', and the
children sung the chorus whilst he rolled the next picture into view. This scene showed the streets of a large city; mounted police with
drawn swords were dispersing a crowd: several men had been ridden down
and were being trampled under the hoofs of the horses, and a number of
others were bleeding profusely from wounds on the head and face. 'After a rather stormy passage we arrives safely at the beautiful city
of Berlin, in Germany, just in time to see a procession of unemployed
workmen being charged by the military police. This picture is
hintitled "Tariff Reform means Work for All".' As an appropriate musical selection Bert played the tune of a
well-known song, and the children sang the words:

'To be there! Oh, I knew what it was to be there! And when they tore me clothes,
Blacked me eyes and broke me nose,
Then I knew what it was to be there!' During the singing Bert turned the handles backwards and again brought
on the picture of the storm at sea. 'As we don't want to get knocked on the 'ed, we clears out of Berlin as
soon as we can--whiles we're safe--and once more embarks on our gallint
ship' and after a few more turns of the 'andle we finds ourselves back
once more in Merry Hingland, where we see the inside of a blacksmith's
shop with a lot of half-starved women making iron chains. They work
seventy hours a week for seven shillings. Our next scene is hintitled
"The Hook and Eye Carders". 'Ere we see the inside of a room in
Slumtown, with a mother and three children and the old grandmother
sewin' hooks and eyes on cards to be sold in drapers' shops. It ses
underneath the pitcher that 384 hooks and 384 eyes has to be joined
together and sewed on cards for one penny.' While this picture was being rolled away the band played and the
children sang with great enthusiasm:

'Rule, Brittania, Brittania rules the waves! Britons, never, never, never shall be slaves!' 'Our next picture is called "An Englishman's Home". 'Ere we see the
inside of another room in Slumtown, with the father and mother and four
children sitting down to dinner--bread and drippin' and tea. It ses
underneath the pitcher that there's Thirteen millions of people in
England always on the verge of starvation. These people that you see
in the pitcher might be able to get a better dinner than this if it
wasn't that most of the money wot the bloke earns 'as to pay the rent. Again we turns the 'andle and presently we comes to another very
beautiful scene--"Early Morning in Trafalgar Square". 'Ere we see a
lot of Englishmen who have been sleepin' out all night because they
ain't got no 'omes to go to.' As a suitable selection for this picture, Bert played the tune of a
music-hall song, the words of which were familiar to all the
youngsters, who sang at the top of their voices:

'I live in Trafalgar Square,
With four lions to guard me,
Pictures and statues all over the place,
Lord Nelson staring me straight in the face,
Of course it's rather draughty,
But still I'm sure you'll agree,
If it's good enough for Lord Nelson,
It's quite good enough for me.' 'Next we 'ave a view of the dining-hall at the Topside Hotel in London,
where we see the tables set for a millionaires' banquet. The forks and
spoons is made of solid gold and the plates is made of silver. The
flowers that you see on the tables and 'angin' down from the ceilin'
and on the walls is worth L2,000 and it cost the bloke wot give the
supper over L30,000 for this one beano. A few more turns of the 'andle
shows us another glorious banquet--the King of Rhineland being
entertained by the people of England. Next we finds ourselves looking
on at the Lord Mayor's supper at the Mansion House. All the fat men
that you see sittin' at the tables is Liberal and Tory Members of
Parlimint. After this we 'ave a very beautiful pitcher hintitled "Four
footed Haristocrats". 'Ere you see Lady Slumrent's pet dogs sittin' up
on chairs at their dinner table with white linen napkins tied round
their necks, eatin' orf silver plates like human people and being
waited on by real live waiters in hevening dress. Lady Slumrent is
very fond of her pretty pets and she does not allow them to be fed on
anything but the very best food; they gets chicken, rump steak, mutton
chops, rice pudding, jelly and custard.' 'I wished I was a pet dog, don't you?' remarked Tommy Newman to Charley
Linden. 'Here we see another unemployed procession,' continued Bert as he
rolled another picture into sight; '2,000 able-bodied men who are not
allowed to work. Next we see the hinterior of a Hindustrial
'Ome--Blind children and <DW36>s working for their living. Our next
scene is called "Cheap Labour". 'Ere we see a lot of small boys about
twelve and thirteen years old bein' served out with their Labour
Stifficats, which gives 'em the right to go to work and earn money to
help their unemployed fathers to pay the slum rent. 'Once more we turns the 'andle and brings on one of our finest scenes. This lovely pitcher is hintitled "The Hangel of Charity", and shows us
the beautiful Lady Slumrent seated at the table in a cosy corner of 'er
charmin' boodore, writin' out a little cheque for the relief of the
poor of Slumtown. 'Our next scene is called "The Rival Candidates, or, a Scene during the
General Election". On the left you will observe, standin' up in a
motor car, a swell bloke with a eyeglass stuck in one eye, and a
overcoat with a big fur collar and cuffs, addressing the crowd: this is
the Honourable Augustus Slumrent, the Conservative candidate. On the
other side of the road we see another motor car and another swell bloke
with a round pane of glass in one eye and a overcoat with a big fur
collar and cuffs, standing up in the car and addressin' the crowd. This
is Mr Mandriver, the Liberal candidate. The crowds of shabby-lookin'
chaps standin' round the motor cars wavin' their 'ats and cheerin' is
workin' men. Both the candidates is tellin' 'em the same old story,
and each of 'em is askin' the workin' men to elect 'im to Parlimint,
and promisin' to do something or other to make things better for the
lower horders.' As an appropriate selection to go with this picture, Bert played the
tune of a popular song, the words being well known to the children, who
sang enthusiastically, clapping their hands and stamping their feet on
the floor in time with the music:

'We've both been there before,
Many a time, many a time! We've both been there before,
Many a time! To colour his nose and mine,
We've both been there before,
Many a time, many a time!' At the conclusion of the singing, Bert turned another picture into view. ''Ere we 'ave another election scene. At each side we see the two
candidates the same as in the last pitcher. In the middle of the road
we see a man lying on the ground, covered with blood, with a lot of
Liberal and Tory working men kickin' 'im, jumpin' on 'im, and stampin'
on 'is face with their 'obnailed boots. The bloke on the ground is a
Socialist, and the reason why they're kickin' 'is face in is because 'e
said that the only difference between Slumrent and Mandriver was that
they was both alike.' While the audience were admiring this picture, Bert played another
well-known tune, and the children sang the words:

'Two lovely black eyes,
Oh what a surprise! Only for telling a man he was wrong,
Two lovely black eyes.' Bert continued to turn the handles of the rollers and a long succession
of pictures passed across the stage, to the delight of the children,
who cheered and sang as occasion demanded, but the most enthusiastic
outburst of all greeted the appearance of the final picture, which was
a portrait of the King. Directly the children saw it--without waiting
for the band--they gave three cheers and began to sing the chorus of
the National Anthem. A round of applause for Bert concluded the Pandorama performance; the
lamp and the candles of the Christmas tree were relit--for although all
the toys had been taken off, the tree still made a fine show with the
shining glass ornaments--and then they had some more games; blind man's
buff, a tug-of-war--in which Philpot was defeated with great
laughter--and a lot of other games. And when they were tired of these,
each child'said a piece' or sung a song, learnt specially for the
occasion. The only one who had not come prepared in this respect was
little Rosie, and even she--so as to be the same as the
others--insisted on reciting the only piece she knew. Kneeling on the
hearthrug, she put her hands together, palm to palm, and shutting her
eyes very tightly she repeated the verse she always said every night
before going to bed:

'Gentle Jesus, meek and mild,
Look on me, a little child. Pity my simplicity,
Suffer me to come to Thee.' Then she stood up and kissed everyone in turn, and Philpot crossed over
and began looking out of the window, and coughed, and blew his nose,
because a nut that he had been eating had gone down the wrong way. Most of them were by this time quite tired out, so after some supper
the party broke up. Although they were nearly all very sleepy, none of
them were very willing to go, but they were consoled by the thought of
another entertainment to which they were going later on in the
week--the Band of Hope Tea and Prize Distribution at the Shining Light
Chapel. Bert undertook to see Elsie and Charley safely home, and Philpot
volunteered to accompany Nellie and Tommy Newman, and to carry Rosie,
who was so tired that she fell asleep on his shoulder before they left
the house. As they were going down the stairs Frankie held a hurried consultation
with his mother, with the result that he was able to shout after them
an invitation to come again next Christmas. Chapter 30

The Brigands hold a Council of War


It being now what is usually called the festive season--possibly
because at this period of the year a greater number of people are
suffering from hunger and cold than at any other time--the reader will
not be surprised at being invited to another little party which took
place on the day after the one we have just left. The scene was Mr
Sweater's office. Mr Sweater was seated at his desk, but with his
chair swung round to enable him to face his guests--Messrs Rushton,
Didlum, and Grinder, who were also seated. 'Something will 'ave to be done, and that very soon,' Grinder was
saying. 'We can't go on much longer as we're doing at present. For my
part, I think the best thing to do is to chuck up the sponge at once;
the company is practically bankrupt now, and the longer we waits the
worser it will be.' 'That's just my opinion,' said Didlum dejectedly. 'If we could supply
the electric light at the same price as gas, or a little cheaper, we
might have some chance; but we can't do it. The fact is that the
machinery we've got is no dam good; it's too small and it's wore out,
consequently the light we supply is inferior to gas and costs more.' 'Yes, I think we're fairly beaten this time,' said Rushton. 'Why, even
if the Gas Coy hadn't moved their works beyond the borough boundary,
still we shouldn't 'ave been hable to compete with 'em.' 'The truth of the matter is just wot
Didlum says. Our machinery is too small, it's worn hout, and good for
nothing but to be throwed on the scrap-heap. So there's only one thing
left to do and that is--go into liquidation.' 'I don't see it,' remarked Sweater. 'Well, what do you propose, then?' Pull down the works and
build fresh, and buy some new machinery? And then most likely not make
a do of it after all? You
won't catch me chuckin' good money after bad in that way.' 'I'm not such a fool as to suggest anything
of that sort,' he said. 'You seem to forget that I am one of the
largest shareholders myself. replied Grinder with a contemptuous laugh in which the
others joined. 'Who's going to buy the shares of a concern that's
practically bankrupt and never paid a dividend?' 'I've tried to sell my little lot several times already,' said Didlum
with a sickly smile, 'but nobody won't buy 'em.' repeated Sweater, replying to Grinder. Why shouldn't Mugsborough go
in for Socialism as well as other towns?' Rushton, Didlum and Grinder fairly gasped for breath: the audacity of
the chief's proposal nearly paralysed them. 'I'm afraid we should never git away with it,' ejaculated Didlum, as
soon as he could speak. 'When the people tumbled to it, there'd be no
hend of a row.' 'The majority of the
people will never know anything about it! Listen to me--'

'Are you quite sure as we can't be over'eard?' interrupted Rushton,
glancing nervously at the door and round the office. 'It's all right,' answered Sweater, who nevertheless lowered his voice
almost to a whisper, and the others drew their chairs closer and bent
forward to listen. 'You know we still have a little money in hand: well, what I propose is
this: At the annual meeting, which, as you know, comes off next week,
we'll arrange for the Secretary to read a highly satisfactory report,
and we'll declare a dividend of 15 per cent--we can arrange it somehow
between us. Of course, we'll have to cook the accounts a little, but
I'll see that it's done properly. The other shareholders are not going
to ask any awkward questions, and we all understand each other.' Sweater paused, and regarded the other three brigands intently. 'Yes, yes,' said Didlum eagerly. And Rushton and
Grinder nodded assent. 'Afterwards,' resumed Sweater, 'I'll arrange for a good report of the
meeting to appear in the Weekly Ananias. I'll instruct the Editor to
write it himself, and I'll tell him just what to say. I'll also get
him to write a leading article about it, saying that electricity is
sure to supersede gas for lighting purposes in the very near future. Then the article will go on to refer to the huge profits made by the
Gas Coy and to say how much better it would have been if the town had
bought the gasworks years ago, so that those profits might have been
used to reduce the rates, the same as has been done in other towns. Finally, the article will declare that it's a great pity that the
Electric Light Supply should be in the hands of a private company, and
to suggest that an effort be made to acquire it for the town. 'In the meantime we can all go about--in a very quiet and judicious
way, of course--bragging about what a good thing we've got, and saying
we don't mean to sell. We shall say that we've overcome all the
initial expenses and difficulties connected with the installation of
the works--that we are only just beginning to reap the reward of our
industry and enterprise, and so on. 'Then,' continued the Chief, 'we can arrange for it to be proposed in
the Council that the Town should purchase the Electric Light Works.' 'But not by one of us four, you know,' said Grinder with a cunning leer. 'Certainly not; that would give the show away at once. There are, as
you know--several members of the Band who are not shareholders in the
company; we'll get some of them to do most of the talking. We, being
the directors of the company, must pretend to be against selling, and
stick out for our own price; and when we do finally consent we must
make out that we are sacrificing our private interests for the good of
the Town. We'll get a committee appointed--we'll have an expert
engineer down from London--I know a man that will suit our purpose
admirably--we'll pay him a trifle and he'll say whatever we tell him
to--and we'll rush the whole business through before you can say "Jack
Robinson", and before the rate-payers have time to realize what's being
done. Not that we need worry ourselves much about them. Most of them
take no interest in public affairs, but even if there is something
said, it won't matter much to us once we've got the money. It'll be a
nine days' wonder and then we'll hear no more of it.' As the Chief ceased speaking, the other brigands also remained silent,
speechless with admiration of his cleverness. 'Well, what do you think of it?' 'I think it's
splendid! If we can honly git away with it,
I reckon it'll be one of the smartest thing we've ever done.' 'Smart ain't the word for it,' observed Rushton. 'There's no doubt it's a grand idear!' exclaimed Didlum, 'and I've just
thought of something else that might be done to help it along. We could
arrange to 'ave a lot of letters sent "To the Editor of the Obscurer"
and "To the Editor of the Ananias," and "To the Editor of the Weekly
Chloroform" in favour of the scheme.' 'Yes, that's a very good idea,' said Grinder. 'For that matter the
editors could write them to themselves and sign them "Progress",
"Ratepayer", "Advance Mugsborough", and sich-like.' 'Yes, that's all right,' said the Chief, thoughtfully, 'but we must be
careful not to overdo it; of course there will have to be a certain
amount of publicity, but we don't want to create too much interest in
it.' 'Come to think of it,' observed Rushton arrogantly, 'why should we
trouble ourselves about the opinion of the ratepayers at all? Why
should we trouble to fake the books, or declare a dividend or 'ave the
harticles in the papers or anything else? We've got the game in our
own 'ands; we've got a majority in the Council, and, as Mr Sweater ses,
very few people even take the trouble to read the reports of the
meetings.' 'Yes, that's right enough,' said Grinder. 'But it's just them few wot
would make a lot of trouble and talk; THEY'RE the very people we 'as to
think about. If we can only manage to put THEM in a fog we'll be all
right, and the way to do it is as Mr Sweater proposes.' 'Yes, I think so,' said the Chief. I can
work it all right in the Ananias and the Chloroform, and of course
you'll see that the Obscurer backs us up.' 'I'll take care of that,' said Grinder, grimly. The three local papers were run by limited companies. Sweater held
nearly all the shares of the Ananias and of the Weekly Chloroform, and
controlled their policy and contents. Grinder occupied the same
position with regard to the Obscurer. The editors were a sort of
marionettes who danced as Sweater and Grinder pulled the strings. 'I wonder how Dr Weakling will take it?' 'That's the very thing I was just thinkin' about,' cried Didlum. 'Don't
you think it would be a good plan if we could arrange to 'ave somebody
took bad--you know, fall down in a fit or something in the street just
outside the Town 'All just before the matter is brought forward in the
Council, and then 'ave someone to come and call 'im out to attend to
the party wot's ill, and keep 'im out till the business is done.' 'Yes, that's a capital idear,' said Grinder thoughtfully. 'But who
could we get to 'ave the fit? It would 'ave to be someone we could
trust, you know.' You wouldn't mind doin' it, would yer?' 'I should strongly object,' said Rushton haughtily. He regarded the
suggestion that he should act such an undignified part, as a kind of
sacrilege. 'Then I'll do it meself if necessary,' said Didlum. 'I'm not proud
when there's money to be made; anything for an honest living.' 'Well, I think we're all agreed, so far,' remarked Sweater. 'And I think we all deserve a drink,' the Chief continued, producing a
decanter and a box of cigars from a cupboard by the side of his desk. 'Pass that water bottle from behind you, Didlum.' 'I suppose nobody won't be comin' in?' 'I'm
a teetotaler, you know.' 'Oh, it's all right,' said Sweater, taking four glasses out of the
cupboard and pouring out the whisky. 'I've given orders that we're not
to be disturbed for anyone. 'Well, 'ere's success to Socialism,' cried Grinder, raising his glass,
and taking a big drink. 'Amen--'ear, 'ear, I mean,' said Didlum, hastily correcting himself. 'Wot I likes about this 'ere business is that we're not only doin'
ourselves a bit of good,' continued Grinder with a laugh, 'we're not
only doin' ourselves a bit of good, but we're likewise doin' the
Socialists a lot of 'arm. When the ratepayers 'ave bought the Works,
and they begins to kick up a row because they're losin' money over
it--we can tell 'em that it's Socialism! And then they'll say that if
that's Socialism they don't want no more of it.' The other brigands laughed gleefully, and some of Didlum's whisky went
down the wrong way and nearly sent him into a fit. 'You might as well kill a man at once,' he protested as he wiped the
tears from his eyes, 'you might as well kill a man at once as choke 'im
to death.' 'And now I've got a bit of good news for you,' said the Chief as he put
his empty glass down. 'Although we've had a very rough time of it in our contest with the
Gasworks Company, and although we've got the worst of it, it hasn't
been all lavender for them, you know. They've not enjoyed themselves
either: we hit them pretty hard when we put up the coal dues.' 'A damn good job too,' said Grinder malignantly. 'Well,' continued Sweater, 'they're just as sick of the fight as they
want to be, because of course they don't know exactly how badly we've
been hit. For all they know, we could have continued the struggle
indefinitely: and--well, to make a long story short, I've had a talk
with the managing director and one or two others, and they're willing
to let us in with them. So that we can put the money we get for the
Electric Light Works into gas shares!' This was such splendid news that they had another drink on the strength
of it, and Didlum said that one of the first things they would have to
do would be to totally abolish the Coal Dues, because they pressed so
hard on the poor. Chapter 31

The Deserter


About the end of January, Slyme left Easton's. The latter had not
succeeded in getting anything to do since the work at 'The Cave' was
finished, and latterly the quality of the food had been falling off. The twelve shillings Slyme paid for his board and lodging was all that
Ruth had to keep house with. She had tried to get some work to do
herself, but generally without success; there were one or two jobs that
she might have had if she had been able to give her whole time to them,
but of course that was not possible; the child and the housework had to
be attended to, and Slyme's meals had to be prepared. Nevertheless, she
contrived to get away several times when she had a chance of earning a
few shillings by doing a day's charing for some lady or other, and then
she left everything in such order at home that Easton was able to
manage all right while she was away. On these occasions, she usually
left the baby with Owen's wife, who was an old schoolmate of hers. Nora was the more willing to render her this service because Frankie
used to be so highly delighted whenever it happened. He never tired of
playing with the child, and for several days afterwards he used to
worry his mother with entreaties to buy a baby of their own. Easton earned a few shillings occasionally; now and then he got a job
to clean windows, and once or twice he did a few days' or hours' work
with some other painter who had been fortunate enough to get a little
job 'on his own'--such as a ceiling to wash and whiten, or a room or
two to paint; but such jobs were few. Sometimes, when they were very hard up, they sold something; the Bible
that used to lie on the little table in the bay window was one of the
first things to be parted with. Ruth erased the inscription from the
fly-leaf and then they sold the book at a second-hand shop for two
shillings. As time went on, they sold nearly everything that was
saleable, except of course, the things that were obtained on the hire
system. Slyme could see that they were getting very much into debt and behind
with the rent, and on two occasions already Easton had borrowed five
shillings from him, which he might never be able to pay back. Another
thing was that Slyme was always in fear that Ruth--who had never wholly
abandoned herself to wrongdoing--might tell Easton what had happened;
more than once she had talked of doing so, and the principal reason why
she refrained was that she knew that even if he forgave her, he could
never think the same of her as before. Slyme repeatedly urged this
view upon her, pointing out that no good could result from such a
confession. It was not only that
the food was bad and that sometimes there was no fire, but Ruth and
Easton were nearly always quarrelling about something or other. She
scarcely spoke to Slyme at all, and avoided sitting at the table with
him whenever possible. He was in constant dread that Easton might
notice her manner towards him, and seek for some explanation. Altogether the situation was so unpleasant that Slyme determined to
clear out. He made the excuse that he had been offered a few weeks'
work at a place some little distance outside the town. After he was
gone they lived for several weeks in semi-starvation on what credit
they could get and by selling the furniture or anything else they
possessed that could be turned into money. The things out of Slyme's
room were sold almost directly he left. Chapter 32

The Veteran


Old Jack Linden had tried hard to earn a little money by selling
bloaters, but they often went bad, and even when he managed to sell
them all the profit was so slight that it was not worth doing. Before the work at 'The Cave' was finished, Philpot was a good friend
to them; he frequently gave old Jack sixpence or a shilling and often
brought a bag of cakes or buns for the children. Sometimes he came to
tea with them on Sundays as an excuse for bringing a tin of salmon. Elsie and Charley frequently went to Owen's house to take tea with
Frankie; in fact, whilst Owen had anything to do, they almost lived
there, for both Owen and Nora, knowing that the Lindens had nothing to
live on except the earnings of the young woman, encouraged the children
to come often. Old Jack made some hopeless attempts to get work--work of any kind, but
nobody wanted him; and to make things worse, his eyesight, which had
been failing for a long time, became very bad. Once he was given a job
by a big provision firm to carry an advertisement about the streets. The man who had been carrying it before--an old soldier--had been
sacked the previous day for getting drunk while on duty. The
advertisement was not an ordinary pair of sandwich boards, but a sort
of box without any bottom or lid, a wooden frame, four sides covered
with canvas, on which were pasted printed bills advertising margarine. Each side of this box or frame was rather larger than an ordinary
sandwich board. Old Linden had to get inside this thing and carry it about the streets;
two straps fixed across the top of the frame and passing one over each
of his shoulders enabled him to carry it. It swayed about a good deal
as he walked along, especially when the wind caught it, but there were
two handles inside to hold it steady by. The pay was eighteenpence a
day, and he had to travel a certain route, up and down the busiest
streets. At first the frame did not feel very heavy, but the weight seemed to
increase as the time went on, and the straps hurt his shoulders. He
felt very much ashamed, also, whenever he encountered any of his old
mates, some of whom laughed at him. In consequence of the frame requiring so much attention to keep it
steady, and being unused to the work, and his sight so bad, he several
times narrowly escaped being run over. Another thing that added to his
embarrassment was the jeering of the other sandwichmen, the loafers
outside the public houses, and the boys, who shouted 'old Jack in the
box' after him. Sometimes the boys threw refuse at the frame, and once
a decayed orange thrown by one of them knocked his hat off. By the time evening came he was scarcely able to stand for weariness. His shoulders, his legs and his feet ached terribly, and as he was
taking the thing back to the shop he was accosted by a ragged,
dirty-looking, beer-sodden old man whose face was inflamed with drink
and fury. 'This was the old soldier who had been discharged the
previous day. He cursed and swore in the most awful manner and accused
Linden of 'taking the bread out of his mouth', and, shaking his fist
fiercely at him, shouted that he had a good mind to knock his face
through his head and out of the back of his neck. He might possibly
have tried to put this threat into practice but for the timely
appearance of a policeman, when he calmed down at once and took himself
off. Jack did not go back the next day; he felt that he would rather starve
than have any more of the advertisement frame, and after this he seemed
to abandon all hope of earning money: wherever he went it was the
same--no one wanted him. So he just wandered about the streets
aimlessly, now and then meeting an old workmate who asked him to have a
drink, but this was not often, for nearly all of them were out of work
and penniless. Chapter 33

The Soldier's Children


During most of this time, Jack Linden's daughter-in-law had 'Plenty of
Work', making blouses and pinafores for Sweater & Co. She had so much
to do that one might have thought that the Tory Millennium had arrived,
and that Tariff Reform was already an accomplished fact. At first they had employed her exclusively on the cheapest kind of
blouses--those that were paid for at the rate of two shillings a dozen,
but they did not give her many of that sort now. She did the work so
neatly that they kept her busy on the better qualities, which did not
pay her so well, because although she was paid more per dozen, there
was a great deal more work in them than in the cheaper kinds. Once she
had a very special one to make, for which she was paid six shillings;
but it took her four and a half days--working early and late--to do it. The lady who bought this blouse was told that it came from Paris, and
paid three guineas for it. But of course Mrs Linden knew nothing of
that, and even if she had known, it would have made no difference to
her. Most of the money she earned went to pay the rent, and sometimes there
was only two or three shillings left to buy food for all of them:
sometimes not even so much, because although she had Plenty of Work she
was not always able to do it. There were times when the strain of
working the machine was unendurable: her shoulders ached, her arms
became cramped, and her eyes pained so that it was impossible to
continue. Then for a change she would leave the sewing and do some
housework. Once, when they owed four weeks' rent, the agent was so threatening
that they were terrified at the thought of being sold up and turned out
of the house, and so she decided to sell the round mahogany table and
some of the other things out of the sitting-room. Nearly all the
furniture that was in the house now belonged to her, and had formed her
home before her husband died. The old people had given most of their
things away at different times to their other sons since she had come
to live there. These men were all married and all in employment. One
was a fitter at the gasworks; the second was a railway porter, and the
other was a butcher; but now that the old man was out of work they
seldom came to the house. The last time they had been there was on
Christmas Eve, and then there had been such a terrible row between them
that the children had been awakened by it and frightened nearly out of
their lives. The cause of the row was that some time previously they
had mutually agreed to each give a shilling a week to the old people. They had done this for three weeks and after that the butcher had
stopped his contribution: it had occurred to him that he was not to be
expected to help to keep his brother's widow and her children. If the
old people liked to give up the house and go to live in a room
somewhere by themselves, he would continue paying his shilling a week,
but not otherwise. Upon this the railway porter and the gas-fitter
also ceased paying. They said it wasn't fair that they should pay a
shilling a week each when the butcher--who was the eldest and earned
the best wages--paid nothing. Provided he paid, they would pay; but if
he didn't pay anything, neither would they. On Christmas Eve they all
happened to come to the house at the same time; each denounced the
others, and after nearly coming to blows they all went away raging and
cursing and had not been near the place since. As soon as she decided to sell the things, Mary went to Didlum's
second-hand furniture store, and the manager said he would ask Mr
Didlum to call and see the table and other articles. She waited
anxiously all the morning, but he did not appear, so she went once more
to the shop to remind him. When he did come at last he was very
contemptuous of the table and of everything else she offered to sell. Five shillings was the very most he could think of giving for the
table, and even then he doubted whether he would ever get his money
back. Eventually he gave her thirty shillings for the table, the
overmantel, the easy chair, three other chairs and the two best
pictures--one a large steel engraving of 'The Good Samaritan' and the
other 'Christ Blessing Little Children'. He paid the money at once; half an hour afterwards the van came to take
the things away, and when they were gone, Mary sank down on the
hearthrug in the wrecked room and sobbed as if her heart would break. Slowly, piece by
piece, in order to buy food and to pay the rent, the furniture was
sold. Every time Didlum came he affected to be doing them a very great
favour by buying the things at all. Business was so bad: it might be years before he could
sell them again, and so on. Once or twice he asked Mary if she did not
want to sell the clock--the one that her late husband had made for his
mother, but Mary shrank from the thought of selling this, until at last
there was nothing else left that Didlum would buy, and one week, when
Mary was too ill to do any needlework--it had to go. He gave them ten
shillings for it. Mary had expected the old woman to be heartbroken at having to part
with this clock, but she was surprised to see her almost indifferent. The truth was, that lately both the old people seemed stunned, and
incapable of taking an intelligent interest in what was happening
around them, and Mary had to attend to everything. From time to time nearly all their other possessions--things of
inferior value that Didlum would not look at, she carried out and sold
at small second-hand shops in back streets or pledged at the
pawn-broker's. The feather pillows, sheets, and blankets: bits of
carpet or oilcloth, and as much of their clothing as was saleable or
pawnable. They felt the loss of the bedclothes more than anything
else, for although all the clothes they wore during the day, and all
the old clothes and dresses in the house, and even an old
tablecloth, were put on the beds at night, they did not compensate for
the blankets, and they were often unable to sleep on account of the
intense cold. A lady district visitor who called occasionally sometimes gave Mary an
order for a hundredweight of coal or a shillingsworth of groceries, or
a ticket for a quart of soup, which Elsie fetched in the evening from
the Soup Kitchen. But this was not very often, because, as the lady
said, there were so many cases similar to theirs that it was impossible
to do more than a very little for any one of them. Sometimes Mary became so weak and exhausted through overwork, worry,
and lack of proper food that she broke down altogether for the time
being, and positively could not do any work at all. Then she used to
lie down on the bed in her room and cry. Whenever she became like this, Elsie and Charley used to do the
housework when they came home from school, and make tea and toast for
her, and bring it to the bedside on a chair so that she could eat lying
down. When there was no margarine or dripping to put on the toast,
they made it very thin and crisp and pretended it was biscuit. The children rather enjoyed these times; the quiet and leisure was so
different from other days when their mother was so busy she had no time
to speak to them. They would sit on the side of the bed, the old grandmother in her chair
opposite with the cat beside her listening to the conversation and
purring or mewing whenever they stroked it or spoke to it. They talked
principally of the future. Elsie said she was going to be a teacher
and earn a lot of money to bring home to her mother to buy things with. Charley was thinking of opening a grocer's shop and having a horse and
cart. When one has a grocer's shop, there is always plenty to eat;
even if you have no money, you can take as much as you like out of your
shop--good stuff, too, tins of salmon, jam, sardines, eggs, cakes,
biscuits and all those sorts of things--and one was almost certain to
have some money every day, because it wasn't likely that a whole day
would go by without someone or other coming into the shop to buy
something. When delivering the groceries with the horse and cart, he
would give rides to all the boys he knew, and in the summertime, after
the work was done and the shop shut up, Mother and Elsie and Granny
could also come for long rides into the country. The old grandmother--who had latterly become quite childish--used to
sit and listen to all this talk with a superior air. Sometimes she
argued with the children about their plans, and ridiculed them. She
used to say with a chuckle that she had heard people talk like that
before--lots of times--but it never came to nothing in the end. One week about the middle of February, when they were in very sore
straits indeed, old Jack applied to the secretary of the Organized
Benevolence Society for assistance. It was about eleven o'clock in the
morning when he turned the corner of the street where the office of the
society was situated and saw a crowd of about thirty men waiting for
the doors to be opened in order to apply for soup tickets. Some of
these men were of the tramp or the drunken loafer class; some were old,
broken-down workmen like himself, and others were labourers wearing
corduroy or moleskin trousers with straps round their legs under their
knees. Linden waited at a distance until all these were gone before he went
in. The secretary received him sympathetically and gave him a big form
to fill up, but as Linden's eyes were so bad and his hand so unsteady
the secretary very obligingly wrote in the answers himself, and
informed him that he would inquire into the case and lay his
application before the committee at the next meeting, which was to be
held on the following Thursday--it was then Monday. Linden explained to him that they were actually starving. He had been
out of work for sixteen weeks, and during all that time they had lived
for the most part on the earnings of his daughter-in-law, but she had
not done anything for nearly a fortnight now, because the firm she
worked for had not had any work for her to do. There was no food in
the house and the children were crying for something to eat. All last
week they had been going to school hungry, for they had had nothing but
dry bread and tea every day: but this week--as far as he could
see--they would not get even that. After some further talk the
secretary gave him two soup tickets and an order for a loaf of bread,
and repeated his promise to inquire into the case and bring it before
the committee. As Jack was returning home he passed the Soup Kitchen, where he saw the
same lot of men who had been to the office of the Organized Benevolence
Society for the soup tickets. They were waiting in a long line to be
admitted. The premises being so small, the proprietor served them in
batches of ten at a time. On Wednesday the secretary called at the house, and on Friday Jack
received a letter from him to the effect that the case had been duly
considered by the committee, who had come to the conclusion that as it
was a 'chronic' case they were unable to deal with it, and advised him
to apply to the Board of Guardians. This was what Linden had hitherto
shrunk from doing, but the situation was desperate. They owed five
weeks' rent, and to crown their misfortune his eyesight had become so
bad that even if there had been any prospect of obtaining work it was
very doubtful if he could have managed to do it. So Linden, feeling
utterly crushed and degraded, swallowed all that remained of his pride
and went like a beaten dog to see the relieving officer, who took him
before the Board, who did not think it a suitable case for out-relief,
and after some preliminaries it was arranged that Linden and his wife
were to go into the workhouse, and Mary was to be allowed three
shillings a week to help her to support herself and the two children. As for Linden's sons, the Guardians intimated their Intention of
compelling them to contribute towards the cost of their parents'
maintenance. Mary accompanied the old people to the gates of their future
dwelling-place, and when she returned home she found there a letter
addressed to J. Linden. It was from the house agent and contained a
notice to leave the house before the end of the ensuing week. Nothing
was said about the rent that was due. Perhaps Mr Sweater thought that
as he had already received nearly six hundred pounds in rent from
Linden he could afford to be generous about the five weeks that were
still owing--or perhaps he thought there was no possibility of getting
the money. However that may have been, there was no reference to it in
the letter--it was simply a notice to clear out, addressed to Linden,
but meant for Mary. It was about half past three o'clock in the afternoon when she returned
home and found this letter on the floor in the front passage. She was
faint with fatigue and hunger, for she had had nothing but a cup of tea
and a slice of bread that day, and her fare had not been much better
for many weeks past. The children were at school, and the house--now
almost destitute of furniture and without carpets or oilcloth on the
floors--was deserted and cold and silent as a tomb. On the kitchen
table were a few cracked cups and saucers, a broken knife, some lead
teaspoons, a part of a loaf, a small basin containing some dripping and
a brown earthenware teapot with a broken spout. Near the table were two
broken kitchen chairs, one with the top cross-piece gone from the back,
and the other with no back to the seat at all. The bareness of the
walls was relieved only by a almanac and some paper pictures
which the children had tacked upon them, and by the side of the
fireplace was the empty wicker chair where the old woman used to sit. There was no fire in the grate, and the cold hearth was untidy with an
accumulation of ashes, for during the trouble of these last few days
she had not had time or heart to do any housework. The floor was
unswept and littered with scraps of paper and dust: in one corner was a
heap of twigs and small branches of trees that Charley had found
somewhere and brought home for the fire. The same disorder prevailed all through the house: all the doors were
open, and from where she stood in the kitchen she could see the bed she
shared with Elsie, with its heterogeneous heap of coverings. The
sitting-room contained nothing but a collection of odds and ends of
rubbish which belonged to Charley--his 'things' as he called them--bits
of wood, string and rope; one wheel of a perambulator, a top, an iron
hoop and so on. Through the other door was visible the dilapidated
bedstead that had been used by the old people, with a similar lot of
bedclothes to those on her own bed, and the torn, ragged covering of
the mattress through the side of which the flock was protruding and
falling in particles on to the floor. As she stood there with the letter in her hand--faint and weary in the
midst of all this desolation, it seemed to her as if the whole world
were falling to pieces and crumbling away all around her. Chapter 34

The Beginning of the End


During the months of January and February, Owen, Crass, Slyme and
Sawkins continued to work at irregular intervals for Rushton & Co.,
although--even when there was anything to do--they now put in only six
hours a day, commencing in the morning and leaving off at four, with an
hour's interval for dinner between twelve and one. They finished the
'plant' and painted the front of Rushton's shop. When all this was
completed, as no other work came in, they all had to'stand off' with
the exception of Sawkins, who was kept on because he was cheap and able
to do all sorts of odd jobs, such as unstopping drains, repairing leaky
roofs, rough painting or lime-washing, and he was also useful as a
labourer for the plumbers, of whom there were now three employed at
Rushton's, the severe weather which had come in with January having
made a lot of work in that trade. With the exception of this one
branch, practically all work was at a standstill. had had several 'boxing-up' jobs to do,
and Crass always did the polishing of the coffins on these occasions,
besides assisting to take the 'box' home when finished and to 'lift in'
the corpse, and afterwards he always acted as one of the bearers at the
funerals. For an ordinary class funeral he usually put in about three
hours for the polishing; that came to one and nine. Taking home the
coffin and lifting in the corpse, one shilling--usually there were two
men to do this besides Hunter, who always accompanied them to
superintend the work--attending the funeral and acting as bearer, four
shillings: so that altogether Crass made six shillings and ninepence
out of each funeral, and sometimes a little more. For instance, when
there was an unusually good-class corpse they had a double coffin and
then of course there were two 'lifts in', for the shell was taken home
first and the outer coffin perhaps a day or two later: this made
another shilling. No matter how expensive the funeral was, the bearers
never got any more money. Sometimes the carpenter and Crass were able
to charge an hour or two more on the making and polishing of a coffin
for a good job, but that was all. Sometimes, when there was a very
cheap job, they were paid only three shillings for attending as
bearers, but this was not often: as a rule they got the same amount
whether it was a cheap funeral or an expensive one. Slyme earned only
five shillings out of each funeral, and Owen only one and six--for
writing the coffin plate. Sometimes there were three or four funerals in a week, and then Crass
did very well indeed. He still had the two young men lodgers at his
house, and although one of them was out of work he was still able to
pay his way because he had some money in the bank. One of the funeral jobs led to a terrible row between Crass and
Sawkins. The corpse was that of a well-to-do woman who had been ill
for a long time with cancer of the stomach, and after the funeral
Rushton & Co. had to clean and repaint and paper the room she had
occupied during her illness. Although cancer is not supposed to be an
infectious disease, they had orders to take all the bedding away and
have it burnt. Sawkins was instructed to take a truck to the house and
get the bedding and take it to the town Refuse Destructor to be
destroyed. There were two feather beds, a bolster and two pillows:
they were such good things that Sawkins secretly resolved that instead
of taking them to the Destructor he would take them to a second-hand
dealer and sell them. As he was coming away from the house with the things he met Hunter, who
told him that he wanted him for some other work; so he was to take the
truck to the yard and leave it there for the present; he could take the
bedding to the Destructor later on in the day. Sawkins did as Hunter
ordered, and in the meantime Crass, who happened to be working at the
yard painting some venetian blinds, saw the things on the truck, and,
hearing what was to be done with them, he also thought it was a pity
that such good things should be destroyed: so when Sawkins came in the
afternoon to take them away Crass told him he need not trouble; 'I'm
goin' to 'ave that lot, he said; 'they're too good to chuck away;
there's nothing wrong with 'em.' He said he had been told to take
them to the Destructor, and he was going to do so. He was dragging the
cart out of the yard when Crass rushed up and lifted the bundle off and
carried it into the paint-shop. Sawkins ran after him and they began
to curse and swear at each other; Crass accusing Sawkins of intending
to take the things to the marine stores and sell them. Sawkins seized
hold of the bundle with the object of replacing it on the cart, but
Crass got hold of it as well and they had a tussle for it--a kind of
tug of war--reeling and struggling all over the shop. cursing and
swearing horribly all the time. Finally, Sawkins--being the better man
of the two--succeeded in wrenching the bundle away and put it on the
cart again, and then Crass hurriedly put on his coat and said he was
going to the office to ask Mr Rushton if he might have the things. Upon hearing this, Sawkins became so infuriated that he lifted the
bundle off the cart and, throwing it upon the muddy ground, right into
a pool of dirty water, trampled it underfoot; and then, taking out his
clasp knife, began savagely hacking and ripping the ticking so that the
feathers all came falling out. In a few minutes he had damaged the
things beyond hope of repair, while Crass stood by, white and
trembling, watching the proceedings but lacking the courage to
interfere. 'Now go to the office and ask Rushton for 'em, if you like!' 'You can 'ave 'em now, if you want 'em.' Crass made no answer and, after a moment's hesitation, went back to his
work, and Sawkins piled the things on the cart once more and took them
away to the Destructor. He would not be able to sell them now, but at
any rate he had stopped that dirty swine Crass from getting them. When Crass went back to the paint-shop he found there one of the
pillows which had fallen out of the bundle during the struggle. He
took it home with him that evening and slept upon it. It was a fine
pillow, much fuller and softer and more cosy than the one he had been
accustomed to. A few days afterwards when he was working at the room where the woman
died, they gave him some other things that had belonged to her to do
away with, and amongst them was a kind of wrap of grey knitted wool. Crass kept this for himself: it was just the thing to wrap round one's
neck when going to work on a cold morning, and he used it for that
purpose all through the winter. In addition to the funerals, there was
a little other work: sometimes a room or two to be painted and papered
and ceilings whitened, and once they had the outside of two small
cottages to paint--doors and windows--two coats. All four of them
worked at this job and it was finished in two days. Some weeks Crass earned a pound or eighteen shillings; sometimes a
little more, generally less and occasionally nothing at all. There was a lot of jealousy and ill-feeling amongst them about the
work. Slyme and Crass were both aggrieved about Sawkins whenever they
were idle, especially if the latter were painting or whitewashing, and
their indignation was shared by all the others who were 'off'. Harlow
swore horribly about it, and they all agreed that it was disgraceful
that a bloody labourer should be employed doing what ought to be
skilled work for fivepence an hour, while properly qualified men were
'walking about'. These other men were also incensed against Slyme and
Crass because the latter were given the preference whenever there was a
little job to do, and it was darkly insinuated that in order to secure
this preference these two were working for sixpence an hour. There was
no love lost between Crass and Slyme either: Crass was furious whenever
it happened that Slyme had a few hours' work to do if he himself were
idle, and if ever Crass was working while Slyme was'standing still'
the latter went about amongst the other unemployed men saying ugly
things about Crass, whom he accused of being a 'crawler'. Owen also
came in for his share of abuse and blame: most of them said that a man
like him should stick out for higher wages whether employed on special
work or not, and then he would not get any preference. But all the
same, whatever they said about each other behind each other's backs,
they were all most friendly to each other when they met face to face. Once or twice Owen did some work--such as graining a door or writing a
sign--for one or other of his fellow workmen who had managed to secure
a little job 'on his own', but putting it all together, the
coffin-plates and other work at Rushton's and all, his earnings had not
averaged ten shillings a week for the last six weeks. Often they had
no coal and sometimes not even a penny to put into the gas meter, and
then, having nothing left good enough to pawn, he sometimes obtained a
few pence by selling some of his books to second-hand book dealers. However, bad as their condition was, Owen knew that they were better
off than the majority of the others, for whenever he went out he was
certain to meet numbers of men whom he had worked with at different
times, who said--some of them--that they had been idle for ten, twelve,
fifteen and in some cases for twenty weeks without having earned a
shilling. Owen used to wonder how they managed to continue to exist. Most of
them were wearing other people's cast-off clothes, hats, and boots,
which had in some instances been given to their wives by 'visiting
ladies', or by the people at whose houses their wives went to work,
charing. As for food, most of them lived on such credit as they could
get, and on the scraps of broken victuals and meat that their wives
brought home from the places they worked at. Some of them had grown-up
sons and daughters who still lived with them and whose earnings kept
their homes together, and the wives of some of them eked out a
miserable existence by letting lodgings. The week before old Linden went into the workhouse Owen earned nothing,
and to make matters worse the grocer from whom they usually bought
their things suddenly refused to let them have any more credit. Owen
went to see him, and the man said he was very sorry, but he could not
let them have anything more without the money; he did not mind waiting
a few weeks for what was already owing, but he could not let the amount
get any higher; his books were full of bad debts already. In
conclusion, he said that he hoped Owen would not do as so many others
had done and take his ready money elsewhere. People came and got
credit from him when they were hard up, and afterwards spent their
ready money at the Monopole Company's stores on the other side of the
street, because their goods were a trifle cheaper, and it was not fair. Owen admitted that it was not fair, but reminded him that they always
bought their things at his shop. The grocer, however, was inexorable;
he repeated several times that his books were full of bad debts and his
own creditors were pressing him. During their conversation the
shopkeeper's eyes wandered continually to the big store on the other
side of the street; the huge, gilded letters of the name 'Monopole
Stores' seemed to have an irresistible attraction for him. Once he
interrupted himself in the middle of a sentence to point out to Owen a
little girl who was just coming out of the Stores with a small parcel
in her hand. 'Her father owes me nearly thirty shillings,' he said, 'but they spend
their ready money there.' The front of the grocer's shop badly needed repainting, and the name on
the fascia, 'A. Smallman', was so faded as to be almost indecipherable. It had been Owen's intention to offer to do this work--the cost to go
against his account--but the man appeared to be so harassed that Owen
refrained from making the suggestion. They still had credit at the baker's, but they did not take much bread:
when one has had scarcely anything else but bread to eat for nearly a
month one finds it difficult to eat at all. That same day, when he
returned home after his interview with the grocer, they had a loaf of
beautiful fresh bread, but none of them could eat it, although they
were hungry: it seemed to stick in their throats, and they could not
swallow it even with the help of a drink of tea. But they drank the
tea, which was the one thing that enabled them to go on living. The next week Owen earned eight shillings altogether: a few hours he
put in assisting Crass to wash off and whiten a ceiling and paint a
room, and there was one coffin-plate. He wrote the latter at home, and
while he was doing it he heard Frankie--who was out in the scullery
with Nora--say to her:

'Mother, how many more days to you think we'll have to have only dry
bread and tea?' Owen's heart seemed to stop as he heard the child's question and
listened for Nora's answer, but the question was not to be answered at
all just then, for at that moment they heard someone running up the
stairs and presently the door was unceremoniously thrown open and
Charley Linden rushed into the house, out of breath, hatless, and
crying piteously. His clothes were old and ragged; they had been
patched at the knees and elbows, but the patches were tearing away from
the rotting fabric into which they had been sewn. He had on a pair of
black stockings full of holes through which the skin was showing. The
soles of his boots were worn through at one side right to the uppers,
and as he walked the sides of his bare heels came into contact with the
floor, the front part of the sole of one boot was separated from the
upper, and his bare toes, red with cold and covered with mud, protruded
through the gap. Some sharp substance--a nail or a piece of glass or
flint--had evidently lacerated his right foot, for blood was oozing
from the broken heel of his boot on to the floor. They were unable to make much sense of the confused story he told them
through his sobs as soon as he was able to speak. All that was clear
was that there was something very serious the matter at home: he
thought his mother must be either dying or dead, because she did not
speak or move or open her eyes, and 'please, please, please will you
come home with me and see her?' While Nora was getting ready to go with the boy, Owen made him sit on a
chair, and having removed the boot from the foot that was bleeding,
washed the cut with some warm water and bandaged it with a piece of
clean rag, and then they tried to persuade him to stay there with
Frankie while Nora went to see his mother, but the boy would not hear
of it. Owen could not go because
he had to finish the coffin-plate, which was only just commenced. It will be remembered that we left Mary Linden alone in the house after
she returned from seeing the old people away. When the children came
home from school, about half an hour afterwards, they found her sitting
in one of the chairs with her head resting on her arms on the table,
unconscious. They were terrified, because they could not awaken her
and began to cry, but presently Charley thought of Frankie's mother
and, telling his sister to stay there while he was gone, he started off
at a run for Owen's house, leaving the front door wide open after him. When Nora and the two boys reached the house they found there two other
women neighbours, who had heard Elsie crying and had come to see what
was wrong. Mary had recovered from her faint and was lying down on the
bed. Nora stayed with her for some time after the other women went
away. She lit the fire and gave the children their tea--there was
still some coal and food left of what had been bought with the three
shillings obtained from the Board of Guardians--and afterwards she
tidied the house. Mary said that she did not know exactly what she would have to do in
the future. If she could get a room somewhere for two or three
shillings a week, her allowance from the Guardians would pay the rent,
and she would be able to earn enough for herself and the children to
live on. This was the substance of the story that Nora told Owen when she
returned home. He had finished writing the coffin-plate, and as it was
now nearly dry he put on his coat and took it down to the carpenter's
shop at the yard. On his way back he met Easton, who had been hanging about in the vain
hope of seeing Hunter and finding out if there was any chance of a job. As they walked along together, Easton confided to Owen that he had
earned scarcely anything since he had been stood off at Rushton's, and
what he had earned had gone, as usual, to pay the rent. Slyme had left
them some time ago. Ruth did not seem able to get on with him; she had
been in a funny sort of temper altogether, but since he had gone she
had had a little work at a boarding-house on the Grand Parade. But
things had been going from bad to worse. They had not been able to keep
up the payments for the furniture they had hired, so the things had
been seized and carted off. They had even stripped the oilcloth from
the floor. Easton remarked he was sorry he had not tacked the bloody
stuff down in such a manner that they would not have been able to take
it up without destroying it. He had been to see Didlum, who said he
didn't want to be hard on them, and that he would keep the things
together for three months, and if Easton had paid up arrears by that
time he could have them back again, but there was, in Easton's opinion,
very little chance of that. Here was a man who grumbled at
the present state of things, yet took no trouble to think for himself
and try to alter them, and who at the first chance would vote for the
perpetuation of the System which produced his misery. 'Have you heard that old Jack Linden and his wife went to the workhouse
today,' he said. 'No,' replied Easton, indifferently. Owen then suggested it would not be a bad plan for Easton to let his
front room, now that it was empty, to Mrs Linden, who would be sure to
pay her rent, which would help Easton to pay his. Easton agreed and
said he would mention it to Ruth, and a few minutes later they parted. The next morning Nora found Ruth talking to Mary Linden about the room
and as the Eastons lived only about five minutes' walk away, they all
three went round there in order that Mary might see the room. The
appearance of the house from outside was unaltered: the white lace
curtains still draped the windows of the front room; and in the centre
of the bay was what appeared to be a small round table covered with a
red cloth, and upon it a geranium in a flowerpot standing in a saucer
with a frill of tissue paper round it. These things and the
curtains, which fell close together, made it impossible for anyone to
see that the room was, otherwise, unfurnished. The 'table' consisted
of an empty wooden box--procured from the grocer's--stood on end, with
the lid of the scullery copper placed upside down upon it for a top and
covered with an old piece of red cloth. The purpose of this was to
prevent the neighbours from thinking that they were hard up; although
they knew that nearly all those same neighbours were in more or less
similar straits. It was not a very large room, considering that it would have to serve
all purposes for herself and the two children, but Mrs Linden knew that
it was not likely that she would be able to get one as good elsewhere
for the same price, so she agreed to take it from the following Monday
at two shillings a week. As the distance was so short they were able to carry most of the
smaller things to their new home during the next few days, and on the
Monday evening, when it was dark. Owen and Easton brought the
remainder on a truck they borrowed for the purpose from Hunter. During the last weeks of February the severity of the weather
increased. There was a heavy fall of snow on the 20th followed by a
hard frost which lasted several days. About ten o'clock one night a policeman found a man lying unconscious
in the middle of a lonely road. At first he thought the man was drunk,
and after dragging him on to the footpath out of the way of passing
vehicles he went for the stretcher. They took the man to the station
and put him into a cell, which was already occupied by a man who had
been caught in the act of stealing a swede turnip from a barn. When the
police surgeon came he pronounced the supposed drunken man to be dying
from bronchitis and want of food; and he further said that there was
nothing to indicate that the man was addicted to drink. When the
inquest was held a few days afterwards, the coroner remarked that it
was the third case of death from destitution that had occurred in the
town within six weeks. The evidence showed that the man was a plasterer who had walked from
London with the hope of finding work somewhere in the country. He had
no money in his possession when he was found by the policeman; all that
his pockets contained being several pawn-tickets and a letter from his
wife, which was not found until after he died, because it was in an
inner pocket of his waistcoat. A few days before this inquest was
held, the man who had been arrested for stealing the turnip had been
taken before the magistrates. The poor wretch said he did it because
he was starving, but Aldermen Sweater and Grinder, after telling him
that starvation was no excuse for dishonesty, sentenced him to pay a
fine of seven shillings and costs, or go to prison for seven days with
hard labour. As the convict had neither money nor friends, he had to
go to jail, where he was, after all, better off than most of those who
were still outside because they lacked either the courage or the
opportunity to steal something to relieve their sufferings. As time went on the long-continued privation began to tell upon Owen
and his family. He had a severe cough: his eyes became deeply sunken
and of remarkable brilliancy, and his thin face was always either
deathly pale or dyed with a crimson flush. Frankie also began to show the effects of being obliged to go so often
without his porridge and milk; he became very pale and thin and his
long hair came out in handfuls when his mother combed or brushed it. This was a great trouble to the boy, who, since hearing the story of
Samson read out of the Bible at school, had ceased from asking to have
his hair cut short, lest he should lose his strength in consequence. He
used to test himself by going through a certain exercise he had himself
invented, with a flat iron, and he was always much relieved when he
found that, notwithstanding the loss of the porridge, he was still able
to lift the iron the proper number of times. But after a while, as he
found that it became increasingly difficult to go through the exercise,
he gave it up altogether, secretly resolving to wait until 'Dad' had
more work to do, so that he could have the porridge and milk again. He
was sorry to have to discontinue the exercise, but he said nothing
about it to his father or mother because he did not want to 'worry'
them...

Sometimes Nora managed to get a small job of needlework. On one
occasion a woman with a small son brought a parcel of garments
belonging to herself or her husband, an old ulster, several coats, and
so on--things that although they were too old-fashioned or shabby to
wear, yet might look all right if turned and made up for the boy. Nora undertook to do this, and after working several hours every day
for a week she earned four shillings: and even then the woman thought
it was so dear that she did not bring any more. Another time Mrs Easton got her some work at a boarding-house where she
herself was employed. The servant was laid up, and they wanted some
help for a few days. The pay was to be two shillings a day, and
dinner. Owen did not want her to go because he feared she was not
strong enough to do the work, but he gave way at last and Nora went. She had to do the bedrooms, and on the evening of the second day, as a
result of the constant running up and down the stairs carrying heavy
cans and pails of water, she was in such intense pain that she was
scarcely able to walk home, and for several days afterwards had to lie
in bed through a recurrence of her old illness, which caused her to
suffer untold agony whenever she tried to stand. Owen was alternately dejected and maddened by the knowledge of his own
helplessness: when he was not doing anything for Rushton he went about
the town trying to find some other work, but usually with scant
success. He did some samples of showcard and window tickets and
endeavoured to get some orders by canvassing the shops in the town, but
this was also a failure, for these people generally had a ticket-writer
to whom they usually gave their work. He did get a few trifling
orders, but they were scarcely worth doing at the price he got for
them. He used to feel like a criminal when he went into the shops to
ask them for the work, because he realized fully that, in effect, he
was saying to them: 'Take your work away from the other man, and employ
me.' He was so conscious of this that it gave him a shamefaced manner,
which, coupled as it was with his shabby clothing, did not create a
very favourable impression upon those he addressed, who usually treated
him with about as much courtesy as they would have extended to any
other sort of beggar. Generally, after a day's canvassing, he returned
home unsuccessful and faint with hunger and fatigue. Once, when there was a bitterly cold east wind blowing, he was out on
one of these canvassing expeditions and contracted a severe cold: his
chest became so bad that he found it almost impossible to speak,
because the effort to do so often brought on a violent fit of coughing. It was during this time that a firm of drapers, for whom he had done
some showcards, sent him an order for one they wanted in a hurry, it
had to be delivered the next morning, so he stayed up by himself till
nearly midnight to do it. As he worked, he felt a strange sensation in
his chest: it was not exactly a pain, and he would have found it
difficult to describe it in words--it was just a sensation. He did not
attach much importance to it, thinking it an effect of the cold he had
taken, but whatever it was he could not help feeling conscious of it
all the time. Frankie had been put to bed that evening at the customary hour, but did
not seem to be sleeping as well as usual. Owen could hear him twisting
and turning about and uttering little cries in his sleep. He left his work several times to go into the boy's room and cover him
with the bedclothes which his restless movements had disordered. As
the time wore on, the child became more tranquil, and about eleven
o'clock, when Owen went in to look at him, he found him in a deep
sleep, lying on his side with his head thrown back on the pillow,
breathing so softly through his slightly parted lips that the sound was
almost imperceptible. The fair hair that clustered round his forehead
was damp with perspiration, and he was so still and pale and silent
that one might have thought he was sleeping the sleep that knows no
awakening. About an hour later, when he had finished writing the showcard, Owen
went out into the scullery to wash his hands before going to bed: and
whilst he was drying them on the towel, the strange sensation he had
been conscious of all the evening became more intense, and a few
seconds afterwards he was terrified to find his mouth suddenly filled
with blood. For what seemed an eternity he fought for breath against the
suffocating torrent, and when at length it stopped, he sank trembling
into a chair by the side of the table, holding the towel to his mouth
and scarcely daring to breathe, whilst a cold sweat streamed from every
pore and gathered in large drops upon his forehead. Through the deathlike silence of the night there came from time to time
the chimes of the clock of a distant church, but he continued to sit
there motionless, taking no heed of the passing hours, and possessed
with an awful terror. And afterwards the other two
would be left by themselves at the mercy of the world. In a few years'
time the boy would be like Bert White, in the clutches of some
psalm-singing devil like Hunter or Rushton, who would use him as if he
were a beast of burden. He imagined he could see him now as he would
be then: worked, driven, and bullied, carrying loads, dragging carts,
and running here and there, trying his best to satisfy the brutal
tyrants, whose only thought would be to get profit out of him for
themselves. If he lived, it would be to grow up with his body deformed
and dwarfed by unnatural labour and with his mind stultified, degraded
and brutalized by ignorance and poverty. As this vision of the child's
future rose before him, Owen resolved that it should never be! He
would not leave them alone and defenceless in the midst of the
'Christian' wolves who were waiting to rend them as soon as he was
gone. If he could not give them happiness, he could at least put them
out of the reach of further suffering. If he could not stay with them,
they would have to come with him. It would be kinder and more merciful. Chapter 35

Facing the 'Problem'


Nearly every other firm in the town was in much the same plight as
Rushton & Co. ; none of them had anything to speak of to do, and the
workmen no longer troubled to go to the different shops asking for a
job. Most of them just walked about
aimlessly or stood talking in groups in the streets, principally in the
neighbourhood of the Wage Slave Market near the fountain on the Grand
Parade. They congregated here in such numbers that one or two
residents wrote to the local papers complaining of the 'nuisance', and
pointing out that it was calculated to drive the 'better-class'
visitors out of the town. After this two or three extra policemen were
put on duty near the fountain with instructions to'move on' any groups
of unemployed that formed. They could not stop them from coming there,
but they prevented them standing about. The processions of unemployed continued every day, and the money they
begged from the public was divided equally amongst those who took part. Sometimes it amounted to one and sixpence each, sometimes it was a
little more and sometimes a little less. These men presented a
terrible spectacle as they slunk through the dreary streets, through
the rain or the snow, with the slush soaking into their broken boots,
and, worse still, with the bitterly cold east wind penetrating their
rotten clothing and freezing their famished bodies. The majority of the skilled workers still held aloof from these
processions, although their haggard faces bore involuntary testimony to
their sufferings. Although privation reigned supreme in their desolate
homes, where there was often neither food nor light nor fire, they were
too 'proud' to parade their misery before each other or the world. They secretly sold or pawned their clothing and their furniture and
lived in semi-starvation on the proceeds, and on credit, but they would
not beg. Many of them even echoed the sentiments of those who had
written to the papers, and with a strange lack of class-sympathy blamed
those who took part in the processions. They said it was that sort of
thing that drove the 'better class' away, injured the town, and caused
all the poverty and unemployment. However, some of them accepted
charity in other ways; district visitors distributed tickets for coal
and groceries. Not that that sort of thing made much difference; there
was usually a great deal of fuss and advice, many quotations of
Scripture, and very little groceries. And even what there was
generally went to the least-deserving people, because the only way to
obtain any of this sort of 'charity' is by hypocritically pretending to
be religious: and the greater the hypocrite, the greater the quantity
of coal and groceries. These 'charitable' people went into the
wretched homes of the poor and--in effect--said: 'Abandon every
particle of self-respect: cringe and fawn: come to church: bow down and
grovel to us, and in return we'll give you a ticket that you can take
to a certain shop and exchange for a shillingsworth of groceries. And,
if you're very servile and humble we may give you another one next
week.' They never gave the 'case' the money. It prevents the 'case' abusing the 'charity' by spending the
money on drink. It advertises the benevolence of the donors: and it
enables the grocer--who is usually a member of the church--to get rid
of any stale or damaged stock he may have on hand. When these visiting ladies' went into a workman's house and found it
clean and decently furnished, and the children clean and tidy, they
came to the conclusion that those people were not suitable 'cases' for
assistance. Perhaps the children had had next to nothing to eat, and
would have been in rags if the mother had not worked like a slave
washing and mending their clothes. But these were not the sort of
cases that the visiting ladies assisted; they only gave to those who
were in a state of absolute squalor and destitution, and then only on
condition that they whined and grovelled. In addition to this district visitor business, the well-to-do
inhabitants and the local authorities attempted--or rather,
pretended--to grapple with the poverty 'problem' in many other ways,
and the columns of the local papers were filled with letters from all
sorts of cranks who suggested various remedies. One individual, whose
income was derived from brewery shares, attributed the prevailing
distress to the drunken and improvident habits of the lower orders. Another suggested that it was a Divine protest against the growth of
Ritualism and what he called 'fleshly religion', and suggested a day of
humiliation and prayer. A great number of well-fed persons thought
this such an excellent proposition that they proceeded to put it into
practice. They prayed, whilst the unemployed and the little children
fasted. If one had not been oppressed by the tragedy of Want and Misery, one
might have laughed at the farcical, imbecile measures that were taken
to relieve it. Several churches held what they called 'Rummage' or
'jumble' sales. They sent out circulars something like this:

JUMBLE SALE
in aid of the Unemployed. If you have any articles of any description which are of no
further use to you, we should be grateful for them, and if you
will kindly fill in annexed form and post it to us, we will send
and collect them. On the day of the sale the parish room was transformed into a kind of
Marine Stores, filled with all manner of rubbish, with the parson and
the visiting ladies grinning in the midst. The things were sold for
next to nothing to such as cared to buy them, and the local
rag-and-bone man reaped a fine harvest. The proceeds of these sales
were distributed in 'charity' and it was usually a case of much cry and
little wool. There was a religious organization, called 'The Mugsborough Skull and
Crossbones Boys', which existed for the purpose of perpetuating the
great religious festival of Guy Fawkes. This association also came to
the aid of the unemployed and organized a Grand Fancy Dress Carnival
and Torchlight Procession. When this took place, although there was a
slight sprinkling of individuals dressed in tawdry costumes as
cavaliers of the time of Charles I, and a few more as highwaymen or
footpads, the majority of the processionists were boys in women's
clothes, or wearing sacks with holes cut in them for their heads and
arms, and with their faces smeared with soot. There were also a number
of men carrying frying-pans in which they burnt red and blue fire. The
procession--or rather, mob--was headed by a band, and the band was
headed by two men, arm in arm, one very tall, dressed to represent
Satan, in red tights, with horns on his head, and smoking a large
cigar, and the other attired in the no less picturesque costume of a
bishop of the Established Church. This crew paraded the town, howling and dancing, carrying flaring
torches, burning the blue and red fire, and some of them singing silly
or obscene songs; whilst the collectors ran about with the boxes
begging for money from people who were in most cases nearly as
poverty-stricken as the unemployed they were asked to assist. The
money thus obtained was afterwards handed over to the Secretary of the
Organized Benevolence Society, Mr Sawney Grinder. Then there was the Soup Kitchen, which was really an inferior
eating-house in a mean street. The man who ran this was a relative of
the secretary of the OBS. He cadged all the ingredients for the soup
from different tradespeople: bones and scraps of meat from butchers:
pea meal and split peas from provision dealers: vegetables from
greengrocers: stale bread from bakers, and so on. Well-intentioned,
charitable old women with more money than sense sent him donations in
cash, and he sold the soup for a penny a basin--or a penny a quart to
those who brought jugs. He had a large number of shilling books printed, each containing
thirteen penny tickets. The Organized Benevolence Society bought a lot
of these books and resold them to benevolent persons, or gave them away
to 'deserving cases'. It was this connection with the OBS that gave
the Soup Kitchen a semi-official character in the estimation of the
public, and furnished the proprietor with the excuse for cadging the
materials and money donations. In the case of the Soup Kitchen, as with the unemployed processions,
most of those who benefited were unskilled labourers or derelicts: with
but few exceptions the unemployed artisans--although their need was
just as great as that of the others--avoided the place as if it were
infected with the plague. They were afraid even to pass through the
street where it was situated lest anyone seeing them coming from that
direction should think they had been there. But all the same, some of
them allowed their children to go there by stealth, by night, to buy
some of this charity-tainted food. Another brilliant scheme, practical and statesmanlike, so different
from the wild projects of demented Socialists, was started by the Rev. Mr Bosher, a popular preacher, the Vicar of the fashionable Church of
the Whited Sepulchre. He collected some subscriptions from a number of
semi-imbecile old women who attended his church. With some of this
money he bought a quantity of timber and opened what he called a Labour
Yard, where he employed a number of men sawing firewood. Being a
clergyman, and because he said he wanted it for a charitable purpose,
of course he obtained the timber very cheaply--for about half what
anyone else would have had to pay for it. The wood-sawing was done piecework. A log of wood about the size of a
railway sleeper had to be sawn into twelve pieces, and each of these
had to be chopped into four. For sawing and chopping one log in this
manner the worker was paid ninepence. One log made two bags of
firewood, which were sold for a shilling each--a trifle under the usual
price. The men who delivered the bags were paid three half-pence for
each two bags. As there were such a lot of men wanting to do this work, no one was
allowed to do more than three lots in one day--that came to two
shillings and threepence--and no one was allowed to do more than two
days in one week. The Vicar had a number of bills printed and displayed in shop windows
calling attention to what he was doing, and informing the public that
orders could be sent to the Vicarage by post and would receive prompt
attention and the fuel could be delivered at any address--Messrs
Rushton & Co. having very kindly lent a handcart for the use of the men
employed at the Labour Yard. As a result of the appearance of this bill, and of the laudatory
notices in the columns of the Ananias, the Obscurer, and the
Chloroform--the papers did not mind giving the business a free
advertisement, because it was a charitable concern--many persons
withdrew their custom from those who usually supplied them with
firewood, and gave their orders to the Yard; and they had the
satisfaction of getting their fuel cheaper than before and of
performing a charitable action at the same time. As a remedy for unemployment this scheme was on a par with the method
of the tailor in the fable who thought to lengthen his cloth by cutting
a piece off one end and sewing it on to the other; but there was one
thing about it that recommended it to the Vicar--it was
self-supporting. He found that there would be no need to use all the
money he had extracted from the semi-imbecile old ladies for timber, so
he bought himself a Newfoundland dog, an antique set of carved ivory
chessmen, and a dozen bottles of whisky with the remainder of the cash. The reverend gentleman hit upon yet another means of helping the poor. He wrote a letter to the Weekly Chloroform appealing for cast-off boots
for poor children. This was considered such a splendid idea that the
editors of all the local papers referred to it in leading articles, and
several other letters were written by prominent citizens extolling the
wisdom and benevolence of the profound Bosher. Most of the boots that
were sent in response to this appeal had been worn until they needed
repair--in a very large proportion of instances, until they were beyond
repair. The poor people to whom they were given could not afford to
have them mended before using them, and the result was that the boots
generally began to fall to pieces after a few days' wear. It did not increase the number of
cast-off boots, and most of the people who 'cast off' their boots
generally gave them to someone or other. The only difference It can
have made was that possibly a few persons who usually threw their boots
away or sold them to second-hand dealers may have been induced to send
them to Mr Bosher instead. But all the same nearly everybody said it
was a splendid idea: its originator was applauded as a public
benefactor, and the pettifogging busybodies who amused themselves with
what they were pleased to term 'charitable work' went into imbecile
ecstasies over him. Chapter 36

The OBS


One of the most important agencies for the relief of distress was the
Organized Benevolence Society. The proceeds of the fancy-dress carnival; the
collections from different churches and chapels which held special
services in aid of the unemployed; the weekly collections made by the
employees of several local firms and business houses; the proceeds of
concerts, bazaars, and entertainments, donations from charitable
persons, and the subscriptions of the members. The society also
received large quantities of cast-off clothing and boots, and tickets
of admission to hospitals, convalescent homes and dispensaries from
subscribers to those institutions, or from people like Rushton & Co.,
who had collecting-boxes in their workshops and offices. Altogether during the last year the Society had received from various
sources about three hundred pounds in hard cash. This money was
devoted to the relief of cases of distress. The largest item in the expenditure of the Society was the salary of
the General Secretary, Mr Sawney Grinder--a most deserving case--who
was paid one hundred pounds a year. After the death of the previous secretary there were so many candidates
for the vacant post that the election of the new secretary was a rather
exciting affair. The excitement was all the more intense because it
was restrained. A special meeting of the society was held: the Mayor,
Alderman Sweater, presided, and amongst those present were Councillors
Rushton, Didlum and Grinder, Mrs Starvem, Rev. Mr Bosher, a number of
the rich, semi-imbecile old women who had helped to open the Labour
Yard, and several other 'ladies'. Some of these were the district
visitors already alluded to, most of them the wives of wealthy citizens
and retired tradesmen, richly dressed, ignorant, insolent, overbearing
frumps, who--after filling themselves with good things in their own
luxurious homes--went flouncing into the poverty-stricken dwellings of
their poor'sisters' and talked to them of'religion', lectured them
about sobriety and thrift, and--sometimes--gave them tickets for soup
or orders for shillingsworths of groceries or coal. Some of these
overfed females--the wives of tradesmen, for instance--belonged to the
Organized Benevolence Society, and engaged in this 'work' for the
purpose of becoming acquainted with people of superior social
position--one of the members was a colonel, and Sir Graball
D'Encloseland--the Member of Parliament for the borough--also belonged
to the Society and occasionally attended its meetings. Others took up
district visiting as a hobby; they had nothing to do, and being densely
ignorant and of inferior mentality, they had no desire or capacity for
any intellectual pursuit. So they took up this work for the pleasure
of playing the grand lady and the superior person at a very small
expense. Other of these visiting ladies were middle-aged, unmarried
women with small private incomes--some of them well-meaning,
compassionate, gentle creatures who did this work because they
sincerely desired to help others, and they knew of no better way. These
did not take much part in the business of the meetings; they paid their
subscriptions and helped to distribute the cast-off clothing and boots
to those who needed them, and occasionally obtained from the secretary
an order for provisions or coal or bread for some poverty-stricken
family; but the poor, toil-worn women whom they visited welcomed them
more for their sisterly sympathy than for the gifts they brought. Some
of the visiting ladies were of this character--but they were not many. They were as a few fragrant flowers amidst a dense accumulation of
noxious weeds. They were examples of humility and kindness shining
amidst a vile and loathsome mass of hypocrisy, arrogance, and cant. When the Chairman had opened the meeting, Mr Rushton moved a vote of
condolence with the relatives of the late secretary whom he eulogized
in the most extraordinary terms. 'The poor of Mugsborough had lost a kind and sympathetic friend', 'One
who had devoted his life to helping the needy', and so on and so forth. (As a matter of fact, most of the time of the defunct had been passed
in helping himself, but Rushton said nothing about that.) Mr Didlum seconded the vote of condolence in similar terms, and it was
carried unanimously. Then the Chairman said that the next business was
to elect a successor to the departed paragon; and immediately no fewer
than nine members rose to propose a suitable person--they each had a
noble-minded friend or relative willing to sacrifice himself for the
good of the poor. The nine Benevolent stood looking at each other and at the Chairman
with sickly smiles upon their hypocritical faces. It would never
do to have a contest. The Secretary of the OBS was usually regarded as
a sort of philanthropist by the outside public, and it was necessary to
keep this fiction alive. For one or two minutes an awkward silence reigned. Then, one after
another they all reluctantly resumed their seats with the exception of
Mr Amos Grinder, who said he wished to propose his nephew, Mr Sawney
Grinder, a young man of a most benevolent disposition who was desirous
of immolating himself upon the altar of charity for the benefit of the
poor--or words to that effect. Mr Didlum seconded, and there being no other nomination--for they all
knew that it would give the game away to have a contest--the Chairman
put Mr Grinder's proposal to the meeting and declared it carried
unanimously. Another considerable item in the expenditure of the society was the
rent of the offices--a house in a back street. The landlord of this
place was another very deserving case. There were numerous other expenses: stationery and stamps, printing,
and so on, and what was left of the money was used for the purpose for
which it had been given--a reasonable amount being kept in hand for
future expenses. All the details were of course duly set forth in the
Report and Balance Sheet at the annual meetings. No copy of this
document was ever handed to the reporters for publication; it was read
to the meeting by the Secretary; the representatives of the Press took
notes, and in the reports of the meeting that subsequently appeared in
the local papers the thing was so mixed up and garbled together that
the few people who read it could not make head or tail of it. The only
thing that was clear was that the society had been doing a great deal
of good to someone or other, and that more money was urgently needed to
carry on the work. It usually appeared something like this:

HELPING THE NEEDY
Mugsborough Organized Benevolence Society
Annual Meeting at the Town Hall

A Splendid record of Miscellaneous and Valuable Work. The annual meeting of the above Society was held yesterday at the
Town Hall. The Mayor, Alderman Sweater, presided, and amongst
those present were Sir Graball D'Encloseland, Lady D'Encloseland,
Lady Slumrent. Mr Bosher, Mr Cheeseman, Mrs Bilder, Mrs
Grosare, Mrs Daree, Mrs Butcher, Mrs Taylor, Mrs Baker, Mrs
Starvem, Mrs Slodging, Mrs M. B. Sile, Mrs Knobrane, Mrs M. T.
Head, Mr Rushton, Mr Didlum, Mr Grinder and (here followed about a
quarter of a column of names of other charitable persons, all
subscribers to the Society). The Secretary read the annual report which contained the following
amongst other interesting items:


During the year, 1,972 applications for assistance have been
received, and of this number 1,302 have been assisted as follows:
Bread or grocery orders, 273. Nurses provided,
2. Twenty-nine persons, whose cases being chronic, were referred to
the Poor Law Guardians. Bedding redeemed,
1. Loans granted to people to enable them to pay their rent, 8. Railway fares for men who were
going away from the town to employment elsewhere, 12. Advertisements for employment, 4--
and so on. There was about another quarter of a column of these details, the
reading of which was punctuated with applause and concluded with:
'Leaving 670 cases which for various reasons the Society was unable to
assist'. The report then went on to explain that the work of inquiring
into the genuineness of the applications entailed a lot of labour on
the part of the Secretary, some cases taking several days. No fewer
than 649 letters had been sent out from the office, and 97 postcards. Very few cash gifts were granted, as it was most necessary
to guard against the Charity being abused. Then followed a most remarkable paragraph headed 'The Balance Sheet',
which--as it was put--'included the following'. 'The following' was a
jumbled list of items of expenditure, subscriptions, donations,
legacies, and collections, winding up with 'the general summary showed
a balance in hand of L178.4.6'. (They always kept a good balance in
hand because of the Secretary's salary and the rent of the offices.) After this very explicit financial statement came the most important
part of the report: 'Thanks are expressed to Sir Graball D'Encloseland
for a donation of 2 guineas. Mrs Starvem,
Hospital tickets. Lady Slumrent, letter of admission to Convalescent
Home. Mrs Sledging, gifts of clothing--and so on for another
quarter of a column, the whole concluding with a vote of thanks to the
Secretary and an urgent appeal to the charitable public for more funds
to enable the Society to continue its noble work. Meantime, in spite of this and kindred organizations the conditions of
the under-paid poverty stricken and unemployed workers remained the
same. Although the people who got the grocery and coal orders, the
'Nourishment', and the cast-off clothes and boots, were very glad to
have them, yet these things did far more harm than good. They
humiliated, degraded and pauperized those who received them, and the
existence of the societies prevented the problem being grappled with in
a sane and practical manner. The people lacked the necessaries of
life: the necessaries of life are produced by Work: these people were
willing to work, but were prevented from doing so by the idiotic system
of society which these 'charitable' people are determined to do their
best to perpetuate. If the people who expect to be praised and glorified for being
charitable were never to give another farthing it would be far better
for the industrious poor, because then the community as a whole would
be compelled to deal with the absurd and unnecessary state of affairs
that exists today--millions of people living and dying in wretchedness
and poverty in an age when science and machinery have made it possible
to produce such an abundance of everything that everyone might enjoy
plenty and comfort. It if were not for all this so-called charity the
starving unemployed men all over the country would demand to be allowed
to work and produce the things they are perishing for want of, instead
of being--as they are now--content to wear their masters' cast-off
clothing and to eat the crumbs that fall from his table. Chapter 37

A Brilliant Epigram


All through the winter, the wise, practical, philanthropic, fat persons
whom the people of Mugsborough had elected to manage their affairs--or
whom they permitted to manage them without being elected--continued to
grapple, or to pretend to grapple, with the 'problem' of unemployment
and poverty. They continued to hold meetings, rummage and jumble
sales, entertainments and special services. They continued to
distribute the rotten cast-off clothing and boots, and the nourishment
tickets. They were all so sorry for the poor, especially for the 'dear
little children'. They did all sorts of things to help the children. In fact, there was nothing that they would not do for them except levy
a halfpenny rate. It might pauperize
the parents and destroy parental responsibility. They evidently
thought that it would be better to destroy the health or even the lives
of the 'dear little children' than to pauperize the parents or
undermine parental responsibility. These people seemed to think that
the children were the property of their parents. They did not have
sense enough to see that the children are not the property of their
parents at all, but the property of the community. When they attain to
manhood and womanhood they will be, if mentally or physically
inefficient, a burden on the community; if they become criminals, they
will prey upon the community, and if they are healthy, educated and
brought up in good surroundings, they will become useful citizens, able
to render valuable service, not merely to their parents, but to the
community. Therefore the children are the property of the community,
and it is the business and to the interest of the community to see that
their constitutions are not undermined by starvation. The Secretary of
the local Trades Council, a body formed of delegates from all the
different trades unions in the town, wrote a letter to the Obscurer,
setting forth this view. He pointed out that a halfpenny rate in that
town would produce a sum of L800, which would be more than sufficient
to provide food for all the hungry schoolchildren. In the next issue
of the paper several other letters appeared from leading citizens,
including, of course, Sweater, Rushton, Didlum and Grinder, ridiculing
the proposal of the Trades Council, who were insultingly alluded to as
'pothouse politicians', 'beer-sodden agitators' and so forth. Their
right to be regarded as representatives of the working men was denied,
and Grinder, who, having made inquiries amongst working men, was
acquainted with the facts, stated that there was scarcely one of the
local branches of the trades unions which had more than a dozen
members; and as Grinder's statement was true, the Secretary was unable
to contradict it. The majority of the working men were also very
indignant when they heard about the Secretary's letter: they said the
rates were quite high enough as it was, and they sneered at him for
presuming to write to the papers at all:

'Who the bloody 'ell was 'e?' 'E
was only a workin' man the same as themselves--a common carpenter! What
the 'ell did 'e know about it? 'E was just trying to make
'isself out to be Somebody, that was all. The idea of one of the likes
of them writing to the papers!' One day, having nothing better to do, Owen was looking at some books
that were exposed for sale on a table outside a second-hand furniture
shop. One book in particular took his attention: he read several pages
with great interest, and regretted that he had not the necessary
sixpence to buy it. The title of the book was: Consumption: Its Causes
and Its Cure. The author was a well-known physician who devoted his
whole attention to the study of that disease. Amongst other things,
the book gave rules for the feeding of delicate children, and there
were also several different dietaries recommended for adult persons
suffering from the disease. One of these dietaries amused him very
much, because as far as the majority of those who suffer from
consumption are concerned, the good doctor might just as well have
prescribed a trip to the moon:

'Immediately on waking in the morning, half a pint of milk--this should
be hot, if possible--with a small slice of bread and butter. 'At breakfast: half a pint of milk, with coffee, chocolate, or oatmeal:
eggs and bacon, bread and butter, or dry toast. 'At eleven o'clock: half a pint of milk with an egg beaten up in it or
some beef tea and bread and butter. 'At one o'clock: half a pint of warm milk with a biscuit or sandwich. 'At two o'clock: fish and roast mutton, or a mutton chop, with as much
fat as possible: poultry, game, etc., may be taken with vegetables, and
milk pudding. 'At five o'clock: hot milk with coffee or chocolate, bread and butter,
watercress, etc. 'At eight o'clock: a pint of milk, with oatmeal or chocolate, and
gluten bread, or two lightly boiled eggs with bread and butter. 'Before retiring to rest: a glass of warm milk. 'During the night: a glass of milk with a biscuit or bread and butter
should be placed by the bedside and be eaten if the patient awakes.' Whilst Owen was reading this book, Crass, Harlow, Philpot and Easton
were talking together on the other side of the street, and presently
Crass caught sight of him. They had been discussing the Secretary's
letter re the halfpenny rate, and as Owen was one of the members of the
Trades Council, Crass suggested that they should go across and tackle
him about it. asked Owen after listening for
about a quarter of an hour to Crass's objection. 'That means that you would have to pay sevenpence per year if we had a
halfpenny rate. Wouldn't it be worth sevenpence a year to you to know
that there were no starving children in the town?' 'Why should I 'ave to 'elp to keep the children of a man who's too lazy
to work, or spends all 'is money on drink?' ''Ow are
yer goin' to make out about the likes o' them?' 'If his children are starving we should feed them first, and punish him
afterwards.' 'The rates is quite high enough as it is,' grumbled Harlow, who had
four children himself. 'That's quite true, but you must remember that the rates the working
classes at present pay are spent mostly for the benefit of other
people. Good roads are maintained for people who ride in motor cars
and carriages; the Park and the Town Band for those who have leisure to
enjoy them; the Police force to protect the property of those who have
something to lose, and so on. But if we pay this rate we shall get
something for our money.' 'We gets the benefit of the good roads when we 'as to push a 'andcart
with a load o' paint and ladders,' said Easton. 'Of course,' said Crass, 'and besides, the workin' class gets the
benefit of all the other things too, because it all makes work.' 'Well, for my part,' said Philpot, 'I wouldn't mind payin' my share
towards a 'appeny rate, although I ain't got no kids o' me own.' The hostility of most of the working men to the proposed rate was
almost as bitter as that of the 'better' classes--the noble-minded
philanthropists who were always gushing out their sympathy for the
'dear little ones', the loathsome hypocrites who pretended that there
was no need to levy a rate because they were willing to give sufficient
money in the form of charity to meet the case: but the children
continued to go hungry all the same. 'Loathsome hypocrites' may seem a hard saying, but it was a matter of
common knowledge that the majority of the children attending the local
elementary schools were insufficiently fed. It was admitted that the
money that could be raised by a halfpenny rate would be more than
sufficient to provide them all with one good meal every day. The
charity-mongers who professed such extravagant sympathy with the 'dear
little children' resisted the levying of the rate 'because it would
press so heavily on the poorer ratepayers', and said that they were
willing to give more in voluntary charity than the rate would amount
to: but, the 'dear little children'--as they were so fond of calling
them--continued to go to school hungry all the same. To judge them by their profession and their performances, it appeared
that these good kind persons were willing to do any mortal thing for
the 'dear little children' except allow them to be fed. If these people had really meant to do what they pretended, they would
not have cared whether they paid the money to a rate-collector or to
the secretary of a charity society and they would have preferred to
accomplish their object in the most efficient and economical way. But although they would not allow the children to be fed, they went to
church and to chapel, glittering with jewellery, their fat carcases
clothed in rich raiment, and sat with smug smiles upon their faces
listening to the fat parsons reading out of a Book that none of them
seemed able to understand, for this was what they read:

'And Jesus called a little child unto Him, and set him in the midst of
them, and said: Whosoever shall receive one such little child in My
name, receiveth Me. But whoso shall offend one of these little ones,
it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck and
that he were drowned in the depth of the sea. 'Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones, for I say unto
you that in heaven their angels do always behold the face of My Father.' And this: 'Then shall He say unto them: Depart from me, ye cursed, into
the everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels: for I was
an hungered and ye gave Me no meat: I was thirsty and ye gave Me no
drink: I was a stranger and ye took Me not in; naked, and ye clothed Me
not. 'Then shall they answer: "Lord, when saw we Thee an hungered or athirst
or a stranger or naked, or sick, and did not minister unto Thee?" and
He shall answer them, "Verily I say unto you, inasmuch as ye did it not
to one of the least of these, ye did it not to Me."' These were the sayings that the infidel parsons mouthed in the infidel
temples to the richly dressed infidel congregations, who heard but did
not understand, for their hearts were become gross and their ears dull
of hearing. And meantime, all around them, in the alley and the slum,
and more terrible still--because more secret--in the better sort of
streets where lived the respectable class of skilled artisans, the
little children became thinner and paler day by day for lack of proper
food, and went to bed early because there was no fire. Sir Graball D'Encloseland, the Member of Parliament for the borough,
was one of the bitterest opponents of the halfpenny rate, but as he
thought it was probable that there would soon be another General
Election and he wanted the children's fathers to vote for him again, he
was willing to do something for them in another way. He had a
ten-year-old daughter whose birthday was in that month, so the
kind-hearted Baronet made arrangements to give a Tea to all the school
children in the town in honour of the occasion. The tea was served in
the schoolrooms and each child was presented with a gilt-edged card on
which was a printed portrait of the little hostess, with 'From your
loving little friend, Honoria D'Encloseland', in gold letters. During
the evening the little girl, accompanied by Sir Graball and Lady
D'Encloseland, motored round to all the schools where the tea was being
consumed: the Baronet made a few remarks, and Honoria made a pretty
little speech, specially learnt for the occasion, at each place, and
they were loudly cheered and greatly admired in response. The
enthusiasm was not confined to the boys and girls, for while the
speechmaking was going on inside, a little crowd of grown-up children
were gathered round outside the entrance, worshipping the motor car:
and when the little party came out the crowd worshipped them also,
going into imbecile ecstasies of admiration of their benevolence and
their beautiful clothes. For several weeks everybody in the town was in raptures over this
tea--or, rather, everybody except a miserable little minority of
Socialists, who said it was bribery, an electioneering dodge, that did
no real good, and who continued to clamour for a halfpenny rate. Another specious fraud was the 'Distress Committee'. This body--or
corpse, for there was not much vitality in it--was supposed to exist
for the purpose of providing employment for 'deserving cases'. One
might be excused for thinking that any man--no matter what his past may
have been--who is willing to work for his living is a 'deserving case':
but this was evidently not the opinion of the persons who devised the
regulations for the working of this committee. Every applicant for
work was immediately given a long job, and presented with a double
sheet of foolscap paper to do it with. Now, if the object of the
committee had been to furnish the applicant with material for the
manufacture of an appropriate headdress for himself, no one could
reasonably have found fault with them: but the foolscap was not to be
utilized in that way; it was called a 'Record Paper', three pages of it
were covered with insulting, inquisitive, irrelevant questions
concerning the private affairs and past life of the 'case' who wished
to be permitted to work for his living, and all these had to be
answered to the satisfaction of Messrs D'Encloseland, Bosher, Sweater,
Rushton, Didlum, Grinder and the other members of the committee, before
the case stood any chance of getting employment. However, notwithstanding the offensive nature of the questions on the
application form, during the five months that this precious committee
was in session, no fewer than 1,237 broken-spirited and humble 'lion's
whelps' filled up the forms and answered the questions as meekly as if
they had been sheep. The funds of the committee consisted of L500,
obtained from the Imperial Exchequer, and about L250 in charitable
donations. This money was used to pay wages for certain work--some of
which would have had to be done even if the committee had never
existed--and if each of the 1,237 applicants had had an equal share of
the work, the wages they would have received would have amounted to
about twelve shillings each. This was what the 'practical' persons,
the 'business-men', called 'dealing with the problem of unemployment'. Imagine having to keep your family for five months with twelve
shillings! And, if you like, imagine that the Government grant had been four times
as much as it was, and that the charity had amounted to four times as
much as it did, and then fancy having to keep your family for five
months with two pounds eight shillings! It is true that some of the members of the committee would have been
very glad if they had been able to put the means of earning a living
within the reach of every man who was willing to work; but they simply
did not know what to do, or how to do it. They were not ignorant of
the reality of the evil they were supposed to be 'dealing
with'--appalling evidences of it faced them on every side, and as,
after all, these committee men were human beings and not devils, they
would have been glad to mitigate it if they could have done so without
hurting themselves: but the truth was that they did not know what to do! These are the 'practical' men; the monopolists of intelligence, the
wise individuals who control the affairs of the world: it is in
accordance with the ideas of such men as these that the conditions of
human life are regulated. This is the position:

It is admitted that never before in the history of mankind was it
possible to produce the necessaries of life in such abundance as at
present. The management of the affairs of the world--the business of arranging
the conditions under which we live--is at present in the hands of
Practical, Level-headed, Sensible Business-men. The result of their management is, that the majority of the people find
it a hard struggle to live. Large numbers exist in perpetual poverty:
a great many more periodically starve: many actually die of want:
hundreds destroy themselves rather than continue to live and suffer. When the Practical, Level-headed, Sensible Business-men are asked why
they do not remedy this state of things, they reply that they do not
know what to do! or, that it is impossible to remedy it! And yet it is admitted that it is now possible to produce the
necessaries of life, in greater abundance than ever before! With lavish kindness, the Supreme Being had provided all things
necessary for the existence and happiness of his creatures. To suggest
that it is not so is a blasphemous lie: it is to suggest that the
Supreme Being is not good or even just. On every side there is an
overflowing superfluity of the materials requisite for the production
of all the necessaries of life: from these materials everything we need
may be produced in abundance--by Work. Here was an army of people
lacking the things that may be made by work, standing idle. Willing to
work; clamouring to be allowed to work, and the Practical,
Level-headed, Sensible Business-men did not know what to do! Of course, the real reason for the difficulty is that the raw materials
that were created for the use and benefit of all have been stolen by a
small number, who refuse to allow them to be used for the purposes for
which they were intended. This numerically insignificant minority
refused to allow the majority to work and produce the things they need;
and what work they do graciously permit to be done is not done with the
object of producing the necessaries of life for those who work, but for
the purpose of creating profit for their masters. And then, strangest fact of all, the people who find it a hard struggle
to live, or who exist in dreadful poverty and sometimes starve, instead
of trying to understand the causes of their misery and to find out a
remedy themselves, spend all their time applauding the Practical,
Sensible, Level-headed Business-men, who bungle and mismanage their
affairs, and pay them huge salaries for doing so. Sir Graball
D'Encloseland, for instance, was a 'Secretary of State' and was paid
L5,000 a year. When he first got the job the wages were only a
beggarly L2,000, but as he found it impossible to exist on less than
L100 a week he decided to raise his salary to that amount; and the
foolish people who find it a hard struggle to live paid it willingly,
and when they saw the beautiful motor car and the lovely clothes and
jewellery he purchased for his wife with the money, and heard the Great
Speech he made--telling them how the shortage of everything was caused
by Over-production and Foreign Competition, they clapped their hands
and went frantic with admiration. Their only regret was that there
were no horses attached to the motor car, because if there had been,
they could have taken them out and harnessed themselves to it instead. Nothing delighted the childish minds of these poor people so much as
listening to or reading extracts from the speeches of such men as
these; so in order to amuse them, every now and then, in the midst of
all the wretchedness, some of the great statesmen made 'great speeches'
full of cunning phrases intended to hoodwink the fools who had elected
them. The very same week that Sir Graball's salary was increased to
L5,000 a year, all the papers were full of a very fine one that he
made. They appeared with large headlines like this:

GREAT SPEECH BY SIR GRABALL D'ENCLOSELAND

Brilliant Epigram! None should have more than they need, whilst any have less than
they need! The hypocrisy of such a saying in the mouth of a man who was drawing a
salary of five thousand pounds a year did not appear to occur to
anyone. On the contrary, the hired scribes of the capitalist Press
wrote columns of fulsome admiration of the miserable claptrap, and the
working men who had elected this man went into raptures over the
'Brilliant Epigram' as if it were good to eat. They cut it out of the
papers and carried it about with them: they showed it to each other:
they read it and repeated it to each other: they wondered at it and
were delighted with it, grinning and gibbering at each other in the
exuberance of their imbecile enthusiasm. The Distress Committee was not the only body pretending to 'deal' with
the poverty 'problem': its efforts were supplemented by all the other
agencies already mentioned--the Labour Yard, the Rummage Sales, the
Organized Benevolence Society, and so on, to say nothing of a most
benevolent scheme originated by the management of Sweater's Emporium,
who announced in a letter that was published in the local Press that
they were prepared to employ fifty men for one week to carry sandwich
boards at one shilling--and a loaf of bread--per day. They got the men; some unskilled labourers, a few old, worn out
artisans whom misery had deprived of the last vestiges of pride or
shame; a number of habitual drunkards and loafers, and a non-descript
lot of poor ragged old men--old soldiers and others of whom it would be
impossible to say what they had once been. The procession of sandwich men was headed by the Semi-drunk and the
Besotted Wretch, and each board was covered with a printed poster:
'Great Sale of Ladies' Blouses now Proceeding at Adam Sweater's
Emporium.' Besides this artful scheme of Sweater's for getting a good
advertisement on the cheap, numerous other plans for providing
employment or alleviating the prevailing misery were put forward in the
columns of the local papers and at the various meetings that were held. Any foolish, idiotic, useless suggestion was certain to receive
respectful attention; any crafty plan devised in his own interest or
for his own profit by one or other of the crew of sweaters and
landlords who controlled the town was sure to be approved of by the
other inhabitants of Mugsborough, the majority of whom were persons of
feeble intellect who not only allowed themselves to be robbed and
exploited by a few cunning scoundrels, but venerated and applauded them
for doing it. Chapter 38

The Brigands' Cave


One evening in the drawing-room at 'The Cave' there was a meeting of a
number of the 'Shining Lights' to arrange the details of a Rummage
Sale, that was to be held in aid of the unemployed. It was an informal
affair, and while they were waiting for the other luminaries, the early
arrivals, Messrs Rushton, Didlum and Grinder, Mr Oyley Sweater, the
Borough Surveyor, Mr Wireman, the electrical engineer who had been
engaged as an 'expert' to examine and report on the Electric Light
Works, and two or three other gentlemen--all members of the Band--took
advantage of the opportunity to discuss a number of things they were
mutually interested in, which were to be dealt with at the meeting of
the Town Council the next day. First, there was the affair of the
untenanted Kiosk on the Grand Parade. This building belonged to the
Corporation, and 'The Cosy Corner Refreshment Coy.' of which Mr Grinder
was the managing director, was thinking of hiring it to open as a
high-class refreshment lounge, provided the Corporation would make
certain alterations and let the place at a reasonable rent. Another
item which was to be discussed at the Council meeting was Mr Sweater's
generous offer to the Corporation respecting the new drain connecting
'The Cave' with the Town Main. The report of Mr Wireman, the electrical expert, was also to be dealt
with, and afterwards a resolution in favour of the purchase of the
Mugsborough Electric light and Installation Co. Ltd by the town, was to
be proposed. In addition to these matters, several other items, including a proposal
by Mr Didlum for an important reform in the matter of conducting the
meetings of the Council, formed subjects for animated conversation
between the brigands and their host. During this discussion other luminaries arrived, including several
ladies and the Rev. Mr Bosher, of the Church of the Whited Sepulchre. The drawing-room of 'The Cave' was now elaborately furnished. A large
mirror in a richly gilt frame reached from the carved marble
mantelpiece to the cornice. A magnificent clock in an alabaster case
stood in the centre of the mantelpiece and was flanked by two
exquisitely painted and gilded vases of Dresden ware. The windows were
draped with costly hangings, the floor was covered with a luxurious
carpet and expensive rugs. Sumptuously upholstered couches and easy
chairs added to the comfort of the apartment, which was warmed by the
immense fire of coal and oak logs that blazed and crackled in the grate. The conversation now became general and at times highly philosophical
in character, although Mr Bosher did not take much part, being too
busily engaged gobbling up the biscuits and tea, and only occasionally
spluttering out a reply when a remark or question was directly
addressed to him. This was Mr Grinder's first visit at the house, and he expressed his
admiration of the manner in which the ceiling and the walls were
decorated, remarking that he had always liked this 'ere Japanese style. Mr Bosher, with his mouth full of biscuit, mumbled that it was sweetly
pretty--charming--beautifully done--must have cost a lot of money. 'Hardly wot you'd call Japanese, though, is it?' observed Didlum,
looking round with the air of a connoisseur. 'I should be inclined to
say it was rather more of the--er--Chinese or Egyptian.' 'Moorish,' explained Mr Sweater with a smile. 'I got the idear at the
Paris Exhibition. It's simler to the decorations in the "Halambara",
the palace of the Sultan of Morocco. That clock there is in the same
style.' The case of the clock referred to--which stood on a table in a corner
of the room--was of fretwork, in the form of an Indian Mosque, with a
pointed dome and pinnacles. This was the case that Mary Linden had
sold to Didlum; the latter had had it stained a dark colour and
polished and further improved it by substituting a clock of more
suitable design than the one it originally held. Mr Sweater had
noticed it in Didlum's window and, seeing that the design was similar
in character to the painted decorations on the ceiling and walls of his
drawing-room, had purchased it. 'I went to the Paris Exhibition meself,' said Grinder, when everyone
had admired the exquisite workmanship of the clock-case. 'I remember
'avin' a look at the moon through that big telescope. I was never so
surprised in me life: you can see it quite plain, and it's round!' You didn't used to think it was square, did yer?' 'No, of course not, but I always used to think it was flat--like a
plate, but it's round like a football.' 'Certainly: the moon is a very simler body to the earth,' explained
Didlum, describing an aerial circle with a wave of his hand. They
moves through the air together, but the earth is always nearest to the
sun and consequently once a fortnight the shadder of the earth falls on
the moon and darkens it so that it's invisible to the naked eye. The
new moon is caused by the moon movin' a little bit out of the earth's
shadder, and it keeps on comin' more and more until we gets the full
moon; and then it goes back again into the shadder; and so it keeps on.' For about a minute everyone looked very solemn, and the profound
silence was disturbed only the the crunching of the biscuits between
the jaws of Mr Bosher, and by certain gurglings in the interior of that
gentleman. 'Science is a wonderful thing,' said Mr Sweater at length, wagging his
head gravely, 'wonderful!' 'Yes: but a lot of it is mere theory, you know,' observed Rushton. 'Take this idear that the world is round, for instance; I fail to see
it! And then they say as Hawstralia is on the other side of the globe,
underneath our feet. In my opinion it's ridiculous, because if it was
true, wot's to prevent the people droppin' orf?' 'Yes: well, of course it's very strange,' admitted Sweater. 'I've
often thought of that myself. If it was true, we ought to be able to
walk on the ceiling of this room, for instance; but of course we know
that's impossible, and I really don't see that the other is any more
reasonable.' 'I've often noticed flies walkin' on the ceilin',' remarked Didlum, who
felt called upon to defend the globular theory. 'Yes; but they're different,' replied Rushton. 'Flies is provided by
nature with a gluey substance which oozes out of their feet for the
purpose of enabling them to walk upside down.' 'There's one thing that seems to me to finish that idear once for all,'
said Grinder, 'and that is--water always finds its own level. You can't
get away from that; and if the world was round, as they want us to
believe, all the water would run off except just a little at the top. To my mind, that settles the whole argymint.' 'Another thing that gets over me,' continued Rushton, 'is this:
according to science, the earth turns round on its axle at the rate of
twenty miles a minit. Well, what about when a lark goes up in the sky
and stays there about a quarter of an hour? Why, if it was true that
the earth was turnin' round at that rate all the time, when the bird
came down it would find itself 'undreds of miles away from the place
where it went up from! But that doesn't 'appen at all; the bird always
comes down in the same spot.' 'Yes, and the same thing applies to balloons and flyin' machines,' said
Grinder. 'If it was true that the world is spinnin' round on its axle
so quick as that, if a man started out from Calais to fly to Dover, by
the time he got to England he'd find 'imself in North America, or
p'r'aps farther off still.' 'And if it was true that the world goes round the sun at the rate they
makes out, when a balloon went up, the earth would run away from it! They'd never be able to get back again!' This was so obvious that nearly everyone said there was probably
something in it, and Didlum could think of no reply. Mr Bosher upon
being appealed to for his opinion, explained that science was alright
in its way, but unreliable: the things scientists said yesterday they
contradicted today, and what they said today they would probably
repudiate tomorrow. It was necessary to be very cautious before
accepting any of their assertions. 'Talking about science,' said Grinder, as the holy man relapsed into
silence and started on another biscuit and a fresh cup of tea. 'Talking
about science reminds me of a conversation I 'ad with Dr Weakling the
other day. You know, he believes we're all descended from monkeys.' Everyone laughed; the thing was so absurd: the idea of placing
intellectual beings on a level with animals! 'But just wait till you hear how nicely I flattened 'im out,' continued
Grinder. 'After we'd been arguin' a long time about wot 'e called
everlution or some sich name, and a lot more tommy-rot that I couldn't
make no 'ead or tail of--and to tell you the truth I don't believe 'e
understood 'arf of it 'imself--I ses to 'im, "Well," I ses, "if it's
true that we're hall descended from monkeys," I ses, "I think your
famly must 'ave left orf where mine begun."' In the midst of the laughter that greeted the conclusion of Grinder's
story it was seen that Mr Bosher had become black in the face. He was
waving his arms and writhing about like one in a fit, his goggle eyes
bursting from their sockets, whilst his huge stomach quivering
spasmodically, alternately contracted and expanded as if it were about
to explode. In the exuberance of his mirth, the unfortunate disciple had swallowed
two biscuits at once. Everybody rushed to his assistance, Grinder and
Didlum seized an arm and a shoulder each and forced his head down. Rushton punched him in the back and the ladies shrieked with alarm. They gave him a big drink of tea to help to get the biscuits down, and
when he at last succeeded in swallowing them he sat in the armchair
with his eyes red-rimmed and full of tears, which ran down over his
white, flabby face. The arrival of the other members of the committee put an end to the
interesting discussion, and they shortly afterwards proceeded with the
business for which the meeting had been called--the arrangements for
the forthcoming Rummage Sale. Chapter 39

The Brigands at Work


The next day, at the meeting of the Town Council, Mr Wireman's report
concerning the Electric Light Works was read. The expert's opinion was
so favourable--and it was endorsed by the Borough Engineer, Mr Oyley
Sweater--that a resolution was unanimously carried in favour of
acquiring the Works for the town, and a secret committee was appointed
to arrange the preliminaries. Alderman Sweater then suggested that a
suitable honorarium be voted to Mr Wireman for his services. This was
greeted with a murmur of approval from most of the members, and Mr
Didlum rose with the intention of proposing a resolution to that effect
when he was interrupted by Alderman Grinder, who said he couldn't see
no sense in giving the man a thing like that. 'Why not give him a sum
of money?' Several members said 'Hear, hear,' to this, but some of the others
laughed. 'I can't see nothing to laugh at,' cried Grinder angrily. 'For my part
I wouldn't give you tuppence for all the honorariums in the country. I
move that we pay 'im a sum of money.' 'I'll second that,' said another member of the Band--one of those who
had cried 'Hear, Hear.' Alderman Sweater said that there seemed to be a little misunderstanding
and explained that an honorarium WAS a sum of money. 'Oh, well, in that case I'll withdraw my resolution,' said Grinder. 'I
thought you wanted to give 'im a 'luminated address or something like
that.' Didlum now moved that a letter of thanks and a fee of fifty guineas be
voted to Mr Wireman, and this was also unanimously agreed to. Dr
Weakling said that it seemed rather a lot, but he did not go so far as
to vote against it. The next business was the proposal that the Corporation should take
over the drain connecting Mr Sweater's house with the town main. Mr
Sweater--being a public-spirited man--proposed to hand this connecting
drain--which ran through a private road--over to the Corporation to be
theirs and their successors for ever, on condition that they would pay
him the cost of construction--L55--and agreed to keep it in proper
repair. After a brief discussion it was decided to take over the drain
on the terms offered, and then Councillor Didlum proposed a vote of
thanks to Alderman Sweater for his generosity in the matter: this was
promptly seconded by Councillor Rushton and would have been carried
nem. con., but for the disgraceful conduct of Dr Weakling, who had the
bad taste to suggest that the amount was about double what the drain
could possibly have cost to construct, that it was of no use to the
Corporation at all, and that they would merely acquire the liability to
keep it in repair. However, no one took the trouble to reply to Weakling, and the Band
proceeded to the consideration of the next business, which was Mr
Grinder's offer--on behalf of the 'Cosy Corner Refreshment Company'--to
take the Kiosk on the Grand Parade. Mr Grinder submitted a plan of
certain alterations that he would require the Corporation to make at
the Kiosk, and, provided the Council agreed to do this work he was
willing to take a lease of the place for five years at L20 per year. Councillor Didlum proposed that the offer of the 'Cosy Corner
Refreshment Co. Ltd' be accepted and the required alterations proceeded
with at once. The Kiosk had brought in no rent for nearly two years,
but, apart from that consideration, if they accepted this offer they
would be able to set some of the unemployed to work. Dr Weakling pointed out that as the proposed alterations would cost
about L175--according to the estimate of the Borough Engineer--and, the
rent being only L20 a year, it would mean that the Council would be L75
out of pocket at the end of the five years; to say nothing of the
expense of keeping the place in repair during all that time. He moved as an amendment that the alterations be made,
and that they then invite tenders, and let the place to the highest
bidder. Councillor Rushton said he was disgusted with the attitude taken up by
that man Weakling. Perhaps it was hardly right to call
him a man. In the matter of these alterations they had
had the use of Councillor Grinder's brains: it was he who first thought
of making these improvements in the Kiosk, and therefore he--or rather
the company he represented--had a moral right to the tenancy. Dr Weakling said that he thought it was understood that when a man was
elected to that Council it was because he was supposed to be willing to
use his brains for the benefit of his constituents. The Mayor asked if there was any seconder to Weakling's amendment, and
as there was not the original proposition was put and carried. Councillor Rushton suggested that a large shelter with seating
accommodation for about two hundred persons should be erected on the
Grand Parade near the Kiosk. The shelter would serve as a protection
against rain, or the rays of the sun in summer. It would add
materially to the comfort of visitors and would be a notable addition
to the attractions of the town. Councillor Didlum said it was a very good idear, and proposed that the
Surveyor be instructed to get out the plans. It seemed to him that the
object was to benefit, not the town, but Mr Grinder. If
this shelter were erected, it would increase the value of the Kiosk as
a refreshment bar by a hundred per cent. If Mr Grinder wanted a
shelter for his customers he should pay for it himself. He
(Dr Weakling) was sorry to have to say it, but he could not help
thinking that this was a Put-up job. (Loud cries of 'Withdraw'
'Apologize' 'Cast 'im out' and terrific uproar.) Weakling did not apologize or withdraw, but he said no more. Didlum's
proposition was carried, and the 'Band' went on to the next item on the
agenda, which was a proposal by Councillor Didlum to increase the
salary of Mr Oyley Sweater, the Borough Engineer, from fifteen pounds
to seventeen pounds per week. Councillor Didlum said that when they had a good man they ought to
appreciate him. Compared with other officials, the
Borough Engineer was not fairly paid. The magistrates'
clerk received seventeen pounds a week. The Town Clerk seventeen
pounds per week. He did not wish it to be understood that he thought
those gentlemen were overpaid--far from it. It was not
that they got too much but that the Engineer got too little. How could
they expect a man like that to exist on a paltry fifteen pounds a week? Why, it was nothing more or less than sweating! He had
much pleasure in moving that the Borough Engineer's salary be increased
to seventeen pounds a week, and that his annual holiday be extended
from a fortnight to one calendar month with hard la--he begged
pardon--with full pay. Councillor Rushton said that he did not propose to make a long
speech--it was not necessary. He would content himself with formally
seconding Councillor Didlum's excellent proposition. Councillor Weakling, whose rising was greeted with derisive laughter,
said he must oppose the resolution. He wished it to be understood that
he was not actuated by any feeling of personal animosity towards the
Borough Engineer, but at the same time he considered it his duty to say
that in his (Dr Weakling's) opinion, that official would be dear at
half the price they were now paying him. He did not
appear to understand his business, nearly all the work that was done
cost in the end about double what the Borough Engineer estimated it
could be done for. He considered him to be a grossly
incompetent person (uproar) and was of opinion that if they were to
advertise they could get dozens of better men who would be glad to do
the work for five pounds a week. He moved that Mr Oyley Sweater be
asked to resign and that they advertise for a man at five pounds a
week. Councillor Grinder rose to a point of order. He appealed to the
Chairman to squash the amendment. Councillor Didlum remarked that he supposed Councillor Grinder meant
'quash': in that case, he would support the suggestion. Councillor Grinder said it was about time they put a stopper on that
feller Weakling. He (Grinder) did not care whether they called it
squashing or quashing; it was all the same so long as they nipped him
in the bud. The man was a disgrace to the Council; always
interfering and hindering the business. The Mayor--Alderman Sweater--said that he did not think it consistent
with the dignity of that Council to waste any more time over this
scurrilous amendment. He was proud to say that it had
never even been seconded, and therefore he would put Mr Didlum's
resolution--a proposition which he had no hesitation in saying
reflected the highest credit upon that gentleman and upon all those who
supported it. All those who were in favour signified their approval in the customary
manner, and as Weakling was the only one opposed, the resolution was
carried and the meeting proceeded to the next business. Councillor Rushton said that several influential ratepayers and
employers of labour had complained to him about the high wages of the
Corporation workmen, some of whom were paid sevenpence-halfpenny an
hour. Sevenpence an hour was the maximum wage paid to skilled workmen
by private employers in that town, and he failed to see why the
Corporation should pay more. It had a very bad effect
on the minds of the men in the employment of private firms, tending to
make them dissatisfied with their wages. The same state of affairs
prevailed with regard to the unskilled labourers in the Council's
employment. Private employers could get that class of labour for
fourpence-halfpenny or fivepence an hour, and yet the corporation paid
fivepence-halfpenny and even sixpence for the same class of work. Considering
that the men in the employment of the Corporation had almost constant
work, if there was to be a difference at all, they should get not more,
but less, than those who worked for private firms. He moved
that the wages of the Corporation workmen be reduced in all cases to
the same level as those paid by private firms. He said it amounted to a positive
scandal. Why, in the summer-time some of these men drew as much as
35/- in a single week! and it was quite common for unskilled
labourers--fellers who did nothing but the very hardest and most
laborious work, sich as carrying sacks of cement, or digging up the
roads to get at the drains, and sich-like easy jobs--to walk off with
25/- a week! He had often noticed some of these men
swaggering about the town on Sundays, dressed like millionaires and
cigared up! They seemed quite a different class of men from those who
worked for private firms, and to look at the way some of their children
was dressed you'd think their fathers was Cabinet Minstrels! No wonder
the ratepayers complained ot the high rates. Another grievance was
that all the Corporation workmen were allowed two days' holiday every
year, in addition to the Bank Holidays, and were paid for them! (Cries
of'shame', 'Scandalous', 'Disgraceful', etc.) No private contractor
paid his men for Bank Holidays, and why should the Corporation do so? He had much pleasure in seconding Councillor Rushton's resolution. He thought that 35/- a week was
little enough for a man to keep a wife and family with (Rot), even if
all the men got it regularly, which they did not. Members should
consider what was the average amount per week throughout the whole
year, not merely the busy time, and if they did that they would find
that even the skilled men did not average more than 25/- a week, and in
many cases not so much. If this subject had not been introduced by
Councillor Rushton, he (Dr Weakling) had intended to propose that the
wages of the Corporation workmen should be increased to the standard
recognized by the Trades Unions. It had been proved
that the notoriously short lives of the working people--whose average
span of life was about twenty years less than that of the well-to-do
classes--their increasingly inferior physique, and the high rate of
mortality amongst their children was caused by the wretched
remuneration they received for hard and tiring work, the excessive
number of hours they have to work, when employed, the bad quality of
their food, the badly constructed and insanitary homes their poverty
compels them to occupy, and the anxiety, worry, and depression of mind
they have to suffer when out of employment. (Cries of 'Rot', 'Bosh',
and loud laughter.) Councillor Didlum said, 'Rot'. It was a very good
word to describe the disease that was sapping the foundations of
society and destroying the health and happiness and the very lives of
so many of their fellow countrymen and women. (Renewed merriment and
shouts of 'Go and buy a red tie.') He appealed to the members to
reject the resolution. He was very glad to say that he believed it was
true that the workmen in the employ of the Corporation were a little
better off than those in the employ of private contractors, and if it
were so, it was as it should be. They had need to be better off than
the poverty-stricken, half-starved poor wretches who worked for private
firms. Councillor Didlum said that it was very evident that Dr Weakling had
obtained his seat on that Council by false pretences. If he had told
the ratepayers that he was a Socialist, they would never have elected
him. Practically every Christian minister in the
country would agree with him (Didlum) when he said that the poverty of
the working classes was caused not by the 'wretched remuneration they
receive as wages', but by Drink. And he was very
sure that the testimony of the clergy of all denominations was more to
be relied upon than the opinion of a man like Dr Weakling. Dr Weakling said that if some of the clergymen referred to or some of
the members of the council had to exist and toil amid the same sordid
surroundings, overcrowding and ignorance as some of the working
classes, they would probably seek to secure some share of pleasure and
forgetfulness in drink themselves! (Great uproar and shouts of
'Order', 'Withdraw', 'Apologize'.) Councillor Grinder said that even if it was true that the haverage
lives of the working classes was twenty years shorter than those of the
better classes, he could not see what it had got to do with Dr
Weakling. So long as the working class was contented to
die twenty years before their time, he failed to see what it had got to
do with other people. They was not runnin' short of workers, was they? So long as the
workin' class was satisfied to die orf--let 'em die orf! The workin' class adn't arst Dr Weakling to
stick up for them, had they? If they wasn't satisfied, they would
stick up for theirselves! The working men didn't want the likes of Dr
Weakling to stick up for them, and they would let 'im know it when the
next election came round. If he (Grinder) was a wordly man, he would
not mind betting that the workin' men of Dr Weakling's ward would give
him 'the dirty kick out' next November. Councillor Weakling, who knew that this was probably true, made no
further protest. Rushton's proposition was carried, and then the Clerk
announced that the next item was the resolution Mr Didlum had given
notice of at the last meeting, and the Mayor accordingly called upon
that gentleman. Councillor Didlum, who was received with loud cheers, said that
unfortunately a certain member of that Council seemed to think he had a
right to oppose nearly everything that was brought forward. (The majority of the members of the Band glared malignantly at
Weakling.) He hoped that for once the individual he referred to would have the
decency to restrain himself, because the resolution he (Didlum) was
about to have the honour of proposing was one that he believed no
right-minded man--no matter what his politics or religious
opinions--could possibly object to; and he trusted that for the credit
of the Council it would be entered on the records as an unopposed
motion. The resolution was as follows:

'That from this date all the meetings of this Council shall be opened
with prayer and closed with the singing of the Doxology.' Councillor Rushton seconded the resolution, which was also supported by
Mr Grinder, who said that at a time like the present, when there was
sich a lot of infiddles about who said that we all came from monkeys,
the Council would be showing a good example to the working classes by
adopting the resolution. Councillor Weakling said nothing, so the new rule was carried nem. con., and as there was no more business to be done it was put into
operation for the first time there and then. Mr Sweater conducting the
singing with a roll of paper--the plan of the drain of 'The Cave'--and
each member singing a different tune. Weakling withdrew during the singing, and afterwards, before the Band
dispersed, it was agreed that a certain number of them were to meet the
Chief at the Cave, on the following evening to arrange the details of
the proposed raid on the finances of the town in connection with the
sale of the Electric Light Works. The alterations which the Corporation had undertaken to make in the
Kiosk on the Grand Parade provided employment for several carpenters
and plasterers for about three weeks, and afterwards for several
painters. This fact was sufficient to secure the working men's
unqualified approval of the action of the Council in letting the place
to Grinder, and Councillor Weakling's opposition--the reasons of which
they did not take the trouble to inquire into or understand--they as
heartily condemned. All they knew or cared was that he had tried to
prevent the work being done, and that he had referred in insulting
terms to the working men of the town. What right had he to call them
half-starved, poverty-stricken, poor wretches? If it came to being
poverty-stricken, according to all accounts, he wasn't any too well orf
hisself. Some of those blokes who went swaggering about in frock-coats
and pot-'ats was just as 'ard up as anyone else if the truth was known. As for the Corporation workmen, it was quite right that their wages
should be reduced. Why should they get more money than anyone else? 'It's us what's got to find the money,' they said. 'We're the
ratepayers, and why should we have to pay them more wages than we get
ourselves? And why should they be paid for holidays any more than us?' During the next few weeks the dearth of employment continued, for, of
course, the work at the Kiosk and the few others jobs that were being
done did not make much difference to the general situation. Groups of
workmen stood at the corners or walked aimlessly about the streets. Most of them no longer troubled to go to the different firms to ask for
work, they were usually told that they would be sent for if wanted. During this time Owen did his best to convert the other men to his
views. He had accumulated a little library of Socialist books and
pamphlets which he lent to those he hoped to influence. Some of them
took these books and promised, with the air of men who were conferring
a great favour, that they would read them. As a rule, when they
returned them it was with vague expressions of approval, but they
usually evinced a disinclination to discuss the contents in detail
because, in nine instances out of ten, they had not attempted to read
them. As for those who did make a half-hearted effort to do so, in the
majority of cases their minds were so rusty and stultified by long
years of disuse, that, although the pamphlets were generally written in
such simple language that a child might have understood, the argument
was generally too obscure to be grasped by men whose minds were addled
by the stories told them by their Liberal and Tory masters. Some, when
Owen offered to lend them some books or pamphlets refused to accept
them, and others who did him the great favour of accepting them,
afterwards boasted that they had used them as toilet paper. Owen frequently entered into long arguments with the other men, saying
that it was the duty of the State to provide productive work for all
those who were willing to do it. Some few of them listened like men
who only vaguely understood, but were willing to be convinced. It's right enough what you say,' they would remark. Others ridiculed this doctrine of State employment: It was all very
fine, but where was the money to come from? And then those who had
been disposed to agree with Owen could relapse into their old apathy. There were others who did not listen so quietly, but shouted with many
curses that it was the likes of such fellows as Owen who were
responsible for all the depression in trade. All this talk about
Socialism and State employment was frightening Capital out of the
country. Those who had money were afraid to invest it in industries,
or to have any work done for fear they would be robbed. When Owen
quoted statistics to prove that as far as commerce and the quantity
produced of commodities of all kinds was concerned, the last year had
been a record one, they became more infuriated than ever, and talked
threateningly of what they would like to do to those bloody Socialists
who were upsetting everything. One day Crass, who was one of these upholders of the existing system,
scored off Owen finely. A little group of them were standing talking
in the Wage Slave Market near the Fountain. In the course of the
argument, Owen made the remark that under existing conditions life was
not worth living, and Crass said that if he really thought so, there
was no compulsion about it; if he wasn't satisfied--if he didn't want
to live--he could go and die. Why the hell didn't he go and make a
hole in the water, or cut his bloody throat? On this particular occasion the subject of the argument was--at
first--the recent increase of the Borough Engineer's salary to
seventeen pounds per week. Owen had said it was robbery, but the
majority of the others expressed their approval of the increase. They
asked Owen if he expected a man like that to work for nothing! It was
not as if he were one of the likes of themselves. They said that, as
for it being robbery, Owen would be very glad to have the chance of
getting it himself. Most of them seemed to think the fact that anyone
would be glad to have seventeen pounds a week, proved that it was right
for them to pay that amount to the Borough Engineer! Usually whenever Owen reflected upon the gross injustices, and
inhumanity of the existing social disorder, he became convinced that it
could not possibly last; it was bound to fall to pieces because of its
own rottenness. It was not just, it was not common sense, and
therefore it could not endure. But always after one of these
arguments--or, rather, disputes--with his fellow workmen, he almost
relapsed into hopelessness and despondency, for then he realized how
vast and how strong are the fortifications that surround the present
system; the great barriers and ramparts of invincible ignorance, apathy
and self-contempt, which will have to be broken down before the system
of society of which they are the defences, can be swept away. At other times as he thought of this marvellous system, it presented
itself to him in such an aspect of almost comical absurdity that he was
forced to laugh and to wonder whether it really existed at all, or if
it were only an illusion of his own disordered mind. One of the things that the human race needed in order to exist was
shelter; so with much painful labour they had constructed a large
number of houses. Thousands of these houses were now standing
unoccupied, while millions of the people who had helped to build the
houses were either homeless or herding together in overcrowded hovels. These human beings had such a strange system of arranging their affairs
that if anyone were to go and burn down a lot of the houses he would be
conferring a great boon upon those who had built them, because such an
act would 'Make a lot more work!' Another very comical thing was that thousands of people wore broken
boots and ragged clothes, while millions of pairs of boots and
abundance of clothing, which they had helped to make, were locked up in
warehouses, and the System had the keys. Thousands of people lacked the necessaries of life. The necessaries of
life are all produced by work. The people who lacked begged to be
allowed to work and create those things of which they stood in need. If anyone asked the System why it prevented these people from producing
the things of which they were in want, the System replied:

'Because they have already produced too much. The warehouses are filled and overflowing, and there is nothing more
for them to do.' There was in existence a huge accumulation of everything necessary. A
great number of the people whose labour had produced that vast store
were now living in want, but the System said that they could not be
permitted to partake of the things they had created. Then, after a
time, when these people, being reduced to the last extreme of misery,
cried out that they and their children were dying of hunger, the System
grudgingly unlocked the doors of the great warehouses, and taking out a
small part of the things that were stored within, distributed it
amongst the famished workers, at the same time reminding them that it
was Charity, because all the things in the warehouses, although they
had been made by the workers, were now the property of the people who
do nothing. And then the starving, bootless, ragged, stupid wretches fell down and
worshipped the System, and offered up their children as living
sacrifices upon its altars, saying:

'This beautiful System is the only one possible, and the best that
human wisdom can devise. Cursed be
those who seek to destroy the System!' As the absurdity of the thing forced itself upon him, Owen, in spite of
the unhappiness he felt at the sight of all the misery by which he was
surrounded, laughed aloud and said to himself that if he was sane, then
all these people must be mad. In the face of such colossal imbecility it was absurd to hope for any
immediate improvement. The little already accomplished was the work of
a few self-sacrificing enthusiasts, battling against the opposition of
those they sought to benefit, and the results of their labours were, in
many instances, as pearls cast before the swine who stood watching for
opportunities to fall upon and rend their benefactors. It was possible that the monopolists,
encouraged by the extraordinary stupidity and apathy of the people
would proceed to lay upon them even greater burdens, until at last,
goaded by suffering, and not having sufficient intelligence to
understand any other remedy, these miserable wretches would turn upon
their oppressors and drown both them and their System in a sea of blood. Besides the work at the Kiosk, towards the end of March things
gradually began to improve in other directions. Several firms began to
take on a few hands. Several large empty houses that were relet had to
be renovated for their new tenants, and there was a fair amount of
inside work arising out of the annual spring-cleaning in other houses. John travelled to the hallway. There was not enough work to keep everyone employed, and most of those
who were taken on as a rule only managed to make a few hours a week,
but still it was better than absolute idleness, and there also began to
be talk of several large outside jobs that were to be done as soon as
the weather was settled. This bad weather, by the way, was a sort of boon to the defenders of
the present system, who were hard-up for sensible arguments to explain
the cause of poverty. One of the principal causes was, of course, the
weather, which was keeping everything back. There was not the
slightest doubt that if only the weather would allow there would always
be plenty of work, and poverty would be abolished. had a fair share of what work there was, and Crass,
Sawkins, Slyme and Owen were kept employed pretty regularly, although
they did not start until half past eight and left off at four. At
different houses in various parts of the town they had ceilings to wash
off and distemper, to strip the old paper from the walls, and to
repaint and paper the rooms, and sometimes there were the venetian
blinds to repair and repaint. Occasionally a few extra hands were
taken on for a few days, and discharged again as soon as the job they
were taken on to do was finished. The defenders of the existing system may possibly believe that the
knowledge that they would be discharged directly the job was done was a
very good incentive to industry, that they would naturally under these
circumstances do their best to get the work done as quickly as
possible. But then it must be remembered that most of the defenders of
the existing system are so constituted, that they can believe anything
provided it is not true and sufficiently silly. All the same, it was a fact that the workmen did do their very best to
get over this work in the shortest possible time, because although they
knew that to do so was contrary to their own interests, they also knew
that it would be very much more contrary to their interests not to do
so. Their only chance of being kept on if other work came in was to
tear into it for all they were worth. Consequently, most of the work
was rushed and botched and slobbered over in about half the time that
it would have taken to do it properly. Rooms for which the customers
paid to have three coats of paint were scamped with one or two. What
Misery did not know about scamping and faking the work, the men
suggested to and showed him in the hope of currying favour with him in
order that they might get the preference over others and be sent for
when the next job came in. This is the principal incentive provided by
the present system, the incentive to cheat. These fellows cheated the
customers of their money. They cheated themselves and their fellow
workmen of work, and their children of bread, but it was all for a good
cause--to make profit for their master. Harlow and Slyme did one job--a room that Rushton & Co. It was finished with two and the men cleared
away their paints. Mary journeyed to the bathroom. The next day, when Slyme went there to paper the
room, the lady of the house said that the painting was not yet
finished--it was to have another coat. Slyme assured her that it had
already had three, but, as the lady insisted, Slyme went to the shop
and sought out Misery. Harlow had been stood off, as there was not
another job in just then, but fortunately he happened to be standing in
the street outside the shop, so they called him and then the three of
them went round to the job and swore that the room had had three coats. She had watched the progress of
the work. Besides, it was impossible; they had only been there three
days. The first day they had not put any paint on at all; they had
done the ceiling and stripped the walls; the painting was not started
till the second day. Misery
explained the mystery: he said that for first coating they had an extra
special very fast-drying paint--paint that dried so quickly that they
were able to give the work two coats in one day. For instance, one man
did the window, the other the door: when these were finished both men
did the skirting; by the time the skirting was finished the door and
window were dry enough to second coat; and then, on the following
day--the finishing coat! Of course, this extra special quick-drying paint was very expensive,
but the firm did not mind that. They knew that most of their customers
wished to have their work finished as quickly as possible, and their
study was to give satisfaction to the customers. This explanation
satisfied the lady--a poverty-stricken widow making a precarious living
by taking in lodgers--who was the more easily deceived because she
regarded Misery as a very holy man, having seen him preaching in the
street on many occasions. There was another job at another boarding-house that Owen and Easton
did--two rooms which had to be painted three coats of white paint and
one of enamel, making four coats altogether. That was what the firm
had contracted to do. As the old paint in these rooms was of a rather
dark shade it was absolutely necessary to give the work three coats
before enamelling it. Misery wanted them to let it go with two, but
Owen pointed out that if they did so it would be such a ghastly mess
that it would never pass. After thinking the matter over for a few
minutes, Misery told them to go on with the third coat of paint. Then
he went downstairs and asked to see the lady of the house. He
explained to her that, in consequence of the old paint being so dark,
he found that it would be necessary, in order to make a good job of it,
to give the work four coats before enamelling it. Of course, they had
agreed for only three, but as they always made a point of doing their
work in a first-class manner rather than not make a good job, they
would give it the extra coat for nothing, but he was sure she would not
wish them to do that. The lady said that she did not want them to work
for nothing, and she wanted it done properly. If it were necessary to
give it an extra coat, they must do so and she would pay for it. The lady was satisfied, and Misery
was in the seventh heaven. Then he went upstairs again and warned Owen
and Easton to be sure to say, if they were asked, that the work had had
four coats. It would not be reasonable to blame Misery or Rushton for not wishing
to do good, honest work--there was no incentive. When they secured a
contract, if they had thought first of making the very best possible
job of it, they would not have made so much profit. The incentive was
not to do the work as well as possible, but to do as little as
possible. The incentive was not to make good work, but to make good
profit. They could not justly be blamed
for not doing good work--there was no incentive. To do good work
requires time and pains. Most of them would have liked to take time
and pains, because all those who are capable of doing good work find
pleasure and happiness in doing it, and have pride in it when done: but
there was no incentive, unless the certainty of getting the sack could
be called an incentive, for it was a moral certainty that any man who
was caught taking time and pains with his work would be promptly
presented with the order of the boot. But there was plenty of
incentive to hurry and scamp and slobber and botch. There was another job at a lodging-house--two rooms to be painted and
papered. The landlord paid for the work, but the tenant had the
privilege of choosing the paper. She could have any pattern she liked
so long as the cost did not exceed one shilling per roll, Rushton's
estimate being for paper of that price. Misery sent her several
patterns of sixpenny papers, marked at a shilling, to choose from, but
she did not fancy any of them, and said that she would come to the shop
to make her selection. So Hunter tore round to the shop in a great
hurry to get there before her. In his haste to dismount, he fell off
his bicycle into the muddy road, and nearly smashed the plate-glass
window with the handle-bar of the machine as he placed it against the
shop front before going in. Without waiting to clean the mud off his clothes, he ordered Budd, the
pimply-faced shopman, to get out rolls of all the sixpenny papers they
had, and then they both set to work and altered the price marked upon
them from sixpence to a shilling. Then they got out a number of
shilling papers and altered the price marked upon them, changing it
from a shilling to one and six. When the unfortunate woman arrived, Misery was waiting for her with a
benign smile upon his long visage. He showed her all the sixpenny
ones, but she did not like any of them, so after a while Nimrod
suggested that perhaps she would like a paper of a little better
quality, and she could pay the trifling difference out of her own
pocket. Then he showed her the shilling papers that he had marked up
to one and sixpence, and eventually the lady selected one of these and
paid the extra sixpence per roll herself, as Nimrod suggested. There
were fifteen rolls of paper altogether--seven for one room and eight
for the other--so that in addition to the ordinary profit on the sale
of the paper--about two hundred and seventy-five per cent.--the firm
made seven and sixpence on this transaction. They might have done
better out of the job itself if Slyme had not been hanging the paper
piece-work, for, the two rooms being of the same pattern, he could
easily have managed to do them with fourteen rolls; in fact, that was
all he did use, but he cut up and partly destroyed the one that was
over so that he could charge for hanging it. Owen was working there at the same time, for the painting of the rooms
was not done before Slyme papered them; the finishing coat was put on
after the paper was hung. He noticed Slyme destroying the paper and,
guessing the reason, asked him how he could reconcile such conduct as
that with his profession of religion. Slyme replied that the fact that he was a Christian did not imply that
he never did anything wrong: if he committed a sin, he was a Christian
all the same, and it would be forgiven him for the sake of the Blood. As for this affair of the paper, it was a matter between himself and
God, and Owen had no right to set himself up as a Judge. In addition to all this work, there were a number of funerals. Crass
and Slyme did very well out of it all, working all day white-washing or
painting, and sometimes part of the night painting venetian blinds or
polishing coffins and taking them home, to say nothing of the lifting
in of the corpses and afterwards acting as bearers. As time went on, the number of small jobs increased, and as the days
grew longer the men were allowed to put in a greater number of hours. Most of the firms had some work, but there was never enough to keep all
the men in the town employed at the same time. It worked like this:
Every firm had a certain number of men who were regarded as the regular
hands. When there was any work to do, they got the preference over
strangers or outsiders. When things were busy, outsiders were taken on
temporarily. When the work fell off, these casual hands were the first
to be'stood still'. If it continued to fall off, the old hands were
also stood still in order of seniority, the older hands being preferred
to strangers--so long, of course, as they were not old in the sense of
being aged or inefficient. This kind of thing usually continued all through the spring and summer. In good years the men of all trades, carpenters, bricklayers,
plasterers, painters and so on, were able to keep almost regularly at
work, except in wet weather. The difference between a good and bad spring and summer is that in good
years it is sometimes possible to make a little overtime, and the
periods of unemployment are shorter and less frequent than in bad
years. It is rare even in good years for one of the casual hands to be
employed by one firm for more than one, two or three months without a
break. It is usual for them to put in a month with one firm, then a
fortnight with another, then perhaps six weeks somewhere else, and
often between there are two or three days or even weeks of enforced
idleness. This sort of thing goes on all through spring, summer and
autumn. The Beano Meeting


By the beginning of April, Rushton & Co. were again working nine hours
a day, from seven in the morning till five-thirty at night, and after
Easter they started working full time from 6 A.M. till 5.30 P.M.,
eleven and a half hours--or, rather, ten hours, for they had to lose
half an hour at breakfast and an hour at dinner. Just before Easter several of the men asked Hunter if they might be
allowed to work on Good Friday and Easter Monday, as, they said, they
had had enough holidays during the winter; they had no money to spare
for holiday-making, and they did not wish to lose two days' pay when
there was work to be done. Hunter told them that there was not
sufficient work in to justify him in doing as they requested: things
were getting very slack again, and Mr Rushton had decided to cease work
from Thursday night till Tuesday morning. They were thus prevented
from working on Good Friday, but it is true that not more than one
working man in fifty went to any religious service on that day or on
any other day during the Easter festival. On the contrary, this
festival was the occasion of much cursing and blaspheming on the part
of those whose penniless, poverty-stricken condition it helped to
aggravate by enforcing unprofitable idleness which they lacked the
means to enjoy. During these holidays some of the men did little jobs on their own
account and others put in the whole time--including Good Friday and
Easter Sunday--gardening, digging and planting their plots of allotment
ground. When Owen arrived home one evening during the week before Easter,
Frankie gave him an envelope which he had brought home from school. It
contained a printed leaflet:

CHURCH OF THE WHITED SEPULCHRE,
MUGSBOROUGH

Easter 19--

Dear Sir (or Madam),

In accordance with the usual custom we invite you to join with us in
presenting the Vicar, the Rev. Habbakuk Bosher, with an Easter
Offering, as a token of affection and regard. Yours faithfully,
A. Cheeseman }
W. Taylor } Churchwardens

Mr Bosher's income from various sources connected with the church was
over six hundred pounds a year, or about twelve pounds per week, but as
that sum was evidently insufficient, his admirers had adopted this
device for supplementing it. Frankie said all the boys had one of
these letters and were going to ask their fathers for some money to
give towards the Easter offering. Most of them expected to get
twopence. As the boy had evidently set his heart on doing the same as the other
children, Owen gave him the twopence, and they afterwards learned that
the Easter Offering for that year was one hundred and twenty-seven
pounds, which was made up of the amounts collected from the
parishioners by the children, the district visitors and the verger, the
collection at a special Service, and donations from the feeble-minded
old females elsewhere referred to. By the end of April nearly all the old hands were back at work, and
several casual hands had also been taken on, the Semi-drunk being one
of the number. In addition to these, Misery had taken on a number of
what he called 'lightweights', men who were not really skilled workmen,
but had picked up sufficient knowledge of the simpler parts of the
trade to be able to get over it passably. These were paid fivepence or
fivepence-halfpenny, and were employed in preference to those who had
served their time, because the latter wanted more money and therefore
were only employed when absolutely necessary. Besides the lightweights
there were a few young fellows called improvers, who were also employed
because they were cheap. Crass now acted as colourman, having been appointed possibly because he
knew absolutely nothing about the laws of colour. As most of the work
consisted of small jobs, all the paint and distemper was mixed up at
the shop and sent out ready for use to the various jobs. Sawkins or some of the other lightweights generally carried the heavier
lots of colour or scaffolding, but the smaller lots of colour or such
things as a pair of steps or a painter's plank were usually sent by the
boy, whose slender legs had become quite bowed since he had been
engaged helping the other philanthropists to make money for Mr Rushton. Crass's work as colourman was simplified, to a certain extent, by the
great number of specially prepared paints and distempers in all
colours, supplied by the manufacturers ready for use. Most of these
new-fangled concoctions were regarded with an eye of suspicion and
dislike by the hands, and Philpot voiced the general opinion about them
one day during a dinner-hour discussion when he said they might appear
to be all right for a time, but they would probably not last, because
they was mostly made of kimicles. One of these new-fashioned paints was called 'Petrifying Liquid', and
was used for first-coating decaying stone or plaster work. It was also
supposed to be used for thinning up a certain kind of patent distemper,
but when Misery found out that it was possible to thin the latter with
water, the use of 'Petrifying Liquid' for that purpose was
discontinued. This 'Petrifying Liquid' was a source of much merriment
to the hands. The name was applied to the tea that they made in
buckets on some of the jobs, and also to the four-ale that was supplied
by certain pubs. One of the new inventions was regarded with a certain amount of
indignation by the hands: it was a white enamel, and they objected to
it for two reasons--one was because, as Philpot remarked, it dried so
quickly that you had to work like greased lightning; you had to be all
over the door directly you started it. The other reason was that, because it dried so quickly, it was
necessary to keep closed the doors and windows of the room where it was
being used, and the smell was so awful that it brought on fits of
dizziness and sometimes vomiting. Needless to say, the fact that it
compelled those who used it to work quickly recommended the stuff to
Misery. As for the smell, he did not care about that; he did not have to inhale
the fumes himself. It was just about this time that Crass, after due consultation with
several of the others, including Philpot, Harlow, Bundy, Slyme, Easton
and the Semi-drunk, decided to call a meeting of the hands for the
purpose of considering the advisability of holding the usual Beano
later on in the summer. The meeting was held in the carpenter's shop
down at the yard one evening at six o'clock, which allowed time for
those interested to attend after leaving work. The hands sat on the benches or carpenter's stools, or reclined upon
heaps of shavings. On a pair of tressels in the centre of the workshop
stood a large oak coffin which Crass had just finished polishing. When all those who were expected to turn up had arrived, Payne, the
foreman carpenter--the man who made the coffins--was voted to the chair
on the proposition of Crass, seconded by Philpot, and then a solemn
silence ensued, which was broken at last by the chairman, who, in a
lengthy speech, explained the object of the meeting. Possibly with a
laudable desire that there should be no mistake about it, he took the
trouble to explain several times, going over the same ground and
repeating the same words over and over again, whilst the audience
waited in a deathlike and miserable silence for him to leave off. Payne, however, did not appear to have any intention of leaving off,
for he continued, like a man in a trance, to repeat what he had said
before, seeming to be under the impression that he had to make a
separate explanation to each individual member of the audience. At
last the crowd could stand it no longer, and began to shout 'Hear,
hear' and to bang bits of wood and hammers on the floor and the
benches; and then, after a final repetition of the statement, that the
object of the meeting was to consider the advisability of holding an
outing, or beanfeast, the chairman collapsed on to a carpenter's stool
and wiped the sweat from his forehead. Crass then reminded the meeting that the last year's Beano had been an
unqualified success, and for his part he would be very sorry if they
did not have one this year. Last year they had four brakes, and they
went to Tubberton Village. It was true that there was nothing much to see at Tubberton, but there
was one thing they could rely on getting there that they could not be
sure of getting for the same money anywhere else, and that was--a good
feed. Just for the sake of getting on with the business,
he would propose that they decide to go to Tubberton, and that a
committee be appointed to make arrangements--about the dinner--with the
landlord of the Queen Elizabeth's Head at that place. Philpot seconded the motion, and Payne was about to call for a show of
hands when Harlow rose to a point of order. It appeared to him that
they were getting on a bit too fast. The proper way to do this
business was first to take the feeling of the meeting as to whether
they wished to have a Beano at all, and then, if the meeting was in
favour of it, they could decide where they were to go, and whether they
would have a whole day or only half a day. The Semi-drunk said that he didn't care a dreadful expression where
they went: he was willing to abide by the decision of the majority. It was a matter of indifference to him whether they had a
day, or half a day, or two days; he was agreeable to anything. Easton suggested that a special saloon carriage might be engaged, and
they could go and visit Madame Tussaud's Waxworks. He had never been
to that place and had often wished to see it. But Philpot objected
that if they went there, Madame Tussaud's might be unwilling to let
them out again. Bundy endorsed the remarks that had fallen from Crass with reference to
Tubberton. He did not care where they went, they would never get such
a good spread for the money as they did last year at the Queen
Elizabeth. The chairman said that he remembered the last Beano very well. They
had half a day--left off work on Saturday at twelve instead of one--so
there was only one hour's wages lost--they went home, had a wash and
changed their clothes, and got up to the Cricketers, where the brakes
was waiting, at one. Then they had the two hours' drive to Tubberton,
stopping on the way for drinks at the Blue Lion, the Warrior's Head,
the Bird in Hand, the Dewdrop Inn and the World Turned Upside Down. They arrived at the Queen Elizabeth at three-thirty, and
the dinner was ready; and it was one of the finest blow-outs he had
ever had. There was soup, vegetables, roast beef, roast
mutton, lamb and mint sauce, plum duff, Yorkshire, and a lot more. The
landlord of the Elizabeth kept as good a drop of beer as anyone could
wish to drink, and as for the teetotallers, they could have tea, coffee
or ginger beer. Having thus made another start, Payne found it very difficult to leave
off, and was proceeding to relate further details of the last Beano
when Harlow again rose up from his heap of shavings and said he wished
to call the chairman to order. What the hell was the
use of all this discussion before they had even decided to have a Beano
at all! Was the meeting in favour of a Beano or not? Everyone was very
uncomfortable, looking stolidly on the ground or staring straight in
front of them. At last Easton broke the silence by suggesting that it would not be a
bad plan if someone was to make a motion that a Beano be held. This
was greeted with a general murmur of 'Hear, hear,' followed by another
awkward pause, and then the chairman asked Easton if he would move a
resolution to that effect. After some hesitation, Easton agreed, and
formally moved: 'That this meeting is in favour of a Beano.' The Semi-drunk said that, in order to get on with the business, he
would second the resolution. But meantime, several arguments had
broken out between the advocates of different places, and several men
began to relate anecdotes of previous Beanos. Nearly everyone was
speaking at once and it was some time before the chairman was able to
put the resolution. Finding it impossible to make his voice heard
above the uproar, he began to hammer on the bench with a wooden mallet,
and to shout requests for order, but this only served to increase the
din. Some of them looked at him curiously and wondered what was the
matter with him, but the majority were so interested in their own
arguments that they did not notice him at all. Whilst the chairman was trying to get the attention of the meeting in
order to put the question, Bundy had become involved in an argument
with several of the new hands who claimed to know of an even better
place than the Queen Elizabeth, a pub called 'The New Found Out', at
Mirkfield, a few miles further on than Tubberton, and another
individual joined in the dispute, alleging that a house called 'The
Three Loggerheads' at Slushton-cum-Dryditch was the finest place for a
Beano within a hundred miles of Mugsborough. He went there last year
with Pushem and Driver's crowd, and they had roast beef, goose, jam
tarts, mince pies, sardines, blancmange, calves' feet jelly and one
pint for each man was included in the cost of the dinner. In the
middle of the discussion, they noticed that most of the others were
holding up their hands, so to show there was no ill feeling they held
up theirs also and then the chairman declared it was carried
unanimously. Bundy said he would like to ask the chairman to read out the resolution
which had just been passed, as he had not caught the words. The chairman replied that there was no written resolution. The motion
was just to express the feeling of this meeting as to whether there was
to be an outing or not. Bundy said he was only asking a civil question, a point of information:
all he wanted to know was, what was the terms of the resolution? Was
they in favour of the Beano or not? The chairman responded that the meeting was unanimously in favour. Harlow said that the next thing to be done was to decide upon the date. That would give them
plenty of time to pay in. Sawkins asked whether it was proposed to have a day or only half a day. He himself was in favour of the whole day. It would only mean losing a
morning's work. It was hardly worth going at all if they only had half
the day. The Semi-drunk remarked that he had just thought of a very good place
to go if they decided to have a change. Three years ago he was working
for Dauber and Botchit and they went to 'The First In and the Last Out'
at Bashford. It was a very small place, but there was a field where
you could have a game of cricket or football, and the dinner was A1 at
Lloyds. There was also a skittle alley attached to the pub and no
charge was made for the use of it. There was a bit of a river there,
and one of the chaps got so drunk that he went orf his onion and jumped
into the water, and when they got him out the village policeman locked
him up, and the next day he was took before the beak and fined two
pounds or a month's hard labour for trying to commit suicide. Easton pointed out that there was another way to look at it: supposing
they decided to have the Beano, he supposed it would come to about six
shillings a head. If they had it at the end of August and started
paying in now, say a tanner a week, they would have plenty of time to
make up the amount, but supposing the work fell off and some of them
got the push? Crass said that in that case a man could either have his money back or
he could leave it, and continue his payments even if he were working
for some other firm; the fact that he was off from Rushton's would not
prevent him from going to the Beano. Harlow proposed that they decide to go to the Queen Elizabeth the same
as last year, and that they have half a day. Philpot said that, in order to get on with the business, he would
second the resolution. Bundy suggested--as an amendment--that it should be a whole day,
starting from the Cricketers at nine in the morning, and Sawkins said
that, in order to get on with the business, he would second the
amendment. One of the new hands said he wished to move another amendment. He
proposed to strike out the Queen Elizabeth and substitute the Three
Loggerheads. The Chairman--after a pause--inquired if there were any seconder to
this, and the Semi-drunk said that, although he did not care much where
they went, still, to get on with the business, he would second the
amendment, although for his own part he would prefer to go to the
'First In and Last Out' at Bashford. The new hand offered to withdraw his suggestion re the Three
Loggerheads in favour of the Semi-drunks proposition, but the latter
said it didn't matter; it could go as it was. As it was getting rather late, several men went home, and cries of 'Put
the question' began to be heard on all sides; the chairman accordingly
was proceeding to put Harlow's proposition when the new hand
interrupted him by pointing out that it was his duty as chairman to put
the amendments first. This produced another long discussion, in the
course of which a very tall, thin man who had a harsh, metallic voice
gave a long rambling lecture about the rules of order and the conduct
of public meetings. He spoke very slowly and deliberately, using very
long words and dealing with the subject in an exhaustive manner. A
resolution was a resolution, and an amendment was an amendment; then
there was what was called an amendment to an amendment; the procedure
of the House of Commons differed very materially from that of the House
of Lords--and so on. This man kept on talking for about ten minutes, and might have
continued for ten hours if he had not been rudely interrupted by
Harlow, who said that it seemed to him that they were likely to stay
there all night if they went on like they were going. He wanted his
tea, and he would also like to get a few hours' sleep before having to
resume work in the morning. He was getting about sick of all this
talk. In order to get on with the business, he would
withdraw his resolution if the others would withdraw their amendments. If they would agree to do this, he would then propose another
resolution which--if carried--would meet all the requirements of the
case. The man with the metallic voice observed that it was not necessary to
ask the consent of those who had moved amendments: if the original
proposition was withdrawed, all the amendments fell to the ground. 'Last year,' observed Crass, 'when we was goin' out of the room after
we'd finished our dinner at the Queen Elizabeth, the landlord pointed
to the table and said, "There's enough left over for you all to 'ave
another lot."' Harlow said that he would move that it be held on the last Saturday in
August; that it be for half a day, starting at one o'clock so that they
could work up till twelve, which would mean that they would only have
to lose one hour's pay: that they go to the same place as last
year--the Queen Elizabeth. That the same committee that
acted last year--Crass and Bundy--be appointed to make all the
arrangements and collect the subscriptions. The tall man observed that this was what was called a compound
resolution, and was proceeding to explain further when the chairman
exclaimed that it did not matter a dam' what it was called--would
anyone second it? The Semi-drunk said that he would--in order to get
on with the business. Bundy moved, and Sawkins seconded, as an amendment, that it should be a
whole day. The new hand moved to substitute the Loggerheads for the Queen
Elizabeth. Easton proposed to substitute Madame Tussaud's Waxworks for the Queen
Elizabeth. He said he moved this just to test the feeling of the
meeting. Harlow pointed out that it would cost at least a pound a head to defray
the expenses of such a trip. The railway fares, tram fares in London,
meals--for it would be necessary to have a whole day--and other
incidental expenses; to say nothing of the loss of wages. It would not
be possible for any of them to save the necessary amount during the
next four months. Philpot repeated his warning as to the danger of visiting Madame
Tussaud's. He was certain that if she once got them in there she would
never let them out again. He had no desire to pass the rest of his
life as an image in a museum. One of the new hands--a man with a red tie--said that they would look
well, after having been soaked for a month or two in petrifying liquid,
chained up in the Chamber of Horrors with labels round their
necks--'Specimens of Liberal and Conservative upholders of the
Capitalist System, 20 century'. Crass protested against the introduction of politics into that meeting. The remarks of the last speakers were most uncalled-for. Easton said that he would withdraw his amendment. Acting under the directions of the man with the metallic voice, the
chairman now proceeded to put the amendment to the vote. Bundy's
proposal that it should be a whole day was defeated, only himself,
Sawkins and the Semi-drunk being in favour. The motion to substitute
the Loggerheads for the Queen Elizabeth was also defeated, and the
compound resolution proposed by Harlow was then carried nem. Philpot now proposed a hearty vote of thanks to the chairman for the
very able manner in which he had conducted the meeting. When this had
been unanimously agreed to, the Semi-drunk moved a similar tribute of
gratitude to Crass for his services to the cause and the meeting
dispersed. Chapter 42

June


During the early part of May the weather was exceptionally bad, with
bitterly cold winds. Rain fell nearly every day, covering the roads
with a slush that penetrated the rotten leather of the cheap or
second-hand boots worn by the workmen. This weather had the effect of
stopping nearly all outside work, and also caused a lot of illness, for
those who were so fortunate as to have inside jobs frequently got wet
through on their way to work in the morning and had to work all day in
damp clothing, and with their boots saturated with water. It was also
a source of trouble to those of the men who had allotments, because if
it had been fine they would have been able to do something to their
gardens while they were out of work. Newman had not succeeded in getting a job at the trade since he came
out of prison, but he tried to make a little money by hawking bananas. Philpot--when he was at work--used often to buy a tanner's or a bob's
worth from him and give them to Mrs Linden's children. On Saturdays
Old Joe used to waylay these children and buy them bags of cakes at the
bakers. One week when he knew that Mrs Linden had not had much work to
do, he devised a very cunning scheme to help her. He had been working
with Slyme, who was papering a large boarded ceiling in a shop. It had
to be covered with unbleached calico before it could be papered and
when the work was done there were a number of narrow pieces of calico
left over. These he collected and tore into strips about six inches
wide which he took round to Mrs Linden, and asked her to sew them
together, end to end, so as to make one long strip: then this long
strip had to be cut into four pieces of equal length and the edges sewn
together in such a manner that it would form a long tube. Philpot told
her that it was required for some work that Rushton's were doing, and
said he had undertaken to get the sewing done. The firm would have to
pay for it, so she could charge a good price. 'You see,' he said with a wink, 'this is one of those jobs where we
gets a chance to get some of our own back.' Mary thought it was rather a strange sort of job, but she did as
Philpot directed and when he came for the stuff and asked how much it
was she said threepence: it had only taken about half an hour. Philpot
ridiculed this: it was not nearly enough. THEY were not supposed to
know how long it took: it ought to be a bob at the very least. So,
after some hesitation she made out a bill for that amount on a
half-sheet of note-paper. He brought her the money the next Saturday
afternoon and went off chuckling to himself over the success of the
scheme. It did not occur to him until the next day that he might just
as well have got her to make him an apron or two: and when he did think
of this he said that after all it didn't matter, because if he had done
that it would have been necessary to buy new calico, and anyhow, it
could be done some other time. Newman did not make his fortune out of the bananas--seldom more than
two shillings a day--and consequently he was very glad when Philpot
called at his house one evening and told him there was a chance of a
job at Rushton's. Newman accordingly went to the yard the next
morning, taking his apron and blouse and his bag of tools with him,
ready to start work. He got there at about quarter to six and was
waiting outside when Hunter arrived. The latter was secretly very glad
to see him, for there was a rush of work in and they were short of men. He did not let this appear, of course, but hesitated for a few minutes
when Newman repeated the usual formula: 'Any chance of a job, sir?' 'We wasn't at all satisfied with you last time you was on, you know,'
said Misery. 'Still, I don't mind giving you another chance. But if
you want to hold your job you'll have to move yourself a bit quicker
than you did before.' Towards the end of the month things began to improve all round. As time went on the improvement
was maintained and nearly everyone was employed. Rushton's were so busy
that they took on several other old hands who had been sacked the
previous year for being too slow. Thanks to the influence of Crass, Easton was now regarded as one of the
regular hands. He had recently resumed the practice of spending some
of his evenings at the Cricketers. It is probable that even if it had
not been for his friendship with Crass, he would still have continued
to frequent the public house, for things were not very comfortable at
home. Somehow or other, Ruth and he seemed to be always quarrelling,
and he was satisfied that it was not always his fault. Sometimes,
after the day's work was over he would go home resolved to be good
friends with her: he would plan on his way homewards to suggest to her
that they should have their tea and then go out for a walk with the
child. Once or twice she agreed, but on each occasion, they quarrelled
before they got home again. So after a time he gave up trying to be
friends with her and went out by himself every evening as soon as he
had had his tea. Mary Linden, who was still lodging with them, could not help perceiving
their unhappiness: she frequently noticed that Ruth's eyes were red and
swollen as if with crying, and she gently sought to gain her
confidence, but without success. On one occasion when Mary was trying
to advise her, Ruth burst out into a terrible fit of weeping, but she
would not say what was the cause--except that her head was aching--she
was not well, that was all. Sometimes Easton passed the evening at the Cricketers but frequently he
went over to the allotments, where Harlow had a plot of ground. Harlow
used to get up about four o'clock in the morning and put in an hour or
so at his garden before going to work; and every evening as soon as he
had finished tea he used to go there again and work till it was dark. Sometimes he did not go home to tea at all, but went straight from work
to the garden, and his children used to bring his tea to him there in a
glass bottle, with something to eat in a little basket. He had four
children, none of whom were yet old enough to go to work, and as may be
imagined, he found it a pretty hard struggle to live. He was not a
teetotaller, but as he often remarked, 'what the publicans got from him
wouldn't make them very fat', for he often went for weeks together
without tasting the stuff, except a glass or two with the Sunday
dinner, which he did not regard as an unnecessary expense, because it
was almost as cheap as tea or coffee. Fortunately his wife was a good needlewoman, and as sober and
industrious as himself; by dint of slaving incessantly from morning
till night she managed to keep her home fairly comfortable and the
children clean and decently dressed; they always looked respectable,
although they did not always have enough proper food to eat. They
looked so respectable that none of the 'visiting ladies' ever regarded
them as deserving cases. Harlow paid fifteen shillings a year for his plot of ground, and
although it meant a lot of hard work it was also a source of pleasure
and some profit. He generally made a few shillings out of the flowers,
besides having enough potatoes and other vegetables to last them nearly
all the year. Sometimes Easton went over to the allotments and lent Harlow a hand
with this gardening work, but whether he went there or to the
Cricketers, he usually returned home about half past nine, and then
went straight to bed, often without speaking a single word to Ruth, who
for her part seldom spoke to him except to answer something he said, or
to ask some necessary question. At first, Easton used to think that it
was all because of the way he had behaved to her in the public house,
but when he apologized--as he did several times--and begged her to
forgive him and forget about it, she always said it was all right;
there was nothing to forgive. Then, after a time, he began to think it
was on account of their poverty and the loss of their home, for nearly
all their furniture had been sold during the last winter. But whenever
he talked of trying to buy some more things to make the place
comfortable again, she did not appear to take any interest: the house
was neat enough as it was: they could manage very well, she said,
indifferently. One evening, about the middle of June, when he had been over to the
allotments, Easton brought her home a bunch of flowers that Harlow had
given him--some red and white roses and some <DW29>s. When he came in,
Ruth was packing his food basket for the next day. The baby was asleep
in its cot on the floor near the window. Although it was nearly nine
o'clock the lamp had not yet been lighted and the mournful twilight
that entered the room through the open window increased the desolation
of its appearance. The fire had burnt itself out and the grate was
filled with ashes. On the hearth was an old rug made of jute that had
once been printed in bright colours which had faded away till the whole
surface had become almost uniformly drab, showing scarcely any trace of
the original pattern. The rest of the floor was bare except for two or
three small pieces of old carpet that Ruth had bought for a few pence
at different times at some inferior second-hand shop. The chairs and
the table were almost the only things that were left of the original
furniture of the room, and except for three or four plates of different
patterns and sizes and a few cups and saucers, the shelves of the
dresser were bare. The stillness of the atmosphere was disturbed only by the occasional
sound of the wheels of a passing vehicle and the strangely distinct
voices of some children who were playing in the street. 'I've brought you these,' said Easton, offering her the flowers. You know I've been
helping him a little with his garden.' At first he thought she did not want to take them. She was standing at
the table with her back to the window, so that he was unable to see the
expression of her face, and she hesitated for a moment before she
faltered out some words of thanks and took the flowers, which she put
down on the table almost as soon as she touched them. Offended at what he considered her contemptuous indifference, Easton
made no further attempt at conversation but went into the scullery to
wash his hands, and then went up to bed. Downstairs, for a long time after he was gone, Ruth sat alone by the
fireless grate, in the silence and the gathering shadows, holding the
bunch of flowers in her hand, living over again the events of the last
year, and consumed with an agony of remorse. The presence of Mary Linden and the two children in the house probably
saved Ruth from being more unhappy than she was. Little Elsie had made
an arrangement with her to be allowed to take the baby out for walks,
and in return Ruth did Elsie's housework. As for Mary, she had not
much time to do anything but sew, almost the only relaxation she knew
being when she took the work home, and on Sunday, which she usually
devoted to a general clean-up of the room, and to mending the
children's clothes. Sometimes on Sunday evening she used to go with
Ruth and the children to see Mrs Owen, who, although she was not ill
enough to stay in bed, seldom went out of the house. She had never
really recovered from the attack of illness which was brought on by her
work at the boarding house. The doctor had been to see her once or
twice and had prescribed--rest. She was to lie down as much as
possible, not to do any heavy work--not to carry or lift any heavy
articles, scrub floors, make beds, or anything of that sort: and she
was to take plenty of nourishing food, beef tea, chicken, a little wine
and so on. He did not suggest a trip round the world in a steam yacht
or a visit to Switzerland--perhaps he thought they might not be able to
afford it. Sometimes she was so ill that she had to observe one at
least of the doctor's instructions--to lie down: and then she would
worry and fret because she was not able to do the housework and because
Owen had to prepare his own tea when he came home at night. On one of
these occasions it would have been necessary for Owen to stay at home
from work if it had not been for Mrs Easton, who came for several days
in succession to look after her and attend to the house. Fortunately, Owen's health was better since the weather had become
warmer. For a long time after the attack of haemorrhage he had while
writing the show-card he used to dread going to sleep at night for fear
it should recur. He had heard of people dying in their sleep from that
cause. Nora knew nothing of what
occurred that night: to have told her would have done no good, but on
the contrary would have caused her a lot of useless anxiety. Sometimes
he doubted whether it was right not to tell her, but as time went by
and his health continued to improve he was glad he had said nothing
about it. Frankie had lately resumed his athletic exercises with the flat iron:
his strength was returning since Owen had been working regularly,
because he had been having his porridge and milk again and also some
Parrish's Food which a chemist at Windley was selling large bottles of
for a shilling. He used to have what he called a 'party' two or three
times a week with Elsie, Charley and Easton's baby as the guests. Sometimes, if Mrs Owen were not well, Elsie used to stay in with her
after tea and do some housework while the boys went out to play, but
more frequently the four children used to go together to the park to
play or sail boats on the lake. Once one of the boats was becalmed
about a couple of yards from shore and while trying to reach it with a
stick Frankie fell into the water, and when Charley tried to drag him
out he fell in also. Elsie put the baby down on the bank and seized
hold of Charley and while she was trying to get him out, the baby began
rolling down, and would probably have tumbled in as well if a man who
happened to be passing by had not rushed up in time to prevent it. Fortunately the water at that place was only about two feet deep, so
the boys were not much the worse for their ducking. They returned home
wet through, smothered with mud, and feeling very important, like boys
who had distinguished themselves. After this, whenever she could manage to spare the time, Ruth Easton
used to go with the children to the park. There was a kind of
summer-house near the shore of the lake, only a few feet away from the
water's edge, surrounded and shaded by trees, whose branches arched
over the path and drooped down to the surface of the water. While the
children played Ruth used to sit in this arbour and sew, but often her
work was neglected and forgotten as she gazed pensively at the water,
which just there looked very still, and dark, and deep, for it was
sheltered from the wind and over-shadowed by the trees that lined the
banks at the end of the lake. Sometimes, if it happened to be raining, instead of going out the
children used to have some games in the house. On one such occasion
Frankie produced the flat iron and went through the exercise, and
Charley had a go as well. But although he was slightly older and
taller than Frankie he could not lift the iron so often or hold it out
so long as the other, a failure that Frankie attributed to the fact
that Charley had too much tea and bread and butter instead of porridge
and milk and Parrish's Food. Charley was so upset about his lack of
strength that he arranged with Frankie to come home with him the next
day after school to see his mother about it. Mrs Linden had a flat
iron, so they gave a demonstration of their respective powers before
her. Mrs Easton being also present, by request, because Frankie said
that the diet in question was suitable for babies as well as big
children. He had been brought up on it ever since he could remember,
and it was almost as cheap as bread and butter and tea. The result of the exhibition was that Mrs Linden promised to make
porridge for Charley and Elsie whenever she could spare the time, and
Mrs Easton said she would try it for the baby also. Chapter 43

The Good Old Summer-time


All through the summer the crowd of ragged-trousered philanthropists
continued to toil and sweat at their noble and unselfish task of making
money for Mr Rushton. Painting the outsides of houses and shops, washing off and distempering
ceilings, stripping old paper off walls, painting and papering rooms
and staircases, building new rooms or other additions to old houses or
business premises, digging up old drains, repairing leaky roofs and
broken windows. Their zeal and enthusiasm in the good cause was unbounded. They were
supposed to start work at six o'clock, but most of them were usually to
be found waiting outside the job at about a quarter to that hour,
sitting on the kerbstones or the doorstep. Their operations extended all over the town: at all hours of the day
they were to be seen either going or returning from 'jobs', carrying
ladders, planks, pots of paint, pails of whitewash, earthenware,
chimney pots, drainpipes, lengths of guttering, closet pans, grates,
bundles of wallpaper, buckets of paste, sacks of cement, and loads of
bricks and mortar. Quite a common spectacle--for gods and men--was a
procession consisting of a handcart loaded up with such materials being
pushed or dragged through the public streets by about half a dozen of
these Imperialists in broken boots and with battered, stained,
discoloured bowler hats, or caps splashed with paint and whitewash;
their stand-up collars dirty, limp and crumpled, and their rotten
second-hand misfit clothing saturated with sweat and plastered with
mortar. Even the assistants in the grocers' and drapers' shops laughed and
ridiculed and pointed the finger of scorn at them as they passed. The superior classes--those who do nothing--regarded them as a sort of
lower animals. A letter appeared in the Obscurer one week from one of
these well-dressed loafers, complaining of the annoyance caused to the
better-class visitors by workmen walking on the pavement as they passed
along the Grand Parade in the evening on their way home from work, and
suggesting that they should walk in the roadway. When they heard of
the letter a lot of the workmen adopted the suggestion and walked in
the road so as to avoid contaminating the idlers. This letter was followed by others of a somewhat similar kind, and one
or two written in a patronizing strain in defence of the working
classes by persons who evidently knew nothing about them. There was
also a letter from an individual who signed himself 'Morpheus'
complaining that he was often awakened out of his beauty sleep in the
middle of the night by the clattering noise of the workmen's boots as
they passed his house on their way to work in the morning. 'Morpheus'
wrote that not only did they make a dreadful noise with their horrible
iron-clad boots, but they were in the habit of coughing and spitting a
great deal, which was very unpleasant to hear, and they conversed in
loud tones. Sometimes their conversation was not at all edifying, for
it consisted largely of bad language, which 'Morpheus' assumed to be
attributable to the fact that they were out of temper because they had
to rise so early. As a rule they worked till half-past five in the evening, and by the
time they reached home it was six o'clock. When they had taken their
evening meal and had a wash it was nearly eight: about nine most of
them went to bed so as to be able to get up about half past four the
next morning to make a cup of tea before leaving home at half past five
to go to work again. Frequently it happened that they had to leave
home earlier than this, because their 'job' was more than half an
hour's walk away. It did not matter how far away the 'job' was from
the shop, the men had to walk to and fro in their own time, for Trades
Union rules were a dead letter in Mugsborough. There were no tram
fares or train fares or walking time allowed for the likes of them. Ninety-nine out of every hundred of them did not believe in such things
as those: they had much more sense than to join Trades Unions: on the
contrary, they believed in placing themselves entirely at the mercy of
their good, kind Liberal and Tory masters. Very frequently it happened, when only a few men were working together,
that it was not convenient to make tea for breakfast or dinner, and
then some of them brought tea with them ready made in bottles and drank
it cold; but most of them went to the nearest pub and ate their food
there with a glass of beer. Even those who would rather have had tea
or coffee had beer, because if they went to a temperance restaurant or
coffee tavern it generally happened that they were not treated very
civilly unless they bought something to eat as well as to drink, and
the tea at such places was really dearer than beer, and the latter was
certainly quite as good to drink as the stewed tea or the liquid mud
that was sold as coffee at cheap 'Workmen's' Eating Houses. There were some who were--as they thought--exceptionally lucky: the
firms they worked for were busy enough to let them work two hours'
overtime every night--till half past seven--without stopping for tea. Most of these arrived home about eight, completely flattened out. Then
they had some tea and a wash and before they knew where they were it
was about half past nine. Then they went to sleep again till half past
four or five the next morning. They were usually so tired when they got home at night that they never
had any inclination for study or any kind of self-improvement, even if
they had had the time. They had plenty of time to study during the
winter: and their favourite subject then was, how to preserve
themselves from starving to death. This overtime, however, was the exception, for although in former years
it had been the almost invariable rule to work till half past seven in
summer, most of the firms now made a practice of ceasing work at
five-thirty. The revolution which had taken place in this matter was a
favourite topic of conversation amongst the men, who spoke regretfully
of the glorious past, when things were busy, and they used to work
fifteen, sixteen and even eighteen hours a day. But nowadays there
were nearly as many chaps out of work in the summer as in the winter. They used to discuss the causes of the change. One was, of course, the
fact that there was not so much building going on as formerly, and
another was the speeding up and slave-driving, and the manner in which
the work was now done, or rather scamped. As old Philpot said, he
could remember the time, when he was a nipper, when such a 'job' as
that at 'The Cave' would have lasted at least six months, and they
would have had more hands on it too! But it would have been done
properly, not messed up like that was: all the woodwork would have been
rubbed down with pumice stone and water: all the knots cut out and the
holes properly filled up, and the work properly rubbed down with
glass-paper between every coat. But nowadays the only place you'd see
a bit of pumice stone was in a glass case in a museum, with a label on
it. 'Pumice Stone: formerly used by house-painters.' Most of them spoke of those bygone times with poignant regret, but
there were a few--generally fellows who had been contaminated by
contact with Socialists or whose characters had been warped and
degraded by the perusal of Socialist literature--who said that they did
not desire to work overtime at all--ten hours a day were quite enough
for them--in fact they would rather do only eight. What they wanted,
they said, was not more work, but more grub, more clothes, more
leisure, more pleasure and better homes. They wanted to be able to go
for country walks or bicycle rides, to go out fishing or to go to the
seaside and bathe and lie on the beach and so forth. But these were
only a very few; there were not many so selfish as this. The majority
desired nothing but to be allowed to work, and as for their children,
why, 'what was good enough for themselves oughter be good enough for
the kids'. They often said that such things as leisure, culture, pleasure and the
benefits of civilization were never intended for 'the likes of us'. They did not--all--actually say this, but that was what their conduct
amounted to; for they not only refused to help to bring about a better
state of things for their children, but they ridiculed and opposed and
cursed and abused those who were trying to do it for them. The foulest
words that came out of their mouths were directed against the men of
their own class in the House of Commons--the Labour Members--and
especially the Socialists, whom they spoke of as fellows who were too
bloody lazy to work for a living, and who wanted the working classes to
keep them. Some of them said that they did not believe in helping their children
to become anything better than their parents had been because in such
cases the children, when they grew up, 'looked down' upon and were
ashamed of their fathers and mothers! They seemed to think that if
they loved and did their duty to their children, the probability was
that the children would prove ungrateful: as if even if that were true,
it would be any excuse for their indifference. Another cause of the shortage of work was the intrusion into the trade
of so many outsiders: fellows like Sawkins and the other lightweights. Whatever other causes there were, there could be no doubt that the
hurrying and scamping was a very real one. Every 'job' had to be done
at once! as if it were a matter of life or death! It must be finished
by a certain time. If the 'job' was at an empty house, Misery's yarn
was that it was let! the people were coming in at the end of the week! All the
ceilings had to be washed off, the walls stripped and repapered, and
two coats of paint inside and outside the house. New drains were to be
put in, and all broken windows and locks and broken plaster repaired. A number of men--usually about half as many as there should have
been--would be sent to do the work, and one man was put in charge of
the 'job'. These sub-foremen or 'coddies' knew that if they'made
their jobs pay' they would be put in charge of others and be kept on in
preference to other men as long as the firm had any work; so they
helped Misery to scheme and scamp the work and watched and drove the
men under their charge; and these latter poor wretches, knowing that
their only chance of retaining their employment was to 'tear into it',
tore into it like so many maniacs. Instead of cleaning any parts of
the woodwork that were greasy or very dirty, they brushed them over
with a coat of spirit varnish before painting to make sure that the
paint would dry: places where the plaster of the walls was damaged were
repaired with what was humorously called 'garden cement'--which was the
technical term for dirt out of the garden--and the surface was skimmed
over with proper material. Ceilings that were not very dirty were not
washed off, but dusted, and lightly gone over with a thin coat of
whitewash. The old paper was often left upon the walls of rooms that
were supposed to be stripped before being repapered, and to conceal
this the joints of the old paper were rubbed down so that they should
not be perceptible through the new paper. As far as possible, Misery
and the sub-foreman avoided doing the work the customers paid for, and
even what little they did was hurried over anyhow. A reign of terror--the terror of the sack--prevailed on all the 'jobs',
which were carried on to the accompaniment of a series of alarums and
excursions: no man felt safe for a moment: at the most unexpected times
Misery would arrive and rush like a whirlwind all over the 'job'. If
he happened to find a man having a spell the culprit was immediately
discharged, but he did not get the opportunity of doing this very often
for everybody was too terrified to leave off working even for a few
minutes' rest. From the moment of Hunter's arrival until his departure, a state of
panic, hurry, scurry and turmoil reigned. His strident voice rang
through the house as he bellowed out to them to 'Rouse themselves! We've got another job to
start when you've done this!' Occasionally, just to keep the others up to concert pitch, he used to
sack one of the men for being too slow. They all trembled before him
and ran about whenever he spoke to or called them, because they knew
that there were always a lot of other men out of work who would be
willing and eager to fill their places if they got the sack. Although it was now summer, and the Distress Committee and all the
other committees had suspended operations, there was still always a
large number of men hanging about the vicinity of the Fountain on the
Parade--The Wage Slave Market. When men finished up for the firm they
were working for they usually made for that place. Any master in want
of a wage slave for a few hours, days or weeks could always buy one
there. The men knew this and they also knew that if they got the sack
from one firm it was no easy matter to get another job, and that was
why they were terrified. When Misery was gone--to repeat the same performance at some other
job--the sub-foreman would have a crawl round to see how the chaps were
getting on: to find out if they had used up all their paint yet, or to
bring them some putty so that they should not have to leave their work
to go to get anything themselves: and then very often Rushton himself
would come and stalk quietly about the house or stand silently behind
the men, watching them as they worked. He seldom spoke to anyone, but
just stood there like a graven image, or walked about like a dumb
animal--a pig, as the men used to say. This individual had a very
exalted idea of his own importance and dignity. One man got the sack
for presuming to stop him in the street to ask some questions about
some work that was being done. Misery went round to all the jobs the next day and told all the
'coddies' to tell all the hands that they were never to speak to Mr
Rushton if they met him in the street, and the following Saturday the
man who had so offended was given his back day, ostensibly because
there was nothing for him to do, but really for the reason stated above. There was one job, the outside of a large house that stood on elevated
ground overlooking the town. The men who were working there were even
more than usually uncomfortable, for it was said that Rushton used to
sit in his office and watch them through a telescope. Sometimes, when it was really necessary to get a job done by a certain
time, they had to work late, perhaps till eight or nine o'clock. No
time was allowed for tea, but some of them brought sufficient food with
them in the morning to enable them to have a little about six o'clock
in the evening. Others arranged for their children to bring them some
tea from home. As a rule, they partook of this without stopping work:
they had it on the floor beside them and ate and drank and worked at
the same time--a paint-brushful of white lead in one hand, and a piece
of bread and margarine in the other. On some jobs, if the 'coddy'
happened to be a decent sort, they posted a sentry to look out for
Hunter or Rushton while the others knocked off for a few minutes to
snatch a mouthful of grub; but it was not safe always to do this, for
there was often some crawling sneak with an ambition to become a
'coddy' who would not scruple to curry favour with Misery by reporting
the crime. As an additional precaution against the possibility of any of the men
idling or wasting their time, each one was given a time-sheet on which
he was required to account for every minute of the day. The form of
these sheets vary slightly with different firms: that of Rushton & Co.,
was as shown. TIME SHEET
OF WORK DONE BY IN THE EMPLOY OF
RUSHTON & CO
BUILDERS & DECORATORS : MUGSBOROUGH

NO SMOKING OR INTOXICANTS ALLOWED DURING WORKING HOURS

EACH PIECE OF WORK MUST BE FULLY DESCRIBED, WHAT IT WAS, AND HOW LONG
IT TOOK TO DO. -----+---------------+-----------+-----------+-------+------------
| | Time When | Time When | |
| Where Working | Started | Finished | Hours | What Doing
-----+---------------+-----------+-----------+-------+------------ Sat
| | | | |
-----+---------------+-----------+-----------+-------+------------ Mon
| | | | |
-----+---------------+-----------+-----------+-------+------------ Tues
| | | | |
-----+---------------+-----------+-----------+-------+------------ Wed
| | | | |
-----+---------------+-----------+-----------+-------+------------ Thur
| | | | |
-----+---------------+-----------+-----------+-------+------------ Fri
| | | | |
-----+---------------+-----------+-----------+-------+------------
| | Total Hours | |
-----+---------------+-----------+-----------+-------+------------


One Monday morning Misery gave each of the sub-foremen an envelope
containing one of the firm's memorandum forms. Crass opened his and
found the following:

Crass

When you are on a job with men under you, check and initial their
time-sheets every night. If they are called away and sent to some other job, or stood off, check
and initial their time-sheets as they leave your job. Any man coming on your job during the day, you must take note of the
exact time of his arrival, and see that his sheet is charged right. Any man who is slow or lazy, or any man that you notice talking more
than is necessary during working hours, you must report him to Mr
Hunter. We expect you and the other foremen to help us to carry out
these rules, AND ANY INFORMATION GIVEN US ABOUT ANY MAN IS TREATED IN
CONFIDENCE. Note: This applies to all men of all trades who come on the jobs of
which you are the foreman. Every week the time-sheets were scrutinized, and every now and then a
man would be 'had up on the carpet' in the office before Rushton and
Misery, and interrogated as to why he had taken fifteen hours to do ten
hours work? In the event of the accused being unable to give a
satisfactory explanation of his conduct he was usually sacked on the
spot. Misery was frequently called 'up on the carpet' himself. If he made a mistake in figuring out a 'job', and gave in too high a
tender for it, so that the firm did not get the work, Rushton grumbled. If the price was so low that there was not enough profit, Rushton was
very unpleasant about it, and whenever it happened that there was not
only no profit but an actual loss, Rushton created such a terrible
disturbance that Misery was nearly frightened to death and used to get
on his bicycle and rush off to the nearest 'job' and howl and bellow at
the 'chaps' to get it done. All the time the capabilities of the men--especially with regard to
speed--were carefully watched and noted: and whenever there was a
slackness of work and it was necessary to discharge some hands those
that were slow or took too much pains were weeded out: this of course
was known to the men and it had the desired effect upon them. In justice to Rushton and Hunter, it must be remembered that there was
a certain amount of excuse for all this driving and cheating, because
they had to compete with all the other firms, who conducted their
business in precisely the same way. It was not their fault, but the
fault of the system. A dozen firms tendered for every 'job', and of course the lowest tender
usually obtained the work. Knowing this, they all cut the price down
to the lowest possible figure and the workmen had to suffer. The trouble was that there were too many'masters'. It would have been
far better for the workmen if nine out of every ten of the employers
had never started business. Then the others would have been able to
get a better price for their work, and the men might have had better
wages and conditions. The hands, however, made no such allowances or
excuses as these for Misery and Rushton. They never thought or spoke
of them except with hatred and curses. But whenever either of them
came to the 'job' the 'coddies' cringed and grovelled before them,
greeting them with disgustingly servile salutations, plentifully
interspersed with the word 'Sir', greetings which were frequently
either ignored altogether or answered with an inarticulate grunt. They
said 'Sir' at nearly every second word: it made one feel sick to hear
them because it was not courtesy: they were never courteous to each
other, it was simply abject servility and self-contempt. One of the results of all the frenzied hurrying was that every now and
then there was an accident: somebody got hurt: and it was strange that
accidents were not more frequent, considering the risks that were
taken. When they happened to be working on ladders in busy streets
they were not often allowed to have anyone to stand at the foot, and
the consequence was that all sorts and conditions of people came into
violent collision with the bottoms of the ladders. Small boys playing
in the reckless manner characteristic of their years rushed up against
them. Errand boys, absorbed in the perusal of penny instalments of the
adventures of Claude Duval, and carrying large baskets of
green-groceries, wandered into them. People with large feet became
entangled in them. Fat persons of both sexes who thought it unlucky to
walk underneath, tried to negotiate the narrow strip of pavement
between the foot of the ladder and the kerb, and in their passage
knocked up against the ladder and sometimes fell into the road. Nursemaids wheeling perambulators--lolling over the handle, which they
usually held with their left hands, the right holding a copy of Orange
Blossoms or some halfpenny paper, and so interested in the story of the
Marquis of Lymejuice--a young man of noble presence and fabulous
wealth, with a drooping golden moustache and very long legs, who,
notwithstanding the diabolical machinations of Lady Sibyl Malvoise, who
loves him as well as a woman with a name like that is capable of loving
anyone, is determined to wed none other than the scullery-maid at the
Village Inn--inevitably bashed the perambulators into the ladders. Even when the girls were not reading they nearly always ran into the
ladders, which seemed to possess a magnetic attraction for
perambulators and go-carts of all kinds, whether propelled by nurses or
mothers. Sometimes they would advance very cautiously towards the
ladder: then, when they got very near, hesitate a little whether to go
under or run the risk of falling into the street by essaying the narrow
passage: then they would get very close up to the foot of the ladder,
and dodge and dance about, and give the cart little pushes from side to
side, until at last the magnetic influence exerted itself and the
perambulator crashed into the ladder, perhaps at the very moment that
the man at the top was stretching out to do some part of the work
almost beyond his reach. Once Harlow had just started painting some rainpipes from the top of a
40-ft ladder when one of several small boys who were playing in the
street ran violently against the foot. Harlow was so startled that he
dropped his brushes and clutched wildly at the ladder, which turned
completely round and slid about six feet along the parapet into the
angle of the wall, with Harlow hanging beneath by his hands. The paint
pot was hanging by a hook from one of the rungs, and the jerk scattered
the brown paint it contained all over Harlow and all over the brickwork
of the front of the house. He managed to descend safely by clasping
his legs round the sides of the ladder and sliding down. When Misery
came there was a row about what he called carelessness. And the next
day Harlow had to wear his Sunday trousers to work. On another occasion they were painting the outside of a house called
'Gothic Lodge'. At one corner it had a tower surmounted by a spire or
steeple, and this steeple terminated with an ornamental wrought-iron
pinnacle which had to be painted. The ladder they had was not quite
long enough, and besides that, as it had to stand in a sort of a
courtyard at the base of the tower, it was impossible to slant it
sufficiently: instead of lying along the roof of the steeple, it was
sticking up in the air. When Easton went up to paint the pinnacle he had to stand on almost the
very top rung of the ladder, to be exact, the third from the top, and
lean over to steady himself by holding on to the pinnacle with his left
hand while he used the brush with his right. As it was only about
twenty minutes' work there were two men to hold the foot of the ladder. It was cheaper to do it this way than to rig up a proper scaffold,
which would have entailed perhaps two hours' work for two or three men. Of course it was very dangerous, but that did not matter at all,
because even if the man fell it would make no difference to the
firm--all the men were insured and somehow or other, although they
frequently had narrow escapes, they did not often come to grief. On this occasion, just as Easton was finishing he felt the pinnacle
that he was holding on to give way, and he got such a fright that his
heart nearly stopped beating. He let go his hold and steadied himself
on the ladder as well as he was able, and when he had descended three
or four steps--into comparative safety--he remained clinging
convulsively to the ladder and feeling so limp that he was unable to go
down any further for several minutes. When he arrived at the bottom
and the others noticed how white and trembling he was, he told them
about the pinnacle being loose, and the 'coddy' coming along just then,
they told him about it, and suggested that it should be repaired, as
otherwise it might fall down and hurt someone: but the 'coddy' was
afraid that if they reported it they might be blamed for breaking it,
and the owner might expect the firm to put it right for nothing, so
they decided to say nothing about it. The pinnacle is still on the
apex of the steeple waiting for a sufficiently strong wind to blow it
down on somebody's head. When the other men heard of Easton's 'narrow shave', most of them said
that it would have served him bloody well right if he had fallen and
broken his neck: he should have refused to go up at all without a
proper scaffold. If Misery or the
coddy had ordered any of THEM to go up and paint the pinnacle off that
ladder, they would have chucked their tools down and demanded their
ha'pence! That was what they said, but somehow or other it never happened that
any of them ever 'chucked their tools down' at all, although such
dangerous jobs were of very frequent occurrence. The scamping business was not confined to houses or properties of an
inferior class: it was the general rule. Large good-class houses,
villas and mansions, the residences of wealthy people, were done in
exactly the same way. Generally in such places costly and beautiful
materials were spoilt in the using. There was a large mansion where the interior woodwork--the doors,
windows and staircase--had to be finished in white enamel. It was
rather an old house and the woodwork needed rubbing down and filling up
before being repainted, but of course there was not time for that, so
they painted it without properly preparing it and when it was enamelled
the rough, uneven surface of the wood looked horrible: but the owner
appeared quite satisfied because it was nice and shiny. The
dining-room of the same house was papered with a beautiful and
expensive plush paper. The ground of this wall-hanging was made to
imitate crimson watered silk, and it was covered with a raised pattern
in plush of the same colour. The price marked on the back of this
paper in the pattern book was eighteen shillings a roll. Slyme was
paid sixpence a roll for hanging it: the room took ten rolls, so it
cost nine pounds for the paper and five shillings to hang it! To fix
such a paper as this properly the walls should first be done with a
plain lining paper of the same colour as the ground of the wallpaper
itself, because unless the paperhanger 'lapps' the joints--which should
not be done--they are apt to open a little as the paper dries and to
show the white wall underneath--Slyme suggested this lining to Misery,
who would not entertain the idea for a moment--they had gone to quite
enough expense as it was, stripping the old paper off! So Slyme went ahead, and as he had to make his wages, he could not
spend a great deal of time over it. Some of the joints were 'lapped'
and some were butted, and two or three weeks after the owner of the
house moved in, as the paper became more dry, the joints began to open
and to show the white plaster of the wall, and then Owen had to go
there with a small pot of crimson paint and a little brush, and touch
out the white line. While he was doing this he noticed and touched up a number of other
faults; places where Slyme--in his haste to get the work done--had
slobbered and smeared the face of the paper with fingermarks and paste. The same ghastly mess was made of several other 'jobs' besides this
one, and presently they adopted the plan of painting strips of colour
on the wall in the places where the joints would come, so that if they
opened the white wall would not show: but it was found that the paste
on the back of the paper dragged the paint off the wall, and when the
joints opened the white streaks showed all the same, so Misery
abandoned all attempts to prevent joints showing, and if a customer
complained, he sent someone to 'touch it up': but the lining paper was
never used, unless the customer or the architect knew enough about the
work to insist upon it. In other parts of the same house the ceilings, the friezes, and the
dados, were covered with 'embossed' or'relief' papers. These hangings
require very careful handling, for the raised parts are easily damaged;
but the men who fixed them were not allowed to take the pains and time
necessary to make good work: consequently in many places--especially at
the joints--the pattern was flattened out and obliterated. The ceiling of the drawing-room was done with a very thick high-relief
paper that was made in sheets about two feet square. These squares
were not very true in shape: they had evidently warped in drying after
manufacture: to make them match anything like properly would need
considerable time and care. But the men were not allowed to take the
necessary time. The result was that when it was finished it presented
a sort of 'higgledy-piggledy' appearance. But it didn't matter:
nothing seemed to matter except to get it done. One would think from
the way the hands were driven and chivvied and hurried over the work
that they were being paid five or six shillings an hour instead of as
many pence. 'For God's sake
get it done! We're losing money over this
"job"! If you chaps don't wake up and move a bit quicker, I shall see
if I can't get somebody else who will.' These costly embossed decorations were usually finished in white; but
instead of carefully coating them with specially prepared paint of
patent distemper, which would need two or three coats, they slobbered
one thick coat of common whitewash on to it with ordinary whitewash
brushes. This was a most economical way to get over it, because it made it
unnecessary to stop up the joints beforehand--the whitewash filled up
all the cracks: and it also filled up the hollow parts, the crevices
and interstices of the ornament, destroying the sharp outlines of the
beautiful designs and reducing the whole to a lumpy, formless mass. But
that did not matter either, so long as they got it done. The architect didn't notice it, because he knew that the more Rushton &
Co. made out of the 'job', the more he himself would make. The man who had to pay for the work didn't notice it; he had the
fullest confidence in the architect. At the risk of wearying the long-suffering reader, mention must be made
of an affair that happened at this particular 'job'. The windows were all fitted with venetian blinds. The gentleman for
whom all the work was being done had only just purchased the house, but
he preferred roller blinds: he had had roller blinds in his former
residence--which he had just sold--and as these roller blinds were
about the right size, he decided to have them fitted to the windows of
his new house: so he instructed Mr Rushton to have all the venetian
blinds taken down and stored away up in the loft under the roof. Mr
Rushton promised to have this done; but they were not ALL put away
under the roof: he had four of them taken to his own place and fitted
up in the conservatory. They were a little too large, so they had to
be narrowed before they were fixed. The sequel was rather interesting, for it happened that when the
gentleman attempted to take the roller blinds from his old house, the
person to whom he had sold it refused to allow them to be removed;
claiming that when he bought the house, he bought the blinds also. There was a little dispute, but eventually it was settled that way and
the gentleman decided that he would have the venetian blinds in his new
house after all, and instructed the people who moved his furniture to
take the venetians down again from under the roof, and refix them, and
then, of course, it was discovered that four of the blinds were
missing. Mr Rushton was sent for, and he said that he couldn't
understand it at all! The only possible explanation that he could
think of was that some of his workmen must have stolen them! He would
make inquiries, and endeavour to discover the culprits, but in any
case, as this had happened while things were in his charge, if he did
not succeed in recovering them, he would replace them. As the blinds had been narrowed to fit the conservatory he had to have
four new ones made. The customer was of course quite satisfied, although very sorry for Mr
Rushton. Rushton told the gentleman
that he would be astonished if he knew all the facts: the difficulties
one has to contend with in dealing with working men: one has to watch
them continually! directly one's back is turned they leave off working! They come late in the morning, and go home before the proper time at
night, and then unless one actually happens to catch them--they charge
the full number of hours on their time sheets! Every now and then
something would be missing, and of course Nobody knew anything about
it. Sometimes one would go unexpectedly to a 'job' and find a lot of
them drunk. Of course one tried to cope with these evils by means of
rules and restrictions and organization, but it was very difficult--one
could not be everywhere or have eyes at the back of one's head. The
gentleman said that he had some idea of what it was like: he had had
something to do with the lower orders himself at one time and another,
and he knew they needed a lot of watching. Rushton felt rather sick over this affair, but he consoled himself by
reflecting that he had got clear away with several valuable rose trees
and other plants which he had stolen out of the garden, and that a
ladder which had been discovered in the hayloft over the stable and
taken--by his instructions--to the 'yard' when the 'job' was finished
had not been missed. Another circumstance which helped to compensate for the blinds was that
the brass fittings throughout the house, finger-plates, sash-lifts and
locks, bolts and door handles, which were supposed to be all new and
which the customer had paid a good price for--were really all the old
ones which Misery had had re-lacquered and refixed. There was nothing unusual about this affair of the blinds, for Rushton
and Misery robbed everybody. They made a practice of annexing every
thing they could lay their hands upon, provided it could be done
without danger to themselves. They never did anything of a heroic or
dare-devil character: they had not the courage to break into banks or
jewellers' shops in the middle of the night, or to go out picking
pockets: all their robberies were of the sneak-thief order. At one house that they 'did up' Misery made a big haul. He had to get
up into the loft under the roof to see what was the matter with the
water tank. When he got up there he found a very fine hall gas lamp
made of wrought brass and copper with stained and painted glass sides. Although covered with dust, it was otherwise in perfect condition, so
Misery had it taken to his own house and cleaned up and fixed in the
hall. In the same loft there were a lot of old brass picture rods and other
fittings, and three very good planks, each about ten feet in length;
these latter had been placed across the rafters so that one could walk
easily and safely over to the tank. But Misery thought they would be
very useful to the firm for whitewashing ceilings and other work, so he
had them taken to the yard along with the old brass, which was worth
about fourpence a pound. There was another house that had to be painted inside: the people who
used to live there had only just left: they had moved to some other
town, and the house had been re-let before they vacated it. The new
tenant had agreed with the agent that the house was to be renovated
throughout before he took possession. The day after the old tenants moved away, the agent gave Rushton the
key so that he could go to see what was to be done and give an estimate
for the work. While Rushton and Misery were looking over the house they discovered a
large barometer hanging on the wall behind the front door: it had been
overlooked by those who removed the furniture. Before returning the
key to the agent, Rushton sent one of his men to the house for the
barometer, which he kept in his office for a few weeks to see if there
would be any inquiries about it. If there had been, it would have been
easy to say that he had brought it there for safety--to take care of
till he could find the owner. The people to whom it belonged thought
the thing had been lost or stolen in transit, and afterwards one of the
workmen who had assisted to pack and remove the furniture was dismissed
from his employment on suspicion of having had something to do with its
disappearance. No one ever thought of Rushton in connection with the
matter, so after about a month he had it taken to his own dwelling and
hung up in the hall near the carved oak marble-topped console table
that he had sneaked last summer from 596 Grand Parade. And there it hangs unto this day: and close behind it, supported by
cords of crimson silk, is a beautiful bevelled-edged card about a foot
square, and upon this card is written, in letters of gold: 'Christ is
the head of this house; the unseen Guest at every meal, the silent
Listener to every conversation.' And on the other side of the barometer is another card of the same kind
and size which says: 'As for me and my house we will serve the Lord.' From another place they stole two large brass chandeliers. This house
had been empty for a very long time, and its owner--who did not reside
in the town--wished to sell it. The agent, to improve the chances of a
sale, decided to have the house overhauled and redecorated.'s tender being the lowest, they got the work. The chandeliers in
the drawing-room and the dining-room were of massive brass, but they
were all blackened and tarnished. Misery suggested to the agent that
they could be cleaned and relacquered, which would make them equal to
new: in fact, they would be better than new ones, for such things as
these were not made now, and for once Misery was telling the truth. The agent agreed and the work was done: it was an extra, of course, and
as the firm got twice as much for the job as they paid for having it
done, they were almost satisfied. When this and all the other work was finished they sent in their
account and were paid. Some months afterwards the house was sold, and Nimrod interviewed the
new proprietor with the object of securing the order for any work that
he might want done. The papers on the walls of
several of the rooms were not to the new owner's taste, and, of course,
the woodwork would have to be re-painted to harmonize with the new
paper. There was a lot of other work besides this: a new conservatory
to build, a more modern bath and heating apparatus to be put in, and
the electric light to be installed, the new people having an objection
to the use of gas. The specifications were prepared by an architect, and Rushton secured
the work. When the chandeliers were taken down, the men, instructed by
Misery, put them on a handcart, and covered them over with sacks and
dust-sheets and took them to the front shop, where they were placed for
sale with the other stock. When all the work at the house was finished, it occurred to Rushton and
Nimrod that when the architect came to examine and pass the work before
giving them the certificate that would enable them to present their
account, he might remember the chandeliers and inquire what had become
of them. So they were again placed on the handcart, covered with sacks
and dust-sheets, taken back to the house and put up in the loft under
the roof so that, if he asked for them, there they were. The architect came, looked ever the house, passed the work, and gave
his certificate; he never mentioned or thought of the chandeliers. The
owner of the house was present and asked for Rushton's bill, for which
he at once gave them a cheque and Rushton and Misery almost grovelled
and wallowed on the ground before him. Throughout the whole interview
the architect and the 'gentleman' had kept their hats on, but Rushton
and Nimrod had been respectfully uncovered all the time, and as they
followed the other two about the house their bearing had been
expressive of the most abject servility. When the architect and the owner were gone the two chandeliers were
taken down again from under the roof, and put upon a handcart, covered
over with sacks and dust-sheets and taken back to the shop and again
placed for sale with the other stock. These are only a few of the petty thefts committed by these people. To
give anything approaching a full account of all the rest would require
a separate volume. As a result of all the hurrying and scamping, every now and again the
men found that they had worked themselves out of a job. Several times during the summer the firm had scarcely anything to do,
and nearly everybody had to stand off for a few days or weeks. When Newman got his first start in the early part of the year he had
only been working for about a fortnight when--with several others--he
was'stood off'. Fortunately, however, the day after he left Rushtons,
he was lucky enough to get a start for another firm, Driver and
Botchit, where he worked for nearly a month, and then he was again
given a job at Rushton's, who happened to be busy again. He did not have to lose much time, for he 'finished up' for Driver and
Botchit on a Thursday night and on the Friday he interviewed Misery,
who told him they were about to commence a fresh 'job' on the following
Monday morning at six o'clock, and that he could start with them. So
this time Newman was only out of work the Friday and Saturday, which
was another stroke of luck, because it often happens that a man has to
lose a week or more after 'finishing up' for one firm before he gets
another 'job'. All through the summer Crass continued to be the general 'colour-man',
most of his time being spent at the shop mixing up colours for all the
different 'jobs'. He also acted as a sort of lieutenant to Hunter,
who, as the reader has already been informed, was not a practical
painter. When there was a price to be given for some painting work,
Misery sometimes took Crass with him to look over it and help him to
estimate the amount of time and material it would take. Crass was thus
in a position of more than ordinary importance, not only being superior
to the 'hands', but also ranking above the other sub-foremen who had
charge of the 'jobs'. It was Crass and these sub-foremen who were to blame for most of the
scamping and driving, because if it had not been for them neither
Rushton nor Hunter would have known how to scheme the work. Of course, Hunter and Rushton wanted to drive and scamp, but not being
practical men they would not have known how if it had not been for
Crass and the others, who put them up to all the tricks of the trade. Crass knew that when the men stayed till half past seven they were in
the habit of ceasing work for a few minutes to eat a mouthful of grub
about six o'clock, so he suggested to Misery that as it was not
possible to stop this, it would be a good plan to make the men stop
work altogether from half past five till six, and lose half an hour's
pay; and to make up the time, instead of leaving off at seven-thirty,
they could work till eight. Misery had known of and winked at the former practice, for he knew that
the men could not work all that time without something to eat, but
Crass's suggestion seemed a much better way, and it was adopted. When the other masters in Mugsborough heard of this great reform they
all followed suit, and it became the rule in that town, whenever it was
necessary to work overtime, for the men to stay till eight instead of
half past seven as formerly, and they got no more pay than before. Previous to this summer it had been the almost invariable rule to have
two men in each room that was being painted, but Crass pointed out to
Misery that under such circumstances they wasted time talking to each
other, and they also acted as a check on one another: each of them
regulated the amount of work he did by the amount the other did, and if
the 'job' took too long it was always difficult to decide which of the
two was to blame: but if they were made to work alone, each of them
would be on his mettle; he would not know how much the others were
doing, and the fear of being considered slow in comparison with others
would make them all tear into it all they could. Misery thought this a very good idea, so the solitary system was
introduced, and as far as practicable, one room, one man became the
rule. They even tried to make the men distemper large ceilings single-handed,
and succeeded in one or two cases, but after several ceilings had been
spoilt and had to be washed off and done over again, they gave that up:
but nearly all the other work was now arranged on the'solitary
system', and it worked splendidly: each man was constantly in a state
of panic as to whether the others were doing more work than himself. Another suggestion that Crass made to Misery was that the sub-foremen
should be instructed never to send a man into a room to prepare it for
painting. 'If you sends a man into a room to get it ready,' said Crass, ''e makes
a meal of it! 'E spends as much time messin' about rubbin' down and
stoppin' up as it would take to paint it. But,' he added, with a
cunning leer, 'give 'em a bit of putty and a little bit of glass-paper,
and the paint at the stand, and then 'e gits it in 'is mind as 'e's
going in there to paint it! And 'e doesn't mess about much over the
preparing of it'. These and many other suggestions--all sorts of devices for scamping and
getting over the work--were schemed out by Crass and the other
sub-foremen, who put them into practice and showed them to Misery and
Rushton in the hope of currying favour with them and being 'kept on'. And between the lot of them they made life a veritable hell for
themselves, and the hands, and everybody else around them. And the
mainspring of it all was--the greed and selfishness of one man, who
desired to accumulate money! For this was the only object of all the
driving and bullying and hatred and cursing and unhappiness--to make
money for Rushton, who evidently considered himself a deserving case. It is sad and discreditable, but nevertheless true, that some of the
more selfish of the philanthropists often became weary of well-doing,
and lost all enthusiasm in the good cause. At such times they used to
say that they were 'Bloody well fed up' with the whole business and
'Tired of tearing their bloody guts out for the benefit of other
people' and every now and then some of these fellows would 'chuck up'
work, and go on the booze, sometimes stopping away for two or three
days or a week at a time. And then, when it was all over, they came
back, very penitent, to ask for another'start', but they generally
found that their places had been filled. If they happened to be good'sloggers'--men who made a practice of
'tearing their guts out' when they did work--they were usually
forgiven, and after being admonished by Misery, permitted to resume
work, with the understanding that if ever it occurred again they would
get the 'infernal'--which means the final and irrevocable--sack. There was once a job at a shop that had been a high-class restaurant
kept by a renowned Italian chef. It had been known as

'MACARONI'S ROYAL ITALIAN CAFE'

Situated on the Grand Parade, it was a favourite resort of the 'Elite',
who frequented it for afternoon tea and coffee and for little suppers
after the theatre. It had plate-glass windows, resplendent with gilding, marble-topped
tables with snow white covers, vases of flowers, and all the other
appurtenances of glittering cut glass and silver. The obsequious
waiters were in evening dress, the walls were covered with lofty
plate-glass mirrors in carved and gilded frames, and at certain hours
of the day and night an orchestra consisting of two violins and a harp
discoursed selections of classic music. But of late years the business had not been paying, and finally the
proprietor went bankrupt and was sold out. The place was shut up for
several months before the shop was let to a firm of dealers in fancy
articles, and the other part was transformed into flats. When the men went there to 'do
it up' they found the interior of the house in a state of indescribable
filth: the ceilings discoloured with smoke and hung with cobwebs, the
wallpapers smeared and black with grease, the handrails and the newel
posts of the staircase were clammy with filth, and the edges of the
doors near the handles were blackened with greasy dirt and
finger-marks. The tops of the skirtings, the mouldings of the doors,
the sashes of the windows and the corners of the floors were thick with
the accumulated dust of years. In one of the upper rooms which had evidently been used as a nursery or
playroom for the children of the renowned chef, the wallpaper for about
two feet above the skirting was blackened with grease and ornamented
with childish drawings made with burnt sticks and blacklead pencils,
the door being covered with similar artistic efforts, to say nothing of
some rude attempts at carving, evidently executed with an axe or a
hammer. But all this filth was nothing compared with the unspeakable
condition of the kitchen and scullery, a detailed description of which
would cause the blood of the reader to curdle, and each particular hair
of his head to stand on end. Let it suffice to say that the walls, the ceiling, the floor, the
paintwork, the gas-stove, the kitchen range, the dresser and everything
else were uniformly absolutely and literally--black. And the black was
composed of soot and grease. In front of the window there was a fixture--a kind of bench or table,
deeply scored with marks of knives like a butcher's block. The sill of
the window was about six inches lower than the top of the table, so
that between the glass of the lower sash of the window, which had
evidently never been raised, and the back of the table, there was a
long narrow cavity or trough, about six inches deep, four inches wide
and as long as the width of the window, the sill forming the bottom of
the cavity. This trough was filled with all manner of abominations: fragments of
fat and decomposed meat, legs of rabbits and fowls, vegetable matter,
broken knives and forks, and hair: and the glass of the window was
caked with filth of the same description. This job was the cause of the sacking of the Semi-drunk and another man
named Bill Bates, who were sent into the kitchen to clean it down and
prepare it for painting and distempering. They commenced to do it, but it made them feel so ill that they went
out and had a pint each, and after that they made another start at it. But it was not long before they felt that it was imperatively necessary
to have another drink. So they went over to the pub, and this time
they had two pints each. Bill paid for the first two and then the
Semi-drunk refused to return to work unless Bill would consent to have
another pint with him before going back. When they had drunk the two
pints, they decided--in order to save themselves the trouble and risk
of coming away from the job--to take a couple of quarts back with them
in two bottles, which the landlord of the pub lent them, charging
twopence on each bottle, to be refunded when they were returned. When they got back to the job they found the 'coddy' in the kitchen,
looking for them and he began to talk and grumble, but the Semi-drunk
soon shut him up: he told him he could either have a drink out of one
of the bottles or a punch in the bloody nose--whichever he liked! Or
if he did not fancy either of these alternatives, he could go to hell! As the 'coddy' was a sensible man he took the beer and advised them to
pull themselves together and try to get some work done before Misery
came, which they promised to do. When the 'coddy' was gone they made another attempt at the work. Misery
came a little while afterwards and began shouting at them because he
said he could not see what they had done. It looked as if they had
been asleep all the morning: Here it was nearly ten o'clock, and as far
as he could see, they had done Nothing! When he was gone they drank the rest of the beer and then they began to
feel inclined to laugh. What did they care for Hunter or Rushton
either? They left off scraping and
scrubbing, and began throwing buckets of water over the dresser and the
walls, laughing uproariously all the time. 'We'll show the b--s how to wash down paintwork!' shouted the
Semi-drunk, as he stood in the middle of the room and hurled a pailful
of water over the door of the cupboard. 'Bring us another bucket of
water, Bill.' Bill was out in the scullery filling his pail under the tap, and
laughing so much that he could scarcely stand. As soon as it was full
he passed it to the Semi-drunk, who threw it bodily, pail and all, on
to the bench in front of the window, smashing one of the panes of
glass. The water poured off the table and all over the floor. Bill brought the next pailful in and threw it at the kitchen door,
splitting one of the panels from top to bottom, and then they threw
about half a dozen more pailfuls over the dresser. 'We'll show the b--rs how to clean paintwork,' they shouted, as they
hurled the buckets at the walls and doors. By this time the floor was deluged with water, which mingled with the
filth and formed a sea of mud. They left the two taps running in the scullery and as the waste pipe of
the sink was choked up with dirt, the sink filled up and overflowed
like a miniature Niagara. The water ran out under the doors into the back-yard, and along the
passage out to the front door. But Bill Bates and the Semi-drunk
remained in the kitchen, smashing the pails at the walls and doors and
the dresser, and cursing and laughing hysterically. They had just filled the two buckets and were bringing them into the
kitchen when they heard Hunter's voice in the passage, shouting out
inquiries as to where all that water came from. Then they heard him
advancing towards them and they stood waiting for him with the pails in
their hands, and directly he opened the door and put his head into the
room they let fly the two pails at him. Unfortunately, they were too
drunk and excited to aim straight. One pail struck the middle rail of
the door and the other the wall by the side of it. Misery hastily shut the door again and ran upstairs, and presently the
'coddy' came down and called out to them from the passage. They went out to see what he wanted, and he told them that Misery had
gone to the office to get their wages ready: they were to make out
their time sheets and go for their money at once. Misery had said that
if they were not there in ten minutes he would have the pair of them
locked up. The Semi-drunk said that nothing would suit them better than to have
all their pieces at once--they had spent all their money and wanted
another drink. Bill Bates concurred, so they borrowed a piece of
blacklead pencil from the 'coddy' and made out their time sheets, took
off their aprons, put them into their tool bags, and went to the office
for their money, which Misery passed out to them through the trap-door. The news of this exploit spread all over the town during that day and
evening, and although it was in July, the next morning at six o'clock
there were half a dozen men waiting at the yard to ask Misery if there
was 'any chance of a job'. Bill Bates and the Semi-drunk had had their spree and had got the sack
for it and most of the chaps said it served them right. Such conduct
as that was going too far. Most of them would have said the same thing no matter what the
circumstances might have been. They had very little sympathy for each
other at any time. Often, when, for instance, one man was sent away from one 'job' to
another, the others would go into his room and look at the work he had
been doing, and pick out all the faults they could find and show them
to each other, making all sorts of ill-natured remarks about the absent
one meanwhile. 'Jist run yer nose over that door, Jim,' one would say
in a tone of disgust. Did yer ever see sich a
mess in yer life? And the other man would
shake his head sadly and say that although the one who had done it had
never been up to much as a workman, he could do it a bit better than
that if he liked, but the fact was that he never gave himself time to
do anything properly: he was always tearing his bloody guts out! Why,
he'd only been in this room about four hours from start to finish! He
ought to have a watering cart to follow him about, because he worked at
such a hell of a rate you couldn't see him for dust! And then the
first man would reply that other people could do as they liked, but for
his part, HE was not going to tear his guts out for nobody! The second man would applaud these sentiments and say that he wasn't
going to tear his out either: and then they would both go back to their
respective rooms and tear into the work for all they were worth, making
the same sort of 'job' as the one they had been criticizing, and
afterwards, when the other's back was turned, each of them in turn
would sneak into the other's room and criticize it and point out the
faults to anyone else who happened to be near at hand. Harlow was working at the place that had been Macaroni's Cafe when one
day a note was sent to him from Hunter at the shop. It was written on
a scrap of wallpaper, and worded in the usual manner of such notes--as
if the writer had studied how to avoid all suspicion of being unduly
civil:

Harlow go to the yard at once take your tools with you. Crass will tell you where you have to go. They were just finishing their dinners when the boy brought this note;
and after reading it aloud for the benefit of the others, Harlow
remarked that it was worded in much the same way in which one would
speak to a dog. The others said nothing; but after he was gone the
other men--who all considered that it was ridiculous for the 'likes of
us' to expect or wish to be treated with common civility--laughed about
it, and said that Harlow was beginning to think he was Somebody: they
supposed it was through readin' all those books what Owen was always
lendin' 'im. And then one of them got a piece of paper and wrote a
note to be given to Harlow at the first opportunity. This note was
properly worded, written in a manner suitable for a gentleman like him,
neatly folded and addressed:


Mr Harlow Esq.,
c/o Macaroni's Royal Cafe
till called for. Mister Harlow,
Dear Sir: Wood you kinely oblige me bi cummin to the paint shop
as soon as you can make it convenient as there is a sealin' to be
wite-woshed hoppin this is not trubbling you to much

I remane
Yours respeckfully
Pontius Pilate. This note was read out for the amusement of the company and afterwards
stored away in the writer's pocket till such a time as an opportunity
should occur of giving it to Harlow. As the writer of the note was on his way back to his room to resume
work he was accosted by a man who had gone into Harlow's room to
criticize it, and had succeeded in finding several faults which he
pointed out to the other, and of course they were both very much
disgusted with Harlow. 'I can't think why the coddy keeps him on the job,' said the first man. 'Between you and me, if I had charge of a job, and Misery sent Harlow
there--I'd send 'im back to the shop.' 'Same as you,' agreed the other as he went back to tear into his own
room. 'Same as you, old man: I shouldn't 'ave 'im neither.' It must not be supposed from this that either of these two men were on
exceptionally bad terms with Harlow; they were just as good friends
with him--to his face--as they were with each other--to each other's
faces--and it was just their way: that was all. If it had been one or both of these two who had gone away instead of
Harlow, just the same things would have been said about them by the
others who remained--it was merely their usual way of speaking about
each other behind each other's backs. It was always the same: if any one of them made a mistake or had an
accident or got into any trouble he seldom or never got any sympathy
from his fellow workmen. On the contrary, most of them at such times
seemed rather pleased than otherwise. There was a poor devil--a stranger in the town; he came from
London--who got the sack for breaking some glass. He had been sent to
'burn off' some old paint of the woodwork of a window. He was not very
skilful in the use of the burning-off lamp, because on the firm when he
had been working in London it was a job that the ordinary hands were
seldom or never called upon to do. There were one or two men who did
it all. For that matter, not many of Rushton's men were very skilful
at it either. It was a job everybody tried to get out of, because
nearly always the lamp went wrong and there was a row about the time
the work took. So they worked this job on to the stranger. This man had been out of work for a long time before he got a start at
Rushton's, and he was very anxious not to lose the job, because he had
a wife and family in London. When the 'coddy' told him to go and burn
off this window he did not like to say that he was not used to the
work: he hoped to be able to do it. But he was very nervous, and the
end was that although he managed to do the burning off all right, just
as he was finishing he accidentally allowed the flame of the lamp to
come into contact with a large pane of glass and broke it. They sent to the shop for a new pane of glass, and the man stayed late
that night and put it in in his own time, thus bearing half the cost of
repairing it. Things were not very busy just then, and on the following Saturday two
of the hands were'stood off'. The stranger was one of them, and
nearly everybody was very pleased. At mealtimes the story of the
broken window was repeatedly told amid jeering laughter. It really
seemed as if a certain amount of indignation was felt that a
stranger--especially such an inferior person as this chap who did not
know how to use a lamp--should have had the cheek to try to earn his
living at all! One thing was very certain--they said, gleefully--he
would never get another job at Rushton's: that was one good thing. And yet they all knew that this accident might have happened to any one
of them. Once a couple of men got the sack because a ceiling they distempered
had to be washed off and done again. It was not really the men's fault
at all: it was a ceiling that needed special treatment and they had not
been allowed to do it properly. But all the same, when they got the sack most of the others laughed and
sneered and were glad. Perhaps because they thought that the fact that
these two unfortunates had been disgraced, increased their own chances
of being 'kept on'. With a few
exceptions, they had an immense amount of respect for Rushton and
Hunter, and very little respect or sympathy for each other. Exactly the same lack of feeling for each other prevailed amongst the
members of all the different trades. Everybody seemed glad if anybody
got into trouble for any reason whatever. There was a garden gate that had been made at the carpenter's shop: it
was not very well put together, and for the usual reason; the man had
not been allowed the time to do it properly. After it was fixed, one
of his shopmates wrote upon it with lead pencil in big letters: 'This
is good work for a joiner. But to hear them talking in the pub of a Saturday afternoon just after
pay-time one would think them the best friends and mates and the most
independent spirits in the world, fellows whom it would be very
dangerous to trifle with, and who would stick up for each other through
thick and thin. All sorts of stories were related of the wonderful
things they had done and said; of jobs they had 'chucked up', and
masters they had 'told off': of pails of whitewash thrown over
offending employers, and of horrible assaults and batteries committed
upon the same. But strange to say, for some reason or other, it seldom
happened that a third party ever witnessed any of these prodigies. It
seemed as if a chivalrous desire to spare the feelings of their victims
had always prevented them from doing or saying anything to them in the
presence of witnesses. When he had drunk a few pints, Crass was a very good hand at these
stories. Here is one that he told in the bar of the Cricketers on the
Saturday afternoon of the same week that Bill Bates and the Semi-drunk
got the sack. The Cricketers was only a few minutes walk from the shop
and at pay-time a number of the men used to go in there to take a drink
before going home. 'Last Thursday night about five o'clock, 'Unter comes inter the
paint-shop an' ses to me, "I wants a pail o' wash made up tonight,
Crass," 'e ses, "ready for fust thing in the mornin'," 'e ses. "Oh," I
ses, lookin' 'im straight in the bloody eye, "Oh, yer do, do
yer?" "Well, you can bloody well make
it yerself!" I ses, "'cos I ain't agoin' to," I ses--just like that. "Wot the 'ell do yer mean," I ses, "by comin' 'ere at this time o'
night with a order like that?" You'd a larfed,' continued
Crass, as he wiped his mouth with the back of his hand after taking
another drink out of his glass, and looking round to note the effect of
the story, 'you'd a larfed if you'd bin there. 'E was fairly
flabbergasted! And wen I said that to 'im I see 'is jaw drop! An'
then 'e started apoligizing and said as 'e 'adn't meant no offence, but
I told 'im bloody straight not to come no more of it. "You bring the
horder at a reasonable time," I ses--just like that--"and I'll attend
to it," I ses, "but not otherwise," I ses.' As he concluded this story, Crass drained his glass and gazed round
upon the audience, who were full of admiration. They looked at each
other and at Crass and nodded their heads approvingly. Yes,
undoubtedly, that was the proper way to deal with such bounders as
Nimrod; take up a strong attitude, an' let 'em see as you'll stand no
nonsense! 'Yer don't blame me, do yer?' 'Why should we put up
with a lot of old buck from the likes of 'im! We're not a lot of
bloody Chinamen, are we?' So far from blaming him, they all assured him that they would have
acted in precisely the same way under similar circumstances. 'For my part, I'm a bloke like this,' said a tall man with a very loud
voice--a chap who nearly fell down dead every time Rushton or Misery
looked at him. 'I'm a bloke like this 'ere: I never stands no cheek
from no gaffers! If a guv'nor ses two bloody words to me, I downs me
tools and I ses to 'im, "Wot! Don't I suit yer, guv'ner? Ain't I done
enuff for yer? Daniel went back to the bathroom. Gimmie me bleedin' a'pence."' If
only everyone would do the same as the tall man--who had just paid for
another round of drinks--things would be a lot more comfortable than
they was. 'Last summer I was workin' for ole Buncer,' said a little man with a
cutaway coat several sizes too large for him. 'I was workin' for ole
Buncer, over at Windley, an' you all knows as 'e don't arf lower it. Well, one day, when I knowed 'e was on the drunk, I 'ad to first coat a
room out--white; so thinks I to meself, "If I buck up I shall be able
to get this lot done by about four o'clock, an' then I can clear orf
'ome. 'Cos I reckoned as 'e'd be about flattened out by that time, an'
you know 'e ain't got no foreman. So I tears into it an' gets this
'ere room done about a quarter past four, an' I'd just got me things
put away for the night w'en 'oo should come fallin' up the bloody
stairs but ole Buncer, drunk as a howl! An' no sooner 'e gits inter
the room than 'e starts yappin' an' rampin'." "Is this 'ere hall
you've done?" "Wotcher bin up to hall day?" 'e ses, an'
'e keeps on shouting' an' swearin' till at last I couldn't stand it no
longer, 'cos you can guess I wasn't in a very good temper with 'im
comin' along jist then w'en I thought I was goin' to get orf a bit
early--so w'en 'e kept on shoutin' I never made no answer to 'im, but
ups with me fist an' I gives 'im a slosh in the dial an' stopped 'is
clock! Then I chucked the pot o' w'ite paint hover 'im, an' kicked 'im
down the bloody stairs.' 'Serve 'im blooming well right, too,' said Crass as he took a fresh
glass of beer from one of the others, who had just'stood' another
round. 'What did the b--r say to that?' replied the little man, ''E picked 'isself up, and
called a keb wot was passin' an' got inter it an' went 'ome; an' I
never seen no more of 'im until about 'arf-past eleven the next day,
w'en I was second-coatin' the room, an' 'e comes up with a noo suit o'
clothes on, an' arsts me if I'd like to come hover to the pub an' 'ave
a drink? So we goes hover, an' 'e calls for a w'iskey an' soda for
isself an' arsts me wot I'd 'ave, so I 'ad the same. An' w'ile we was
gettin' it down us, 'e ses to me, "Ah, Garge," 'e ses. "You losed your
temper with me yesterday,"' 'e ses.' If you 'adn't served 'im as you did you'd most likely 'ave 'ad to
put up with a lot more ole buck.' They all agreed that the little man had done quite right: they all said
that they didn' blame him in the least: they would all have done the
same: in fact, this was the way they all conducted themselves whenever
occasion demanded it. To hear them talk, one would imagine that such
affairs as the recent exploit of Bill Bates and the Semi-drunk were
constantly taking place, instead of only occurring about once in a blue
moon. Crass stood the final round of drinks, and as he evidently thought that
circumstance deserved to be signalized in some special manner, he
proposed the following toast, which was drunk with enthusiasm:

'To hell with the man,
May he never grow fat,
What carries two faces,
Under one 'at.' They did not have many
big jobs, but there were a lot of little ones, and the boy Bert was
kept busy running from one to the other. He spent most of his time
dragging a handcart with loads of paint, or planks and steps, and
seldom went out to work with the men, for when he was not taking things
out to the various places where the philanthropists were working, he
was in the paintshop at the yard, scraping out dirty paint-pots or
helping Crass to mix up colours. Although scarcely anyone seemed to
notice it, the boy presented a truly pitiable spectacle. Dragging the handcart did not help him to put on flesh,
for the weather was very hot and the work made him sweat. His home was right away on the other side of Windley. It took him more
than three-quarters of an hour to walk to the shop, and as he had to be
at work at six, that meant that he had to leave home at a few minutes
past five every morning, so that he always got up about half past four. He was wearing a man's coat--or rather jacket--which gave the upper
part of his body a bulky appearance. The trousers were part of a suit
of his own, and were somewhat narrowly cut, as is the rule with boys'
cheap ready-made trousers. These thin legs appearing under the big
jacket gave him a rather grotesque appearance, which was heightened by
the fact that all his clothes, cap, coat, waistcoat, trousers and
boots, were smothered with paint and distemper of various colours, and
there were generally a few streaks of paint of some sort or other upon
his face, and of course his hands--especially round the
fingernails--were grimed with it. But the worst of all were the
dreadful hobnailed boots: the leather of the uppers of these was an
eighth of an inch thick, and very stiff. Across the fore part of the
boot this hard leather had warped into ridges and valleys, which chafed
his feet, and made them bleed. The soles were five-eighths of an inch
thick, covered with hobnails, and were as hard and inflexible and
almost as heavy as iron. These boots hurt his feet dreadfully and made
him feel very tired and miserable, for he had such a lot of walking to
do. He used to be jolly glad when dinner-time came, for then he used to
get out of sight in some quiet spot and lie down for the whole hour. His favourite dining-place was up in the loft over the carpenter's
shop, where they stored the mouldings and architraves. No one ever
came there at that hour, and after he had eaten his dinner he used to
lie down and think and rest. He nearly always had an hour for dinner, but he did not always have it
at the same time: sometimes he had it at twelve o'clock and sometimes
not till two. It all depended upon what stuff had to be taken to the
job. Often it happened that some men at a distant job required some material
to use immediately after dinner, and perhaps Crass was not able to get
it ready till twelve o'clock, so that it was not possible to take it
before dinner-time, and if Bert left it till after dinner the men would
be wasting their time waiting for it: so in such cases he took it there
first and had his dinner when he came back. Sometimes he got back about half past twelve, and it was necessary for
him to take out another lot of material at one o'clock. In such a case he 'charged' half an hour overtime on his time sheet--he
used to get twopence an hour for overtime. Sometimes Crass sent him with a handcart to one job to get a pair of
steps or tressels, or a plank, or some material or other, and take them
to another job, and on these occasions it was often very late before he
was able to take his meals. Instead of getting his breakfast at eight,
it was often nearly nine before he got back to the shop, and frequently
he had to go without dinner until half past one or two. Sometimes he could scarcely manage to carry the pots of paint to the
jobs; his feet were so hot and sore. When he had to push the cart it
was worse still, and often when knocking-off time came he felt so tired
that he could scarcely manage to walk home. But the weather was not always hot or fine: sometimes it was quite
cold, almost like winter, and there was a lot of rain that summer. At
such times the boy frequently got wet through several times a day as he
went from one job to another, and he had to work all the time in his
wet clothes and boots, which were usually old and out of repair and let
in the water. One of the worst jobs that he had to do was when a new stock of white
lead came in. This stuff came in wooden barrels containing two
hundredweight, and he used to have to dig it out of these barrels with
a trowel, and put it into a metal tank, where it was kept covered with
water, and the empty barrels were returned to the makers. When he was doing this work he usually managed to get himself smeared
all over with the white lead, and this circumstance, and the fact that
he was always handling paint or some poisonous material or other was
doubtless the cause of the terrible pains he often had in his
stomach--pains that sometimes caused him to throw himself down and roll
on the ground in agony. One afternoon Crass sent him with a handcart to a job that Easton,
Philpot, Harlow and Owen were just finishing. He got there about half
past four and helped the men to load up the things, and afterwards
walked alongside the cart with them back to the shop. On the way they all noticed and remarked to each other that the boy
looked tired and pale and that he seemed to limp: but he did not say
anything, although he guessed that they were talking about him. They
arrived at the shop a little before knocking-off time--about ten
minutes past five. Bert helped them to unload, and afterwards, while
they were putting their things away and 'charging up' the unused
materials they had brought back, he pushed the cart over to the shed
where it was kept, on the other side of the yard. He did not return to
the shop at once and a few minutes later when Harlow came out into the
yard to get a bucket of water to wash their hands with, he saw the boy
leaning on the side of the cart, crying, and holding one foot off the
ground. Harlow asked him what was the matter, and while he was speaking to him
the others came out to see what was up: the boy said he had rheumatism
or growing pains or something in his leg, 'just here near the knee'. But he didn't say much, he just cried miserably, and turned his head
slowly from side to side, avoiding the looks of the men because he felt
ashamed that they should see him cry. When they saw how ill and miserable he looked, the men all put their
hands in their pockets to get some coppers to give to him so that he
could ride home on the tram. They gave him fivepence altogether, more
than enough to ride all the way; and Crass told him to go at
once--there was no need to wait till half past; but before he went
Philpot got a small glass bottle out of his tool bag and filled it with
oil and turps--two of turps and one of oil--which he gave to Bert to
rub into his leg before going to bed: The turps--he explained--was to
cure the pain and the oil was to prevent it from hurting the skin. He
was to get his mother to rub it in for him if he were too tired to do
it himself. Bert promised to observe these directions, and, drying his
tears, took his dinner basket and limped off to catch the tram. It was a few days after this that Hunter met with an accident. He was
tearing off on his bicycle to one of the jobs about five minutes to
twelve to see if he could catch anyone leaving off for dinner before
the proper time, and while going down a rather steep hill the
front brake broke--the rubbers of the rear one were worn out and failed
to act--so Misery to save himself from being smashed against the
railings of the houses at the bottom of the hill, threw himself off the
machine, with the result that his head and face and hands were terribly
cut and bruised. He was so badly knocked about that he had to remain
at home for nearly three weeks, much to the delight of the men and the
annoyance--one might even say the indignation--of Mr Rushton, who did
not know enough about the work to make out estimates without
assistance. There were several large jobs to be tendered for at the
same time, so Rushton sent the specifications round to Hunter's house
for him to figure out the prices, and nearly all the time that Misery
was at home he was sitting up in bed, swathed in bandages, trying to
calculate the probable cost of these jobs. Rushton did not come to see
him, but he sent Bert nearly every day, either with some
specifications, or some accounts, or something of that sort, or with a
note inquiring when Hunter thought he would be able to return to work. All sorts of rumours became prevalent amongst the men concerning
Hunter's condition. He had 'broken his spiral column', he had
'conjunction of the brain', or he had injured his 'innards' and would
probably never be able to 'do no more slave-drivin''. Crass--who had
helped Mr Rushton to 'price up' several small jobs--began to think it
might not be altogether a bad thing for himself if something were to
happen to Hunter, and he began to put on side and to assume airs of
authority. He got one of the light-weights to assist him in his work
of colourman and made him do all the hard work, while he spent part of
his own time visiting the different jobs to see how the work progressed. He was wearing a pair of sporting
trousers the pattern of which consisted of large black and white
squares. The previous owner of these trousers was taller and slighter
than Crass, so although the legs were about a couple of inches too
long, they fitted him rather tightly, so much so that it was fortunate
that he had his present job of colourman, for if he had had to do any
climbing up and down ladders or steps, the trousers would have burst. His jacket was also two or three sizes too small, and the sleeves were
so short that the cuffs of his flanelette shirt were visible. This
coat was made of serge, and its colour had presumably once been blue,
but it was now a sort of heliotrope and violet: the greater part being
of the former tint, and the parts under the sleeves of the latter. This
jacket fitted very tightly across the shoulders and back and being much
too short left his tightly clad posteriors exposed to view. He however seemed quite unconscious of anything peculiar in his
appearance and was so bumptious and offensive that most of the men were
almost glad when Nimrod came back. They said that if Crass ever got
the job he would be a dam' sight worse than Hunter. As for the latter,
for a little while after his return to work it was said that his
illness had improved his character: he had had time to think things
over; and in short, he was ever so much better than before: but it was
not long before this story began to be told the other way round. and a thing that happened about a fortnight after
his return caused more ill feeling and resentment against him and
Rushton than had ever existed previously. What led up to it was
something that was done by Bundy's mate, Ted Dawson. This poor wretch was scarcely ever seen without a load of some sort or
other: carrying a sack of cement or plaster, a heavy ladder, a big
bucket of mortar, or dragging a load of scaffolding on a cart. He must
have been nearly as strong as a horse, because after working in this
manner for Rushton & Co. from six in the morning till half past five at
night, he usually went to work in his garden for two or three hours
after tea, and frequently went there for an hour or so in the morning
before going to work. The poor devil needed the produce of his garden
to supplement his wages, for he had a wife and three children to
provide for and he earned only--or rather, to be correct, he was paid
only--fourpence an hour. There was an old house to which they were making some alterations and
repairs, and there was a lot of old wood taken out of it: old, decayed
floorboards and stuff of that kind, wood that was of no use whatever
except to burn. Bundy and his mate were working there, and one night, Misery came a few
minutes before half past five and caught Dawson in the act of tying up
a small bundle of this wood. When Hunter asked him what he was going
to do with it he made no attempt at prevarication or concealment: he
said he was going to take it home for fire-wood, because it was of no
other use. Misery kicked up a devil of a row and ordered him to leave
the wood where it was: it had to be taken to the yard, and it was
nothing to do with Dawson or anyone else whether it was any use or not! If he caught anyone taking wood away he would sack them on the spot. Hunter shouted very loud so that all the others might hear, and as they
were all listening attentively in the next room, where they were taking
their aprons off preparatory to going home, they got the full benefit
of his remarks. The following Saturday when the hands went to the office for their
money they were each presented with a printed card bearing the
following legend:

Under no circumstances is any article or material, however
trifling, to be taken away by workmen for their private use,
whether waste material or not, from any workshop or place where
work is being done. Foremen are hereby instructed to see that
this order is obeyed and to report any such act coming to their
knowledge. Any man breaking this rule will be either dismissed
without notice or given into custody. Most of the men took these cards with the envelopes containing their
wages and walked away without making any comment--in fact, most of them
were some distance away before they realized exactly what the card was
about. Two or three of them stood a few steps away from the pay window
in full view of Rushton and Misery and ostentatiously tore the thing
into pieces and threw them into the street. One man remained at the
pay window while he read the card--and then flung it with an obscene
curse into Rushton's face, and demanded his back day, which they gave
him without any remark or delay, the other men who were not yet paid
having to wait while he made out his time-sheet for that morning. The story of this card spread all over the place in a very short time. It became the talk of every shop in the town. Whenever any of
Rushton's men encountered the employees of another firm, the latter
used to shout after them--'However trifling!' 'Ere comes some of Rushton's pickpockets.' Amongst Rushton's men themselves it became a standing joke or form of
greeting to say when one met another--'Remember! If one of their number was seen going home with an unusual amount of
paint or whitewash on his hands or clothes, the others would threaten
to report him for stealing the material. They used to say that however
trifling the quantity, it was against orders to take it away. Harlow drew up a list of rules which he said Mr Rushton had instructed
him to communicate to the men. One of these rules provided that
everybody was to be weighed upon arrival at the job in the morning and
again at leaving-off time: any man found to have increased in weight
was to be discharged. There was also much cursing and covert resentment about it; the men
used to say that such a thing as that looked well coming from the likes
of Rushton and Hunter, and they used to remind each other of the affair
of the marble-topped console table, the barometer, the venetian blinds
and all the other robberies. None of them ever said anything to either Misery or Rushton about the
cards, but one morning when the latter was reading his letters at the
breakfast table, on opening one of them he found that it contained one
of the notices, smeared with human excrement. He did not eat any more
breakfast that morning. It was not to be much wondered at that none of them had the courage to
openly resent the conditions under which they had to work, for although
it was summer, there were many men out of employment, and it was much
easier to get the sack than it was to get another job. None of the men were ever caught stealing anything, however trifling,
but all the same during the course of the summer five or six of them
were captured by the police and sent to jail--for not being able to pay
their poor rates. All through the summer Owen continued to make himself objectionable and
to incur the ridicule of his fellow workmen by talking about the causes
of poverty and of ways to abolish it. Most of the men kept two shillings or half a crown of their wages back
from their wives for pocket money, which they spent on beer and
tobacco. There were a very few who spent a little more than this, and
there were a still smaller number who spent so much in this way that
their families had to suffer in consequence. Most of those who kept back half a crown or three shillings from their
wives did so on the understanding that they were to buy their clothing
out of it. Some of them had to pay a shilling a week to a tallyman or
credit clothier. These were the ones who indulged in shoddy new
suits--at long intervals. Others bought--or got their wives to buy for
them--their clothes at second-hand shops, 'paying off' about a shilling
or so a week and not receiving the things till they were paid for. There were a very large proportion of them who did not spend even a
shilling a week for drink: and there were numerous others who, while
not being formally total abstainers, yet often went for weeks together
without either entering a public house or tasting intoxicating drink in
any form. Then there were others who, instead of drinking tea or coffee or cocoa
with their dinners or suppers, drank beer. This did not cost more than
the teetotal drinks, but all the same there are some persons who say
that those who swell the 'Nation's Drink Bill' by drinking beer with
their dinners or suppers are a kind of criminal, and that they ought to
be compelled to drink something else: that is, if they are working
people. As for the idle classes, they of course are to be allowed to
continue to make merry, 'drinking whisky, wine and sherry', to say
nothing of having their beer in by the barrel and the dozen--or forty
dozen--bottles. But of course that's a different matter, because these
people make so much money out of the labour of the working classes that
they can afford to indulge in this way without depriving their children
of the necessaries of life. There is no more cowardly, dastardly slander than is contained in the
assertion that the majority or any considerable proportion of working
men neglect their families through drink. There
are some who do, but they are not even a large minority. They are few
and far between, and are regarded with contempt by their fellow workmen. It will be said that their families had to suffer for want of even the
little that most of them spent in that way: but the persons that use
this argument should carry it to its logical conclusion. Tea is an
unnecessary and harmful drink; it has been condemned by medical men so
often that to enumerate its evil qualities here would be waste of time. The same can be said of nearly all the cheap temperance drinks; they
are unnecessary and harmful and cost money, and, like beer, are drunk
only for pleasure. What right has anyone to say to working men that when their work is
done they should not find pleasure in drinking a glass or two of beer
together in a tavern or anywhere else? Let those who would presume to
condemn them carry their argument to its logical conclusion and condemn
pleasure of every kind. Let them persuade the working classes to lead
still simpler lives; to drink water instead of such unwholesome things
as tea, coffee, beer, lemonade and all the other harmful and
unnecessary stuff. They would then be able to live ever so much more
cheaply, and as wages are always and everywhere regulated by the cost
of living, they would be able to work for lower pay. These people are fond of quoting the figures of the 'Nation's Drink
Bill,' as if all this money were spent by the working classes! But if
the amount of money spent in drink by the 'aristocracy', the clergy and
the middle classes were deducted from the 'Nation's Drink Bill', it
would be seen that the amount spent per head by the working classes is
not so alarming after all; and would probably not be much larger than
the amount spent on drink by those who consume tea and coffee and all
the other unwholesome and unnecessary 'temperance' drinks. The fact that some of Rushton's men spent about two shillings a week on
drink while they were in employment was not the cause of their poverty. If they had never spent a farthing for drink, and if their wretched
wages had been increased fifty percent, they would still have been in a
condition of the most abject and miserable poverty, for nearly all the
benefits and privileges of civilization, nearly everything that makes
life worth living, would still have been beyond their reach. It is inevitable, so long as men have to live and work under such
heartbreaking, uninteresting conditions as at present that a certain
proportion of them will seek forgetfulness and momentary happiness in
the tavern, and the only remedy for this evil is to remove the cause;
and while that is in process, there is something else that can be done
and that is, instead of allowing filthy drinking dens, presided over by
persons whose interest it is to encourage men to drink more bad beer
than is good for them or than they can afford,--to have civilized
institutions run by the State or the municipalities for use and not
merely for profit. Decent pleasure houses, where no drunkenness or
filthiness would be tolerated--where one could buy real beer or coffee
or tea or any other refreshments; where men could repair when their
day's work was over and spend an hour or two in rational intercourse
with their fellows or listen to music and singing. Taverns to which
they could take their wives and children without fear of defilement,
for a place that is not fit for the presence of a woman or a child is
not fit to exist at all. Owen, being a teetotaller, did not spend any of his money on drink; but
he spent a lot on what he called 'The Cause'. Every week he bought
some penny or twopenny pamphlets or some leaflets about Socialism,
which he lent or gave to his mates; and in this way and by means of
much talk he succeeded in converting a few to his party. Philpot,
Harlow and a few others used to listen with interest, and some of them
even paid for the pamphlets they obtained from Owen, and after reading
them themselves, passed them on to others, and also occasionally 'got
up' arguments on their own accounts. Others were simply indifferent,
or treated the subject as a kind of joke, ridiculing the suggestion
that it was possible to abolish poverty. They repeated that there had
'always been rich and poor in the world and there always would be, so
there was an end of it'. But the majority were bitterly hostile; not
to Owen, but to Socialism. For the man himself most of them had a
certain amount of liking, especially the ordinary hands because it was
known that he was not a'master's man' and that he had declined to
'take charge' of jobs which Misery had offered to him. But to
Socialism they were savagely and malignantly opposed. Some of those
who had shown some symptoms of Socialism during the past winter when
they were starving had now quite recovered and were stout defenders of
the Present System. Barrington was still working for the firm and continued to maintain his
manner of reserve, seldom speaking unless addressed but all the same,
for several reasons, it began to be rumoured that he shared Owen's
views. He always paid for the pamphlets that Owen gave him, and on one
occasion, when Owen bought a thousand leaflets to give away, Barrington
contributed a shilling towards the half-crown that Owen paid for them. But he never took any part in the arguments that sometimes raged during
the dinner-hour or at breakfast-time. It was a good thing for Owen that he had his enthusiasm for 'the cause'
to occupy his mind. Socialism was to him what drink was to some of the
others--the thing that enable them to forget and tolerate the
conditions under which they were forced to exist. Some of them were so
muddled with beer, and others so besotted with admiration of their
Liberal and Tory masters, that they were oblivious of the misery of
their own lives, and in a similar way, Owen was so much occupied in
trying to rouse them from their lethargy and so engrossed in trying to
think out new arguments to convince them of the possibility of bringing
about an improvement in their condition that he had no time to dwell
upon his own poverty; the money that he spent on leaflets and pamphlets
to give away might have been better spent on food and clothing for
himself, because most of those to whom he gave them were by no means
grateful; but he never thought of that; and after all, nearly everyone
spends money on some hobby or other. Some people deny themselves the
necessaries or comforts of life in order that they may be able to help
to fatten a publican. Others deny themselves in order to enable a lazy
parson to live in idleness and luxury; and others spend much time and
money that they really need for themselves in buying Socialist
literature to give away to people who don't want to know about
Socialism. One Sunday morning towards the end of July, a band of about twenty-five
men and women on bicycles invaded the town. Two of them--who rode a
few yards in front of the others, had affixed to the handlebars of each
of their machines a slender, upright standard from the top of one of
which fluttered a small flag of crimson silk with 'International
Brotherhood and Peace' in gold letters. The other standard was similar
in size and colour, but with a different legend: 'One for all and All
for one.' As they rode along they gave leaflets to the people in the streets, and
whenever they came to a place where there were many people they
dismounted and walked about, giving their leaflets to whoever would
accept them. They made several long halts during their progress along
the Grand Parade, where there was a considerable crowd, and then they
rode over the hill to Windley, which they reached a little before
opening time. There were little crowds waiting outside the several
public houses and a number of people passing through the streets on
their way home from Church and Chapel. The strangers distributed
leaflets to all those who would take them, and they went through a lot
of the side streets, putting leaflets under the doors and in the
letter-boxes. When they had exhausted their stock they remounted and
rode back the way they came. Meantime the news of their arrival had spread, and as they returned
through the town they were greeted with jeers and booing. Presently
someone threw a stone, and as there happened to be plenty of stones
just there several others followed suit and began running after the
retreating cyclists, throwing stones, hooting and cursing. The leaflet which had given rise to all this fury read as follows:

WHAT IS SOCIALISM? At present the workers, with hand and brain produce continually
food, clothing and all useful and beautiful things in great
abundance. BUT THEY LABOUR IN VAIN--for they are mostly poor and often in
want. Their women and
children suffer, and their old age is branded with pauperism. Socialism is a plan by which poverty will be abolished, and
everyone enabled to live in plenty and comfort, with leisure and
opportunity for ampler life. If you wish to hear more of this plan, come to the field at the
Cross Roads on the hill at Windley, on Tuesday evening next at 8
P.M. and

LOOK OUT FOR THE SOCIALIST VAN

The cyclists rode away amid showers of stones without sustaining much
damage. One had his hand cut and another, who happened to look round,
was struck on the forehead, but these were the only casualties. On the following Tuesday evening, long before the appointed time, there
was a large crowd assembled at the cross roads or the hill at Windley,
waiting for the appearance of the van, and they were evidently prepared
to give the Socialists a warm reception. There was only one policeman
in uniform there but there were several in plain clothes amongst the
crowd. Crass, Dick Wantley, the Semi-drunk, Sawkins, Bill Bates and several
other frequenters of the Cricketers were amongst the crowd, and there
were also a sprinkling of tradespeople, including the Old Dear and Mr
Smallman, the grocer, and a few ladies and gentlemen--wealthy
visitors--but the bulk of the crowd were working men, labourers,
mechanics and boys. As it was quite evident that the crowd meant mischief--many of them had
their pockets filled with stones and were armed with sticks--several of
the Socialists were in favour of going to meet the van to endeavour to
persuade those in charge from coming, and with that object they
withdrew from the crowd, which was already regarding them with menacing
looks, and went down the road in the direction from which the van was
expected to come. They had not gone very far, however, before the
people, divining what they were going to do, began to follow them and
while they were hesitating what course to pursue, the Socialist van,
escorted by five or six men on bicycles, appeared round the corner at
the bottom of the hill. As soon as the crowd saw it, they gave an exultant cheer, or, rather,
yell, and began running down the hill to meet it, and in a few minutes
it was surrounded by a howling mob. The van was drawn by two horses;
there was a door and a small platform at the back and over this was a
sign with white letters on a red ground: 'Socialism, the only hope of
the Workers.' The driver pulled up, and another man on the platform at the rear
attempted to address the crowd, but his voice was inaudible in the din
of howls, catcalls, hooting and obscene curses. After about an hour of
this, as the crowd began pushing against the van and trying to overturn
it, the terrified horses commenced to get restive and uncontrollable,
and the man on the box attempted to drive up the hill. This seemed to
still further infuriate the horde of savages who surrounded the van. Numbers of them clutched the wheels and turned them the reverse way,
screaming that it must go back to where it came from; several of them
accordingly seized the horses' heads and, amid cheers, turned them
round. The man on the platform was still trying to make himself heard, but
without success. The strangers who had come with the van and the
little group of local Socialists, who had forced their way through the
crowd and gathered together close to the platform in front of the
would-be speaker, only increased the din by their shouts of appeal to
the crowd to 'give the man a fair chance'. This little bodyguard
closed round the van as it began to move slowly downhill, but they were
not sufficiently numerous to protect it from the crowd, which, not
being satisfied with the rate at which the van was proceeding, began to
shout to each other to 'Run it away!' and several
savage rushes were made with the intention of putting these suggestions
into execution. Some of the defenders were hampered with their bicycles, but they
resisted as well as they were able, and succeeded in keeping the crowd
off until the foot of the hill was reached, and then someone threw the
first stone, which by a strange chance happened to strike one of the
cyclists whose head was already bandaged--it was the same man who had
been hit on the Sunday. This stone was soon followed by others, and
the man on the platform was the next to be struck. He got it right on
the mouth, and as he put up his handkerchief to staunch the blood
another struck him on the forehead just above the temple, and he
dropped forward on his face on to the platform as if he had been shot. As the speed of the vehicle increased, a regular hail of stones fell
upon the roof and against the sides of the van and whizzed past the
retreating cyclists, while the crowd followed close behind, cheering,
shrieking out volleys of obscene curses, and howling like wolves. 'We'll give the b--rs Socialism!' shouted Crass, who was literally
foaming at the mouth. 'We'll teach 'em to come 'ere trying to undermined our bloody
morality,' howled Dick Wantley as he hurled a lump of granite that he
had torn up from the macadamized road at one of the cyclists. They ran on after the van until it was out of range, and then they
bethought themselves of the local Socialists; but they were nowhere to
be seen; they had prudently withdrawn as soon as the van had got fairly
under way, and the victory being complete, the upholders of the present
system returned to the piece of waste ground on the top of the hill,
where a gentleman in a silk hat and frockcoat stood up on a little
hillock and made a speech. He said nothing about the Distress
Committee or the Soup Kitchen or the children who went to school
without proper clothes or food, and made no reference to what was to be
done next winter, when nearly everybody would be out of work. These
were matters he and they were evidently not at all interested in. But
he said a good deal about the Glorious Empire! The things he said were received with rapturous
applause, and at the conclusion of his address, the crowd sang the
National Anthem with great enthusiasm and dispersed, congratulating
themselves that they had shown to the best of their ability what
Mugsborough thought of Socialism and the general opinion of the crowd
was that they would hear nothing more from the Socialist van. But in this they were mistaken, for the very next Sunday evening a
crowd of Socialists suddenly materialized at the Cross Roads. Some of
them had come by train, others had walked from different places and
some had cycled. A crowd gathered and the Socialists held a meeting, two speeches being
delivered before the crowd recovered from their surprise at the
temerity of these other Britishers who apparently had not sense enough
to understand that they had been finally defeated and obliterated last
Tuesday evening: and when the cyclist with the bandaged head got up on
the hillock some of the crowd actually joined in the hand-clapping with
which the Socialists greeted him. In the course of his speech he informed them that the man who had come
with the van and who had been felled whilst attempting to speak from
the platform was now in hospital. For some time it had been probable
that he would not recover, but he was now out of danger, and as soon as
he was well enough there was no doubt that he would come there again. Upon this Crass shouted out that if ever the Vanners did return, they
would finish what they had begun last Tuesday. He would not get off so
easy next time. But when he said this, Crass--not being able to see
into the future--did not know what the reader will learn in due time,
that the man was to return to that place under different circumstances. When they had finished their speech-making one of the strangers who was
acting as chairman invited the audience to put questions, but as nobody
wanted to ask any, he invited anyone who disagreed with what had been
said to get up on the hillock and state his objections, so that the
audience might have an opportunity of judging for themselves which side
was right; but this invitation was also neglected. Then the chairman
announced that they were coming there again next Sunday at the same
time, when a comrade would speak on 'Unemployment and Poverty, the
Cause and the Remedy', and then the strangers sang a song called
'England Arise', the first verse being:

England Arise, the long, long night is over,
Faint in the east, behold the Dawn appear
Out of your evil dream of toil and sorrow
Arise, O England! During the progress of the meeting several of the strangers had been
going out amongst the crowd giving away leaflets, which many of the
people gloomily refused to accept, and selling penny pamphlets, of
which they managed to dispose of about three dozen. Before declaring the meeting closed, the chairman said that the speaker
who was coming next week resided in London: he was not a millionaire,
but a workman, the same as nearly all those who were there present. They were not going to pay him anything for coming, but they intended
to pay his railway fare. Therefore next Sunday after the meeting there
would be a collection, and anything over the amount of the fare would
be used for the purchase of more leaflets such as those they were now
giving away. He hoped that anyone who thought that any of the money
went into the pockets of those who held the meeting would come and
join: then they could have their share. The meeting now terminated and the Socialists were suffered to depart
in peace. Some of them, however, lingered amongst the crowd after the
main body had departed, and for a long time after the meeting was over
little groups remained on the field excitedly discussing the speeches
or the leaflets. The next Sunday evening when the Socialists came they found the field
at the Cross Roads in the possession of a furious, hostile mob, who
refused to allow them to speak, and finally they had to go away without
having held a meeting. They came again the next Sunday, and on this
occasion they had a speaker with a very loud--literally a
stentorian--voice, and he succeeded in delivering an address, but as
only those who were very close were able to hear him, and as they were
all Socialists, it was not of much effect upon those for whom it was
intended. They came again the next Sunday and nearly every other Sunday during
the summer: sometimes they were permitted to hold their meeting in
comparative peace and at other times there was a row. They made
several converts, and many people declared themselves in favour of some
of the things advocated, but they were never able to form a branch of
their society there, because nearly all those who were convinced were
afraid to publicly declare themselves lest they should lose their
employment or customers. Chapter 44

The Beano


Now and then a transient gleam of sunshine penetrated the gloom in
which the lives of the philanthropists were passed. The cheerless
monotony was sometimes enlivened with a little innocent merriment. Every now and then there was a funeral which took Misery and Crass away
for the whole afternoon, and although they always tried to keep the
dates secret, the men generally knew when they were gone. Sometimes the people in whose houses they were working regaled them
with tea, bread and butter, cake or other light refreshments, and
occasionally even with beer--very different stuff from the petrifying
liquid they bought at the Cricketers for twopence a pint. At other
places, where the people of the house were not so generously disposed,
the servants made up for it, and entertained them in a similar manner
without the knowledge of their masters and mistresses. Even when the
mistresses were too cunning to permit of this, they were seldom able to
prevent the men from embracing the domestics, who for their part were
quite often willing to be embraced; it was an agreeable episode that
helped to vary the monotony of their lives, and there was no harm done. It was rather hard lines on the philanthropists sometimes when they
happened to be working in inhabited houses of the better sort. They
always had to go in and out by the back way, generally through the
kitchen, and the crackling and hissing of the poultry and the joints of
meat roasting in the ovens, and the odours of fruit pies and tarts, and
plum puddings and sage and onions, were simply maddening. In the
back-yards of these houses there were usually huge stacks of empty
beer, stout and wine bottles, and others that had contained whisky,
brandy or champagne. The smells of the delicious viands that were being prepared in the
kitchen often penetrated into the dismantled rooms that the
philanthropists were renovating, sometimes just as they were eating
their own wretched fare out of their dinner basket, and washing it down
with draughts of the cold tea or the petrifying liquid they sometimes
brought with them in bottles. Sometimes, as has been said, the people of the house used to send up
some tea and bread and butter or cakes or other refreshments to the
workmen, but whenever Hunter got to know of it being done he used to
speak to the people about it and request that it be discontinued, as it
caused the men to waste their time. But the event of the year was the Beano, which took place on the last
Saturday in August, after they had been paying in for about four
months. The cost of the outing was to be five shillings a head, so
this was the amount each man had to pay in, but it was expected that
the total cost--the hire of the brakes and the cost of the
dinner--would come out at a trifle less than the amount stated, and in
that case the surplus would be shared out after the dinner. The amount
of the share-out would be greater or less according to other
circumstances, for it generally happened that apart from the
subscriptions of the men, the Beano fund was swelled by charitable
donations from several quarters, as will be seen later on. When the eventful day arrived, the hands, instead of working till one,
were paid at twelve o'clock and rushed off home to have a wash and
change. The brakes were to start from the 'Cricketers' at one, but it was
arranged, for the convenience of those who lived at Windley, that they
were to be picked up at the Cross Roads at one-thirty. There were four brakes altogether--three large ones for the men and one
small one for the accommodation of Mr Rushton and a few of his personal
friends, Didlum, Grinder, Mr Toonarf, an architect and Mr Lettum, a
house and estate Agent. One of the drivers was accompanied by a friend
who carried a long coachman's horn. This gentleman was not paid to
come, but, being out of work, he thought that the men would be sure to
stand him a few drinks and that they would probably make a collection
for him in return for his services. Most of the chaps were smoking twopenny cigars, and had one or two
drinks with each other to try to cheer themselves up before they
started, but all the same it was a melancholy procession that wended
its way up the hill to Windley. To judge from the mournful expression
on the long face of Misery, who sat on the box beside the driver of the
first large brake, and the downcast appearance of the majority of the
men, one might have thought that it was a funeral rather than a
pleasure party, or that they were a contingent of lost souls being
conducted to the banks of the Styx. The man who from time to time
sounded the coachman's horn might have passed as the angel sounding the
last trump, and the fumes of the cigars were typical of the smoke of
their torment, which ascendeth up for ever and ever. A brief halt was made at the Cross Roads to pick up several of the men,
including Philpot, Harlow, Easton, Ned Dawson, Sawkins, Bill Bates and
the Semi-drunk. The two last-named were now working for Smeariton and
Leavit, but as they had been paying in from the first, they had elected
to go to the Beano rather than have their money back. The Semi-drunk
and one or two other habitual boozers were very shabby and down at
heel, but the majority of the men were decently dressed. Some had taken
their Sunday clothes out of pawn especially for the occasion. Others
were arrayed in new suits which they were going to pay for at the rate
of a shilling a week. Some had bought themselves second-hand suits,
one or two were wearing their working clothes brushed and cleaned up,
and some were wearing Sunday clothes that had not been taken out of
pawn for the simple reason that the pawnbrokers would not take them in. These garments were in what might be called a transition
stage--old-fashioned and shiny with wear, but yet too good to take for
working in, even if their owners had been in a position to buy some
others to take their place for best. Crass, Slyme and one or two of
the single men, however, were howling swells, sporting stand-up collars
and bowler hats of the latest type, in contradistinction to some of the
others, who were wearing hats of antique patterns, and collars of
various shapes with jagged edges. Harlow had on an old straw hat that
his wife had cleaned up with oxalic acid, and Easton had carefully dyed
the faded binding of his black bowler with ink. Their boots were the
worst part of their attire: without counting Rushton and his friends,
there were thirty-seven men altogether, including Nimrod, and there
were not half a dozen pairs of really good boots amongst the whole
crowd. When all were seated a fresh start was made. The small brake, with
Rushton, Didlum, Grinder and two or three other members of the Band,
led the way. Next came the largest brake with Misery on the box. Beside the driver of the third brake was Payne, the foreman carpenter. Crass occupied a similar position of honour on the fourth brake, on the
back step of which was perched the man with the coachman's horn. Crass--who had engaged the brakes--had arranged with the drivers that
the cortege should pass through the street where he and Easton lived,
and as they went by Mrs Crass was standing at the door with the two
young men lodgers, who waved their handkerchiefs and shouted greetings. A little further on Mrs Linden and Easton's wife were standing at the
door to see them go by. In fact, the notes of the coachman's horn
alarmed most of the inhabitants, who crowded to their windows and doors
to gaze upon the dismal procession as it passed. The mean streets of Windley were soon left far behind and they found
themselves journeying along a sunlit, winding road, bordered with
hedges of hawthorn, holly and briar, past rich, brown fields of
standing corn, shimmering with gleams of gold, past apple-orchards
where bending boughs were heavily loaded with mellow fruits exhaling
fragrant odours, through the cool shades of lofty avenues of venerable
oaks, whose overarched and interlacing branches formed a roof of green,
gilt and illuminated with quivering spots and shafts of sunlight that
filtered through the trembling leaves; over old mossy stone bridges,
spanning limpid streams that duplicated the blue sky and the fleecy
clouds; and then again, stretching away to the horizon on every side
over more fields, some rich with harvest, others filled with drowsing
cattle or with flocks of timid sheep that scampered away at the sound
of the passing carriages. Several times they saw merry little
companies of rabbits frisking gaily in and out of the hedges or in the
fields beside the sheep and cattle. At intervals, away in the
distance, nestling in the hollows or amid sheltering trees, groups of
farm buildings and stacks of hay; and further on, the square ivy-clad
tower of an ancient church, or perhaps a solitary windmill with its
revolving sails alternately flashing and darkening in the rays of the
sun. Past thatched wayside cottages whose inhabitants came out to wave
their hands in friendly greeting. Past groups of sunburnt,
golden-haired children who climbed on fences and five-barred gates, and
waved their hats and cheered, or ran behind the brakes for the pennies
the men threw down to them. From time to time the men in the brakes made half-hearted attempts at
singing, but it never came to much, because most of them were too
hungry and miserable. They had not had time to take any dinner and
would not have taken any even if they had the time, for they wished to
reserve their appetites for the banquet at the Queen Elizabeth, which
they expected to reach about half past three. However, they cheered up
a little after the first halt--at the Blue Lion, where most of them got
down and had a drink. Some of them, including the Semi-drunk, Ned
Dawson, Bill Bates and Joe Philpot--had two or three drinks, and felt
so much happier for them that, shortly after they started off again,
sounds of melody were heard from the brake the three first named rode
in--the one presided over by Crass--but it was not very successful, and
even after the second halt--about five miles further on--at the
Warrior's Head, they found it impossible to sing with any heartiness. Fitful bursts of song arose from time to time from each of the brakes
in turn, only to die mournfully away. It is not easy to sing on an
empty stomach even if one has got a little beer in it; and so it was
with most of them. They were not in a mood to sing, or to properly
appreciate the scenes through which they were passing. They wanted
their dinners, and that was the reason why this long ride, instead of
being a pleasure, became after a while, a weary journey that seemed as
if it were never coming to an end. The next stop was at the Bird in Hand, a wayside public house that
stood all by itself in a lonely hollow. The landlord was a fat,
jolly-looking man, and there were several customers in the bar--men who
looked like farm-labourers, but there were no other houses to be seen
anywhere. This extraordinary circumstance exercised the minds of our
travellers and formed the principal topic of conversation until they
arrived at the Dew Drop Inn, about half an hour afterwards. The first
brake, containing Rushton and his friends, passed on without stopping
here. The occupants of the second brake, which was only a little way
behind the first, were divided in opinion whether to stop or go on. Some shouted out to the driver to pull up, others ordered him to
proceed, and more were undecided which course to pursue--a state of
mind that was not shared by the coachman, who, knowing that if they
stopped somebody or other would be sure to stand him a drink, had no
difficulty whatever in coming to a decision, but drew rein at the inn,
an example that was followed by both the other carriages as they drove
up. It was a very brief halt, not more than half the men getting down at
all, and those who remained in the brakes grumbled so much at the delay
that the others drank their beer as quickly as possible and the journey
was resumed once more, almost in silence. No attempts at singing, no
noisy laughter; they scarcely spoke to each other, but sat gloomily
gazing out over the surrounding country. Instructions had been given to the drivers not to stop again till they
reached the Queen Elizabeth, and they therefore drove past the World
Turned Upside Down without stopping, much to the chagrin of the
landlord of that house, who stood at the door with a sickly smile upon
his face. Some of those who knew him shouted out that they would give
him a call on their way back, and with this he had to be content. They reached the long-desired Queen Elizabeth at twenty minutes to
four, and were immediately ushered into a large room where a round
table and two long ones were set for dinner--and they were set in a
manner worthy of the reputation of the house. The cloths that covered the tables and the serviettes, arranged fanwise
in the drinking glasses, were literally as white as snow, and about a
dozen knives and forks and spoons were laid for each person. Down the
centre of the table glasses of delicious yellow custard and cut-glass
dishes of glistening red and golden jelly alternated with vases of
sweet-smelling flowers. The floor of the dining-room was covered with oilcloth--red flowers on
a pale yellow ground; the pattern was worn off in places, but it was
all very clean and shining. Whether one looked at the walls with the
old-fashioned varnished oak paper, or at the glossy piano standing
across the corner near the white-curtained window, at the shining oak
chairs or through the open casement doors that led into the shady
garden beyond, the dominating impression one received was that
everything was exquisitely clean. The landlord announced that dinner would be served in ten minutes, and
while they were waiting some of them indulged in a drink at the
bar--just as an appetizer--whilst the others strolled in the garden or,
by the landlord's invitation, looked over the house. Amongst other
places, they glanced into the kitchen, where the landlady was
superintending the preparation of the feast, and in this place, with
its whitewashed walls and red-tiled floor, as in every other part of
the house, the same absolute cleanliness reigned supreme. 'It's a bit differint from the Royal Caff, where we got the sack, ain't
it?' remarked the Semi-drunk to Bill Bates as they made their way to
the dining-room in response to the announcement that dinner was ready. Rushton, with Didlum and Grinder and his other friends, sat at the
round table near the piano. Hunter took the head of the longer of the
other two tables and Crass the foot, and on either side of Crass were
Bundy and Slyme, who had acted with him as the Committee who had
arranged the Beano. Payne, the foreman carpenter, occupied the head of
the other table. The dinner was all that could be desired; it was almost as good as the
kind of dinner that is enjoyed every day by those persons who are too
lazy to work but are cunning enough to make others work for them. There was soup, several entrees, roast beef, boiled mutton, roast
turkey, roast goose, ham, cabbage, peas, beans and sweets galore, plum
pudding, custard, jelly, fruit tarts, bread and cheese and as much beer
or lemonade as they liked to pay for, the drinks being an extra; and
afterwards the waiters brought in cups of coffee for those who desired
it. Everything was up to the knocker, and although they were somewhat
bewildered by the multitude of knives and forks, they all, with one or
two exceptions, rose to the occasion and enjoyed themselves famously. The excellent decorum observed being marred only by one or two
regrettable incidents. The first of these occurred almost as soon as
they sat down, when Ned Dawson who, although a big strong fellow, was
not able to stand much beer, not being used to it, was taken ill and
had to be escorted from the room by his mate Bundy and another man. They left him somewhere outside and he came back again about ten
minutes afterwards, much better but looking rather pale, and took his
seat with the others. The turkeys, the roast beef and the boiled mutton, the peas and beans
and the cabbage, disappeared with astonishing rapidity, which was not
to be wondered at, for they were all very hungry from the long drive,
and nearly everyone made a point of having at least one helping of
everything there was to be had. Some of them went in for two lots of
soup. Then for the next course, boiled mutton and ham or turkey: then
some roast beef and goose. Then a little more boiled mutton with a
little roast beef. Each of the three boys devoured several times his
own weight of everything, to say nothing of numerous bottles of
lemonade and champagne ginger beer. Crass frequently paused to mop the perspiration from his face and neck
with his serviette. There was
enough and to spare of everything to eat, the beer was of the best, and
all the time, amid the rattle of the crockery and the knives and forks,
the proceedings were enlivened by many jests and flashes of wit that
continuously kept the table in a roar. 'Chuck us over another dollop of that there white stuff, Bob,' shouted
the Semi-drunk to Crass, indicating the blancmange. Crass reached out his hand and took hold of the dish containing the
'white stuff', but instead of passing it to the Semi-drunk, he
proceeded to demolish it himself, gobbling it up quickly directly from
the dish with a spoon. 'Why, you're eating it all yerself, yer bleeder,' cried the Semi-drunk
indignantly, as soon as he realized what was happening. 'That's all right, matey,' replied Crass affably as he deposited the
empty dish on the table. 'It don't matter, there's plenty more where
it come from. Upon being applied to, the landlord, who was assisted by his daughter,
two other young women and two young men, brought in several more lots
and so the Semi-drunk was appeased. As for the plum-pudding--it was a fair knock-out; just like Christmas:
but as Ned Dawson and Bill Bates had drunk all the sauce before the
pudding was served, they all had to have their first helping without
any. However, as the landlord brought in another lot shortly
afterwards, that didn't matter either. As soon as dinner was over, Crass rose to make his statement as
secretary. Thirty-seven men had paid five shillings each: that made
nine pounds five shillings. The committee had decided that the three
boys--the painters' boy, the carpenters' boy and the front shop
boy--should be allowed to come half-price: that made it nine pounds
twelve and six. In addition to paying the ordinary five-shilling
subscription, Mr Rushton had given one pound ten towards the expenses. And several other gentlemen had also given something
towards it. Mr Sweater, of the Cave, one pound. Mr
Grinder, ten shillings in addition to the five-shilling subscription. Mr Lettum, ten shillings, as well as the five-shilling
subscription. Mr Didlum, ten shillings in addition to the
five shillings. Mr Toonarf, ten shillings as well as the
five-shilling subscription. They had also written to some of the
manufacturers who supplied the firm with materials, and asked them to
give something: some of 'em had sent half a crown, some five shillings,
some hadn't answered at all, and two of 'em had written back to say
that as things is cut so fine nowadays, they didn't hardly get no
profit on their stuff, so they couldn't afford to give nothing; but out
of all the firms they wrote to they managed to get thirty-two and
sixpence altogether, making a grand total of seventeen pounds. As for the expenses, the dinner was two and six a head, and there was
forty-five of them there, so that came to five pounds twelve and six. Then there was the hire of the brakes, also two and six a head, five
pound twelve and six, which left a surplus of five pound fifteen to be
shared out (applause), which came to three shillings each for the
thirty-seven men, and one and fourpence for each of the boys. Crass, Slyme and Bundy now walked round the tables distributing the
share-out, which was very welcome to everybody, especially those who
had spent nearly all their money during the journey from Mugsborough,
and when this ceremony was completed, Philpot moved a hearty vote of
thanks to the committee for the manner in which they had carried out
their duties, which was agreed to with acclamation. Then they made a
collection for the waiters, and the three waitresses, which amounted to
eleven shillings, for which the host returned thanks on behalf of the
recipients, who were all smiles. Then Mr Rushton requested the landlord to serve drinks and cigars all
round. Some had cigarettes and the teetotallers had lemonade or ginger
beer. Those who did not smoke themselves took the cigar all the same
and gave it to someone else who did. When all were supplied there
suddenly arose loud cries of 'Order!' and it was seen that Hunter was
upon his feet. As soon as silence was obtained, Misery said that he believed that
everyone there present would agree with him, when he said that they
should not let the occasion pass without drinking the 'ealth of their
esteemed and respected employer, Mr Rushton. Some of
them had worked for Mr Rushton on and off for many years, and as far as
THEY was concerned it was not necessary for him (Hunter) to say much in
praise of Mr Rushton. They knew Mr Rushton as well as
he did himself and to know him was to esteem him. As for the
new hands, although they did not know Mr Rushton as well as the old
hands did, he felt sure that they would agree that as no one could wish
for a better master. He had much pleasure in asking
them to drink Mr Rushton's health. 'Musical honours, chaps,' shouted Crass, waving his glass and leading
off the singing which was immediately joined in with great enthusiasm
by most of the men, the Semi-drunk conducting the music with a table
knife:

For he's a jolly good fellow,
For he's a jolly good fellow,
For he's a jolly good fel-ell-O,
And so say all of us,
So 'ip, 'ip, 'ip, 'ooray! So 'ip, 'ip, 'ip, 'ooray! For he's a jolly good fellow,
For 'e's a jolly good fellow
For 'e's a jolly good fel-ell-O,
And so say all of us. Hip, hip, hip, hooray! Hip, hip, hip, hooray! Hip, hip, hip, hooray! Everyone present drank Rushton's health, or at any rate went through
the motions of doing so, but during the roar of cheering and singing
that preceded it several of the men stood with expressions of contempt
or uneasiness upon their faces, silently watching the enthusiasts or
looking at the ceiling or on the floor. 'I will say this much,' remarked the Semidrunk as they all resumed
their seats--he had had several drinks during dinner, besides those he
had taken on the journey--I will say this much, although I did have a
little misunderstanding with Mr Hunter when I was workin' at the Royal
Caff, I must admit that this is the best firm that's ever worked under
me.' This statement caused a shout of laughter, which, however, died away as
Mr Rushton rose to acknowledge the toast to his health. He said that
he had now been in business for nearly sixteen years and this was--he
believed--the eleventh outing he had had the pleasure of attending. During all that time the business had steadily progressed and had
increased in volume from year to year, and he hoped and believed that
the progress made in the past would be continued in the future. Of course, he realized that the success of the business
depended very largely upon the men as well as upon himself; he did his
best in trying to get work for them, and it was necessary--if the
business was to go on and prosper--that they should also do their best
to get the work done when he had secured it for them. The masters could not do without the men, and the men could not live
without the masters. It was a matter of division of
labour: the men worked with their hands and the masters worked with
their brains, and one was no use without the other. He hoped the good
feeling which had hitherto existed between himself and his workmen
would always continue, and he thanked them for the way in which they
had responded to the toast of his health. Loud cheers greeted the conclusion of this speech, and then Crass stood
up and said that he begged to propose the health of Mr 'Unter. He wasn't going to make a long speech as he wasn't much of a
speaker. (Cries of 'You're all right,' 'Go on,' etc.) But he felt
sure as they would all hagree with him when he said that--next to Mr
Rushton--there wasn't no one the men had more respect and liking for
than Mr 'Unter. A few weeks ago when Mr 'Unter was laid up,
many of them began to be afraid as they was going to lose 'im. He was
sure that all the 'ands was glad to 'ave this hoppertunity of
congratulating him on his recovery (Hear, hear) and of wishing him the
best of 'ealth in the future and hoping as he would be spared to come
to a good many more Beanos. Loud applause greeted the conclusion of Crass's remarks, and once more
the meeting burst into song:

For he's a jolly good fellow
For he's a jolly good fellow. For he's a jolly good fellow,
And so say all of us. So 'ip, 'ip, 'ip, 'ooray! So 'ip, 'ip, 'ip, 'ooray! When they had done cheering, Nimrod rose. His voice trembled a little
as he thanked them for their kindness, and said that he hoped he
deserved their goodwill. He could only say that as he was sure as he
always tried to be fair and considerate to everyone. He
would now request the landlord to replenish their glasses. As soon as the drinks were served, Nimrod again rose and said he wished
to propose the healths of their visitors who had so kindly contributed
to their expenses--Mr Lettum, Mr Didlum, Mr Toonarf and Mr Grinder. They were very pleased and proud to see them there (Hear,
hear), and he was sure the men would agree with him when he said that
Messrs Lettum, Didlum, Toonarf and Grinder were jolly good fellows. To judge from the manner in which they sang the chorus and cheered, it
was quite evident that most of the hands did agree. When they left
off, Grinder rose to reply on behalf of those included in the toast. He
said that it gave them much pleasure to be there and take part in such
pleasant proceedings and they were glad to think that they had been
able to help to bring it about. It was very gratifying to see the good
feeling that existed between Mr Rushton and his workmen, which was as
it should be, because masters and men was really fellow workers--the
masters did the brain work, the men the 'and work. They was both
workers, and their interests was the same. He liked to see men doing
their best for their master and knowing that their master was doing his
best for them, that he was not only a master, but a friend. That was
what he (Grinder) liked to see--master and men pulling together--doing
their best, and realizing that their interests was identical. If only all masters and men would do this they would find
that everything would go on all right, there would be more work and
less poverty. Let the men do their best for their masters, and the
masters do their best for their men, and they would find that that was
the true solution of the social problem, and not the silly nonsense
that was talked by people what went about with red flags. Most of those fellows were chaps who was too lazy to work
for their livin'. They could take it from him that, if
ever the Socialists got the upper hand there would just be a few of the
hartful dodgers who would get all the cream, and there would be nothing
left but 'ard work for the rest. That's wot hall those
hagitators was after: they wanted them (his hearers) to work and keep
'em in idleness. On behalf of Mr Didlum, Mr Toonarf, Mr
Lettum and himself, he thanked them for their good wishes, and hoped to
be with them on a sim'ler occasion in the future. Loud cheers greeted the termination of his speech, but it was obvious
from some of the men's faces that they resented Grinder's remarks. These men ridiculed Socialism and regularly voted for the continuance
of capitalism, and yet they were disgusted and angry with Grinder! There was also a small number of Socialists--not more than half a dozen
altogether--who did not join in the applause. These men were all
sitting at the end of the long table presided over by Payne. None of
them had joined in the applause that greeted the speeches, and so far
neither had they made any protest. Some of them turned very red as
they listened to the concluding sentences of Grinder's oration, and
others laughed, but none of them said anything. They knew before they
came that there was sure to be a lot of 'Jolly good fellow' business
and speechmaking, and they had agreed together beforehand to take no
part one way or the other, and to refrain from openly dissenting from
anything that might be said, but they had not anticipated anything
quite so strong as this. When Grinder sat down some of those who had applauded him began to jeer
at the Socialists. 'What have you got to say to that?' 'They ain't got nothing to say now.' 'Why don't some of you get up and make a speech?' This last appeared to be a very good idea to those Liberals and Tories
who had not liked Grinder's observations, so they all began to shout
'Owen!' Several of those who had been loudest in applauding Grinder
also joined in the demand that Owen should make a speech, because they
were certain that Grinder and the other gentlemen would be able to
dispose of all his arguments; but Owen and the other Socialists made no
response except to laugh, so presently Crass tied a white handkerchief
on a cane walking-stick that belonged to Mr Didlum, and stuck it in the
vase of flowers that stood on the end of the table where the Socialist
group were sitting. When the noise had in some measure ceased, Grinder again rose. 'When I
made the few remarks that I did, I didn't know as there was any
Socialists 'ere: I could tell from the look of you that most of you had
more sense. At the same time I'm rather glad I said what I did,
because it just shows you what sort of chaps these Socialists are. They're pretty artful--they know when to talk and when to keep their
mouths shut. What they like is to get hold of a few ignorant workin'
men in a workshop or a public house, and then they can talk by the
mile--reg'ler shop lawyers, you know wot I mean--I'm right and
everybody else is wrong. You know the sort of thing I
mean. When they finds theirselves in the company of edicated people
wot knows a little more than they does theirselves, and who isn't
likely to be misled by a lot of claptrap, why then, mum's the word. So
next time you hears any of these shop lawyers' arguments, you'll know
how much it's worth.' Most of the men were delighted with this speech, which was received
with much laughing and knocking on the tables. They remarked to each
other that Grinder was a smart man: he'd got the Socialists weighed up
just about right--to an ounce. Then, it was seen that Barrington was on his feet facing Grinder and a
sudden, awe-filled silence fell. 'It may or may not be true,' began Barrington, 'that Socialists always
know when to speak and when to keep silent, but the present occasion
hardly seemed a suitable one to discuss such subjects. 'We are here today as friends and want to forget our differences and
enjoy ourselves for a few hours. But after what Mr Grinder has said I
am quite ready to reply to him to the best of my ability. 'The fact that I am a Socialist and that I am here today as one of Mr
Rushton's employees should be an answer to the charge that Socialists
are too lazy to work for their living. And as to taking advantage of
the ignorance and simplicity of working men and trying to mislead them
with nonsensical claptrap, it would have been more to the point if Mr
Grinder had taken some particular Socialist doctrine and had proved it
to be untrue or misleading, instead of adopting the cowardly method of
making vague general charges that he cannot substantiate. He would
find it far more difficult to do that than it would be for a Socialist
to show that most of what Mr Grinder himself has been telling us is
nonsensical claptrap of the most misleading kind. He tells us that the
employers work with their brains and the men with their hands. If it
is true that no brains are required to do manual labour, why put idiots
into imbecile asylums? Why not let them do some of the hand work for
which no brains are required? As they are idiots, they would probably
be willing to work for even less than the ideal "living wage". If Mr
Grinder had ever tried, he would know that manual workers have to
concentrate their minds and their attention on their work or they would
not be able to do it at all. His talk about employers being not only
the masters but the "friends" of their workmen is also mere claptrap
because he knows as well as we do, that no matter how good or
benevolent an employer may be, no matter how much he might desire to
give his men good conditions, it is impossible for him to do so,
because he has to compete against other employers who do not do that. It is the bad employer--the sweating, slave-driving employer--who sets
the pace and the others have to adopt the same methods--very often
against their inclinations--or they would not be able to compete with
him. If any employer today were to resolve to pay his workmen not less
wages than he would be able to live upon in comfort himself, that he
would not require them to do more work in a day than he himself would
like to perform every day of his own life, Mr Grinder knows as well as
we do that such an employer would be bankrupt in a month; because he
would not be able to get any work except by taking it at the same price
as the sweaters and the slave-drivers. 'He also tells us that the interests of masters and men are identical;
but if an employer has a contract, it is to his interest to get the
work done as soon as possible; the sooner it is done the more profit he
will make; but the more quickly it is done, the sooner will the men be
out of employment. How then can it be true that their interests are
identical? 'Again, let us suppose that an employer is, say, thirty years of age
when he commences business, and that he carries it on for twenty years. Let us assume that he employs forty men more or less regularly during
that period and that the average age of these men is also thirty years
at the time the employer commences business. At the end of the twenty
years it usually happens that the employer has made enough money to
enable him to live for the remainder of his life in ease and comfort. All through those twenty years they have
earned but a bare living wage and have had to endure such privations
that those who are not already dead are broken in health. 'In the case of the employer there had been twenty years of steady
progress towards ease and leisure and independence. In the case of the
majority of the men there were twenty years of deterioration, twenty
years of steady, continuous and hopeless progress towards physical and
mental inefficiency: towards the scrap-heap, the work-house, and
premature death. What is it but false, misleading, nonsensical
claptrap to say that their interests were identical with those of their
employer? 'Such talk as that is not likely to deceive any but children or fools. We are not children, but it is very evident that Mr Grinder thinks that
we are fools. 'Occasionally it happens, through one or more of a hundred different
circumstances over which he has no control, or through some error of
judgement, that after many years of laborious mental work an employer
is overtaken by misfortune, and finds himself no better and even worse
off than when he started; but these are exceptional cases, and even if
he becomes absolutely bankrupt he is no worse off than the majority of
the workmen. 'At the same time it is quite true that the real interests of employers
and workmen are the same, but not in the sense that Mr Grinder would
have us believe. Under the existing system of society but a very few
people, no matter how well off they may be, can be certain that they or
their children will not eventually come to want; and even those who
think they are secure themselves, find their happiness diminished by
the knowledge of the poverty and misery that surrounds them on every
side. 'In that sense only is it true that the interests of masters and men
are identical, for it is to the interest of all, both rich and poor, to
help to destroy a system that inflicts suffering upon the many and
allows true happiness to none. It is to the interest of all to try and
find a better way.' Here Crass jumped up and interrupted, shouting out that they hadn't
come there to listen to a lot of speechmaking--a remark that was
greeted with unbounded applause by most of those present. Loud cries
of 'Hear, hear!' resounded through the room, and the Semi-drunk
suggested that someone should sing a song. The men who had clamoured for a speech from Owen said nothing, and Mr
Grinder, who had been feeling rather uncomfortable, was secretly very
glad of the interruption. The Semi-drunk's suggestion that someone should sing a song was
received with unqualified approbation by everybody, including
Barrington and the other Socialists, who desired nothing better than
that the time should be passed in a manner suitable to the occasion. The landlord's daughter, a rosy girl of about twenty years of age, in a
pink print dress, sat down at the piano, and the Semi-drunk, taking his
place at the side of the instrument and facing the audience, sang the
first song with appropriate gestures, the chorus being rendered
enthusiastically by the full strength of the company, including Misery,
who by this time was slightly drunk from drinking gin and ginger beer:

'Come, come, come an' 'ave a drink with me
Down by the ole Bull and Bush. Come, come, come an' shake 'ands with me
Down by the ole Bull and Bush. Come an' take 'old of me 'and
Come, come, come an' 'ave a drink with me,
Down by the old Bull and Bush,
Bush! Protracted knocking on the tables greeted the end of the song, but as
the Semi-drunk knew no other except odd verses and choruses, he called
upon Crass for the next, and that gentleman accordingly sang 'Work,
Boys, Work' to the tune of 'Tramp, tramp, tramp, the boys are
marching'. As this song is the Marseillaise of the Tariff Reform
Party, voicing as it does the highest ideals of the Tory workmen of
this country, it was an unqualified success, for most of them were
Conservatives. 'Now I'm not a wealthy man,
But I lives upon a plan
Wot will render me as 'appy as a King;
An' if you will allow, I'll sing it to you now,
For time you know is always on the wing. Work, boys, work and be contented
So long as you've enough to buy a meal. For if you will but try, you'll be wealthy--bye and bye--
If you'll only put yer shoulder to the wheel.' 'Altogether, boys,' shouted Grinder, who was a strong Tariff Reformer,
and was delighted to see that most of the men were of the same way of
thinking; and the 'boys' roared out the chorus once more:

Work, boys, work and be contented
So long as you've enough to buy a meal
For if you will but try, you'll be wealthy--bye and bye
If you'll only put your shoulder to the wheel. As they sang the words of this noble chorus the Tories seemed to become
inspired with lofty enthusiasm. It is of course impossible to say for
certain, but probably as they sang there arose before their exalted
imaginations, a vision of the Past, and looking down the long vista of
the years that were gone, they saw that from their childhood they had
been years of poverty and joyless toil. They saw their fathers and
mothers, weaned and broken with privation and excessive labour, sinking
unhonoured into the welcome oblivion of the grave. And then, as a change came over the spirit of their dream, they saw the
Future, with their own children travelling along the same weary road to
the same kind of goal. It is possible that visions of this character were conjured up in their
minds by the singing, for the words of the song gave expression to
their ideal of what human life should be. That was all they wanted--to
be allowed to work like brutes for the benefit of other people. They
did not want to be civilized themselves and they intended to take good
care that the children they had brought into the world should never
enjoy the benefits of civilization either. As they often said:

'Who and what are our children that they shouldn't be made to work for
their betters? They're not Gentry's children, are they? The good
things of life was never meant for the likes of them. That's wot the likes of them was made for, and if we can only get
Tariff Reform for 'em they will always be sure of plenty of it--not
only Full Time, but Overtime! As for edication, travellin' in furrin'
parts, an' enjoying life an' all sich things as that, they was never
meant for the likes of our children--they're meant for Gentry's
children! Our children is only like so much dirt compared with
Gentry's children! That's wot the likes of us is made for--to Work for
Gentry, so as they can 'ave plenty of time to enjoy theirselves; and
the Gentry is made to 'ave a good time so as the likes of us can 'ave
Plenty of Work.' There were several more verses, and by the time they had sung them all,
the Tories were in a state of wild enthusiasm. Even Ned Dawson, who
had fallen asleep with his head pillowed on his arms on the table,
roused himself up at the end of each verse, and after having joined in
the chorus, went to sleep again. At the end of the song they gave three cheers for Tariff Reform and
Plenty of Work, and then Crass, who, as the singer of the last song,
had the right to call upon the next man, nominated Philpot, who
received an ovation when he stood up, for he was a general favourite. He never did no harm to nobody, and he was always wiling to do anyone a
good turn whenever he had the opportunity. Shouts of 'Good old Joe'
resounded through the room as he crossed over to the piano, and in
response to numerous requests for 'The old song' he began to sing 'The
Flower Show':

'Whilst walkin' out the other night, not knowing where to go
I saw a bill upon a wall about a Flower Show. So I thought the flowers I'd go and see to pass away the night. And when I got into that Show it was a curious sight. So with your kind intention and a little of your aid,
Tonight some flowers I'll mention which I hope will never fade.' Omnes:
To-night some flowers I'll mention which I hope will never fade.' There were several more verses, from which it appeared that the
principal flowers in the Show were the Rose, the Thistle and the
Shamrock. When he had finished, the applause was so deafening and the demands for
an encore so persistent that to satisfy them he sang another old
favourite--'Won't you buy my pretty flowers?' 'Ever coming, ever going,
Men and women hurry by,
Heedless of the tear-drops gleaming,
In her sad and wistful eye
How her little heart is sighing
Thro' the cold and dreary hours,
Only listen to her crying,
"Won't you buy my pretty flowers?"' When the last verse of this sang had been sung five er six times,
Philpot exercised his right of nominating the next singer, and called
upon Dick Wantley, who with many suggestive gestures and grimaces sang
'Put me amongst the girls', and afterwards called upon Payne, the
foreman carpenter, who gave 'I'm the Marquis of Camberwell Green'. There was a lot of what music-hall artists call 'business' attached to
his song, and as he proceeded, Payne, who was ghastly pale and very
nervous, went through a lot of galvanic motions and gestures, bowing
and scraping and sliding about and flourishing his handkerchief in
imitation of the courtly graces of the Marquis. During this
performance the audience maintained an appalling silence, which so
embarrassed Payne that before he was half-way through the song he had
to stop because he could not remember the rest. However, to make up
for this failure he sang another called 'We all must die, like the fire
in the grate'. This also was received in a very lukewarm manner by the
crowd, same of whom laughed and others suggested that if he couldn't
sing any better than that, the sooner HE was dead the better. This was followed by another Tory ballad, the chorus being as follows:

His clothes may be ragged, his hands may be soiled. But where's the disgrace if for bread he has toiled. His 'art is in the right place, deny it no one can
The backbone of Old England is the honest workin' man.' After a few more songs it was decided to adjourn to a field at the rear
of the tavern to have a game of cricket. Sides were formed, Rushton,
Didlum, Grinder, and the other gentlemen taking part just as if they
were only common people, and while the game was in progress the rest
played ring quoits or reclined on the grass watching the players,
whilst the remainder amused themselves drinking beer and playing cards
and shove-ha'penny in the bar parlour, or taking walks around the
village sampling the beer at the other pubs, of which there were three. The time passed in this manner until seven o'clock, the hour at which
it had been arranged to start on the return journey; but about a
quarter of an hour before they set out an unpleasant incident occurred. During the time that they were playing cricket a party of glee singers,
consisting of four young girls and five men, three of whom were young
fellows, the other two being rather elderly, possibly the fathers of
some of the younger members of the party, came into the field and sang
several part songs for their entertainment. Towards the close of the
game most of the men had assembled in this field, and during a pause in
the singing the musicians sent one of their number, a shy girl about
eighteen years of age--who seemed as if she would rather that someone
else had the task--amongst the crowd to make a collection. The girl
was very nervous and blushed as she murmured her request, and held out
a straw hat that evidently belonged to one of the male members of the
glee party. A few of the men gave pennies, some refused or pretended
not to see either the girl or the hat, others offered to give her some
money for a kiss, but what caused the trouble was that two or three of
those who had been drinking more than was good for them dropped the
still burning ends of their cigars, all wet with saliva as they were,
into the hat and Dick Wantley spit into it. The girl hastily returned to her companions, and as she went some of
the men who had witnessed the behaviour of those who had insulted her,
advised them to make themselves scarce, as they stood a good chance of
getting a thrashing from the girl's friends. They said it would serve
them dam' well right if they did get a hammering. Partly sobered by fear, the three culprits sneaked off and hid
themselves, pale and trembling with terror, under the box seats of the
three brakes. They had scarcely left when the men of the glee party
came running up, furiously demanding to see those who had insulted the
girl. As they could get no satisfactory answer, one of their number
ran back and presently returned, bringing the girl with him, the other
young women following a little way behind. She said she could not see the men they were looking for, so they went
down to the public house to see if they could find them there, some of
the Rushton's men accompanying them and protesting their indignation. The time passed quickly enough and by half past seven the brakes were
loaded up again and a start made for the return journey. They called at all the taverns on the road, and by the time they
reached the Blue Lion half of them were three sheets in the wind, and
five or six were very drunk, including the driver of Crass's brake and
the man with the bugle. The latter was so far gone that they had to
let him lie down in the bottom of the carriage amongst their feet,
where he fell asleep, while the others amused themselves by blowing
weird shrieks out of the horn. There was an automatic penny-in-the-slot piano at the Blue Lion and as
that was the last house of the road they made a rather long stop there,
playing hooks and rings, shove-ha'penny, drinking, singing, dancing and
finally quarrelling. Several of them seemed disposed to quarrel with Newman. All sorts of
offensive remarks were made at him in his hearing. Once someone
ostentatiously knocked his glass of lemonade over, and a little later
someone else collided violently with him just as he was in the act of
drinking, causing his lemonade to spill all over his clothes. The
worst of it was that most of these rowdy ones were his fellow
passengers in Crass's brake, and there was not much chance of getting a
seat in either of the other carriages, for they were overcrowded
already. From the remarks he overheard from time to time, Newman guessed the
reason of their hostility, and as their manner towards him grew more
menacing, he became so nervous that he began to think of quietly
sneaking off and walking the remainder of the way home by himself,
unless he could get somebody in one of the other brakes to change seats
with him. Whilst these thoughts were agitating his mind, Dick Wantley suddenly
shouted out that he was going to go for the dirty tyke who had offered
to work under price last winter. It was his fault that they were all working for sixpence halfpenny and
he was going to wipe the floor with him. Some of his friends eagerly
offered to assist, but others interposed, and for a time it looked as
if there was going to be a free fight, the aggressors struggling hard
to get at their inoffensive victim. Eventually, however, Newman found a seat in Misery's brake, squatting
on the floor with his back to the horses, thankful enough to be out of
reach of the drunken savages, who were now roaring out ribald songs and
startling the countryside, as they drove along, with unearthly blasts
on the coach horn. Meantime, although none of them seemed to notice it, the brake was
travelling at a furious rate, and swaying about from side to side in a
very erratic manner. It would have been the last carriage, but things
had got a bit mixed at the Blue Lion and, instead of bringing up the
rear of the procession, it was now second, just behind the small
vehicle containing Rushton and his friends. Crass several times reminded them that the other carriage was so near
that Rushton must be able to hear every word that was said, and these
repeated admonitions at length enraged the Semi-drunk, who shouted out
that they didn't care a b--r if he could hear. 'You're only a dirty toe-rag! That's all you are--a bloody rotter! That's the only reason you gets put in charge of jobs--'cos you're a
good <DW65>-driver! You're a bloody sight worse than Rushton or Misery
either! Who was it started the one-man, one-room dodge, eh? 'Knock 'im orf 'is bleedin' perch,' suggested Bundy. Everybody seemed to think this was a very good idea, but when the
Semi-drunk attempted to rise for the purpose of carrying it out, he was
thrown down by a sudden lurch of the carriage on the top of the
prostrate figure of the bugle man and by the time the others had
assisted him back to his seat they had forgotten all about their plan
of getting rid of Crass. Meantime the speed of the vehicle had increased to a fearful rate. Rushton and the other occupants of the little wagonette in front had
been for some time shouting to them to moderate the pace of their
horses, but as the driver of Crass's brake was too drunk to understand
what they said he took no notice, and they had no alternative but to
increase their own speed to avoid being run down. The drunken driver
now began to imagine that they were trying to race him, and became
fired with the determination to pass them. It was a very narrow road,
but there was just about room to do it, and he had sufficient
confidence in his own skill with the ribbons to believe that he could
get past in safety. The terrified gesticulations and the shouts of Rushton's party only
served to infuriate him, because he imagined that they were jeering at
him for not being able to overtake them. He stood up on the footboard
and lashed the horses till they almost flew over the ground, while the
carriage swayed and skidded in a fearful manner. In front, the horses of Rushton's conveyance were also galloping at top
speed, the vehicle bounding and reeling from one side of the road to
the other, whilst its terrified occupants, whose faces were blanched
with apprehension, sat clinging to their seats and to each other, their
eyes projecting from the sockets as they gazed back with terror at
their pursuers, some of whom were encouraging the drunken driver with
promises of quarts of beer, and urging on the horses with curses and
yells. Crass's fat face was pallid with fear as he clung trembling to his
seat. Another man, very drunk and oblivious of everything, was leaning
over the side of the brake, spewing into the road, while the remainder,
taking no interest in the race, amused themselves by singing--conducted
by the Semi-drunk--as loud as they could roar:

'Has anyone seen a Germin band,
Germin Band, Germin Band? I've been lookin' about,
Pom--Pom, Pom, Pom, Pom! 'I've searched every pub, both near and far,
Near and far, near and far,
I want my Fritz,
What plays tiddley bits
On the big trombone!' The one presided over by
Hunter contained a mournful crew. Nimrod himself, from the effects of
numerous drinks of ginger beer with secret dashes of gin in it, had
become at length crying drunk, and sat weeping in gloomy silence beside
the driver, a picture of lachrymose misery and but dimly conscious of
his surroundings, and Slyme, who rode with Hunter because he was a
fellow member of the Shining Light Chapel. Then there was another
paperhanger--an unhappy wretch who was afflicted with religious mania;
he had brought a lot of tracts with him which he had distributed to the
other men, to the villagers of Tubberton and to anybody else who would
take them. Most of the other men who rode in Nimrod's brake were of the
'religious' working man type. Ignorant, shallow-pated dolts, without
as much intellectuality as an average cat. Attendants at various PSAs
and 'Church Mission Halls' who went every Sunday afternoon to be
lectured on their duty to their betters and to have their minds--save
the mark!--addled and stultified by such persons as Rushton, Sweater,
Didlum and Grinder, not to mention such mental specialists as the holy
reverend Belchers and Boshers, and such persons as John Starr. At these meetings none of the'respectable' working men were allowed to
ask any questions, or to object to, or find fault with anything that
was said, or to argue, or discuss, or criticize. They had to sit there
like a lot of children while they were lectured and preached at and
patronized. Even as sheep before their shearers are dumb, so they were
not permitted to open their mouths. For that matter they did not wish
to be allowed to ask any questions, or to discuss anything. They sat there and listened to what was said,
but they had but a very hazy conception of what it was all about. Most of them belonged to these PSAs merely for the sake of the loaves
and fishes. Every now and then they were awarded prizes--Self-help by
Smiles, and other books suitable for perusal by persons suffering from
almost complete obliteration of the mental faculties. Besides other
benefits there was usually a Christmas Club attached to the 'PSA' or
'Mission' and the things were sold to the members slightly below cost
as a reward for their servility. They were for the most part tame, broken-spirited, poor wretches who
contentedly resigned themselves to a life of miserable toil and
poverty, and with callous indifference abandoned their offspring to the
same fate. Compared with such as these, the savages of New Guinea or
the Red Indians are immensely higher in the scale of manhood. They call no man master; and if they do not enjoy the benefits
of science and civilization, neither do they toil to create those
things for the benefit of others. And as for their children--most of
those savages would rather knock them on the head with a tomahawk than
allow them to grow up to be half-starved drudges for other men. But these were not free: their servile lives were spent in grovelling
and cringing and toiling and running about like little dogs at the
behest of their numerous masters. And as for the benefits of science
and civilization, their only share was to work and help to make them,
and then to watch other men enjoy them. And all the time they were
tame and quiet and content and said, 'The likes of us can't expect to
'ave nothing better, and as for our children wot's been good enough for
us is good enough for the likes of them.' But although they were so religious and respectable and so contented to
be robbed on a large scale, yet in small matters, in the commonplace
and petty affairs of their everyday existence, most of these men were
acutely alive to what their enfeebled minds conceived to be their own
selfish interests, and they possessed a large share of that singular
cunning which characterizes this form of dementia. That was why they had chosen to ride in Nimrod's brake--because they
wished to chum up with him as much as possible, in order to increase
their chances of being kept on in preference to others who were not so
respectable. Some of these poor creatures had very large heads, but a close
examination would have shown that the size was due to the extraordinary
thickness of the bones. The cavity of the skull was not so large as
the outward appearance of the head would have led a casual observer to
suppose, and even in those instances where the brain was of a fair
size, it was of inferior quality, being coarse in texture and to a
great extent composed of fat. Although most of them were regular attendants at some place of
so-called worship, they were not all teetotallers, and some of them
were now in different stages of intoxication, not because they had had
a great deal to drink, but because--being usually abstemious--it did
not take very much to make them drunk. From time to time this miserable crew tried to enliven the journey by
singing, but as most of them only knew odd choruses it did not come to
much. As for the few who did happen to know all the words of a song,
they either had no voices or were not inclined to sing. The most
successful contribution was that of the religious maniac, who sang
several hymns, the choruses being joined in by everybody, both drunk
and sober. The strains of these hymns, wafted back through the balmy air to the
last coach, were the cause of much hilarity to its occupants who also
sang the choruses. As they had all been brought up under 'Christian'
influences and educated in 'Christian' schools, they all knew the
words: 'Work, for the night is coming', 'Turn poor Sinner and escape
Eternal Fire', 'Pull for the Shore' and 'Where is my Wandering Boy?' The last reminded Harlow of a song he knew nearly all the words of,
'Take the news to Mother', the singing of which was much appreciated by
all present and when it was finished they sang it all over again,
Philpot being so affected that he actually shed tears; and Easton
confided to Owen that there was no getting away from the fact that a
boy's best friend is his mother. In this last carriage, as in the other two, there were several men who
were more or less intoxicated and for the same reason--because not
being used to taking much liquor, the few extra glasses they had drunk
had got into their heads. They were as sober a lot of fellows as need
be at ordinary times, and they had flocked together in this brake
because they were all of about the same character--not tame, contented
imbeciles like most of those in Misery's carnage, but men something
like Harlow, who, although dissatisfied with their condition, doggedly
continued the hopeless, weary struggle against their fate. They were not teetotallers and they never went to either church or
chapel, but they spent little in drink or on any form of enjoyment--an
occasional glass of beer or a still rarer visit to a music-hall and now
and then an outing more or less similar to this being the sum total of
their pleasures. These four brakes might fitly be regarded as so many travelling lunatic
asylums, the inmates of each exhibiting different degrees and forms of
mental disorder. The occupants of the first--Rushton, Didlum and Co.--might be classed
as criminal lunatics who injured others as well as themselves. In a
properly constituted system of society such men as these would be
regarded as a danger to the community, and would be placed under such
restraint as would effectually prevent them from harming themselves or
others. These wretches had abandoned every thought and thing that
tends to the elevation of humanity. They had given up everything that
makes life good and beautiful, in order to carry on a mad struggle to
acquire money which they would never be sufficiently cultured to
properly enjoy. Deaf and blind to every other consideration, to this
end they had degraded their intellects by concentrating them upon the
minutest details of expense and profit, and for their reward they raked
in their harvest of muck and lucre along with the hatred and curses of
those they injured in the process. They knew that the money they
accumulated was foul with the sweat of their brother men, and wet with
the tears of little children, but they were deaf and blind and callous
to the consequences of their greed. Devoid of every ennobling thought
or aspiration, they grovelled on the filthy ground, tearing up the
flowers to get at the worms. In the coach presided over by Crass, Bill Bates, the Semi-drunk and the
other two or three habitual boozers were all men who had been driven
mad by their environment. At one time most of them had been fellows
like Harlow, working early and late whenever they got the chance, only
to see their earnings swallowed up in a few minutes every Saturday by
the landlord and all the other host of harpies and profitmongers, who
were waiting to demand it as soon as it was earned. In the years that
were gone, most of these men used to take all their money home
religiously every Saturday and give it to the 'old girl' for the house,
and then, lo and behold, in a moment, yea, even in the twinkling of an
eye, it was all gone! and nothing to
show for it except an insufficiency of the bare necessaries of life! But after a time they had become heartbroken and sick and tired of that
sort of thing. They hankered after a little pleasure, a little
excitement, a little fun, and they found that it was possible to buy
something like those in quart pots at the pub. They knew they were not
the genuine articles, but they were better than nothing at all, and so
they gave up the practice of giving all their money to the old girl to
give to the landlord and the other harpies, and bought beer with some
of it instead; and after a time their minds became so disordered from
drinking so much of this beer, that they cared nothing whether the rent
was paid or not. They cared but little whether the old girl and the
children had food or clothes. They said, 'To hell with everything and
everyone,' and they cared for nothing so long as they could get plenty
of beer. The occupants of Nimrod's coach have already been described and most of
them may correctly be classed as being similar to <DW35> idiots of the
third degree--very cunning and selfish, and able to read and write, but
with very little understanding of what they read except on the most
common topics. As for those who rode with Harlow in the last coach, most of them, as
has been already intimated, were men of similar character to himself. The greater number of them fairly good workmen and--unlike the boozers
in Crass's coach--not yet quite heartbroken, but still continuing the
hopeless struggle against poverty. These differed from Nimrod's lot
inasmuch as they were not content. They were always complaining of
their wretched circumstances, and found a certain kind of pleasure in
listening to the tirades of the Socialists against the existing social
conditions, and professing their concurrence with many of the
sentiments expressed, and a desire to bring about a better state of
affairs. Most of them appeared to be quite sane, being able to converse
intelligently on any ordinary subject without discovering any symptoms
of mental disorder, and it was not until the topic of Parliamentary
elections was mentioned that evidence of their insanity was
forthcoming. It then almost invariably appeared that they were subject
to the most extraordinary hallucinations and extravagant delusions, the
commonest being that the best thing that the working people could do to
bring about an improvement in their condition, was to continue to elect
their Liberal and Tory employers to make laws for and to rule over
them! At such times, if anyone ventured to point out to them that that
was what they had been doing all their lives, and referred them to the
manifold evidences that met them wherever they turned their eyes of its
folly and futility, they were generally immediately seized with a
paroxysm of the most furious mania, and were with difficulty prevented
from savagely assaulting those who differed from them. They were usually found in a similar condition of maniacal excitement
for some time preceding and during a Parliamentary election, but
afterwards they usually manifested that modification of insanity which
is called melancholia. In fact they alternated between these two forms
of the disease. During elections, the highest state of exalted mania;
and at ordinary times--presumably as a result of reading about the
proceedings in Parliament of the persons whom they had elected--in a
state of melancholic depression, in their case an instance of hope
deferred making the heart sick. This condition occasionally proved to be the stage of transition into
yet another modification of the disease--that known as dipsomania, the
phase exhibited by Bill Bates and the Semi-drunk. Yet another form of insanity was that shown by the Socialists. Like
most of their fellow passengers in the last coach, the majority of
these individuals appeared to be of perfectly sound mind. Upon
entering into conversation with them one found that they reasoned
correctly and even brilliantly. They had divided their favourite
subject into three parts. First; an exact definition of the condition
known as Poverty. Secondly; a knowledge of the causes of Poverty; and
thirdly, a rational plan for the cure of Poverty. Those who were
opposed to them always failed to refute their arguments, and feared,
and nearly always refused, to meet them in fair fight--in open
debate--preferring to use the cowardly and despicable weapons of
slander and misrepresentation. The fact that these Socialists never
encountered their opponents except to defeat them, was a powerful
testimony to the accuracy of their reasonings and the correctness of
their conclusions--and yet they were undoubtedly mad. One might
converse with them for an indefinite time on the three divisions of
their subject without eliciting any proofs of insanity, but directly
one inquired what means they proposed to employ in order to bring about
the adoption of their plan, they replied that they hoped to do so by
reasoning with the others! Although they had sense enough to understand the real causes of
poverty, and the only cure for poverty, they were nevertheless so
foolish that they entertained the delusion that it is possible to
reason with demented persons, whereas every sane person knows that to
reason with a maniac is not only fruitless, but rather tends to fix
more deeply the erroneous impressions of his disordered mind. The wagonette containing Rushton and his friends continued to fly over
the road, pursued by the one in which rode Crass, Bill Bates, and the
Semi-drunk; but notwithstanding all the efforts of the drunken driver,
they were unable to overtake or pass the smaller vehicle, and when they
reached the foot of the hill that led up to Windley the distance
between the two carriages rapidly increased, and the race was
reluctantly abandoned. When they reached the top of the hill Rushton and his friends did not
wait for the others, but drove off towards Mugsborough as fast as they
could. Crass's brake was the next to arrive at the summit, and they halted
there to wait for the other two conveyances and when they came up all
those who lived nearby got out, and some of them sang 'God Save the
King', and then with shouts of 'Good Night', and cries of 'Don't forget
six o'clock Monday morning', they dispersed to their homes and the
carriages moved off once more. At intervals as they passed through Windley brief stoppages were made
in order to enable others to get out, and by the time they reached the
top of the long incline that led down into Mugsborough it was nearly
twelve o'clock and the brakes were almost empty, the only passengers
being Owen and four or five others who lived down town. By ones and
twos these also departed, disappearing into the obscurity of the night,
until there was none left, and the Beano was an event of the past. Chapter 45

The Great Oration


The outlook for the approaching winter was--as usual--gloomy in the
extreme. One of the leading daily newspapers published an article
prophesying a period of severe industrial depression. 'As the
warehouses were glutted with the things produced by the working
classes, there was no need for them to do any more work--at present;
and so they would now have to go and starve until such time as their
masters had sold or consumed the things already produced.' Of course,
the writer of the article did not put it exactly like that, but that
was what it amounted to. This article was quoted by nearly all the
other papers, both Liberal and Conservative. The Tory papers--ignoring
the fact that all the Protectionist countries were in exactly the same
condition, published yards of misleading articles about Tariff Reform. The Liberal papers said Tariff Reform was no remedy. Look at America
and Germany--worse than here! Still, the situation was undoubtedly
very serious--continued the Liberal papers--and Something would have to
be done. They did not say exactly what, because, of course, they did
not know; but Something would have to be done--tomorrow. They talked
vaguely about Re-afforestation, and Reclaiming of Foreshores, and Sea
walls: but of course there was the question of Cost! But all the same Something would have to be done. Great caution was necessary in dealing with
such difficult problems! We must go slow, and if in the meantime a few
thousand children die of starvation, or become 'rickety' or consumptive
through lack of proper nutrition it is, of course, very regrettable,
but after all they are only working-class children, so it doesn't
matter a great deal. Most of the writers of these Liberal and Tory papers seemed to think
that all that was necessary was to find 'Work' for the 'working' class! That was their conception of a civilized nation in the twentieth
century! For the majority of the people to work like brutes in order
to obtain a 'living wage' for themselves and to create luxuries for a
small minority of persons who are too lazy to work at all! And
although this was all they thought was necessary, they did not know
what to do in order to bring even that much to pass! Winter was
returning, bringing in its train the usual crop of horrors, and the
Liberal and Tory monopolists of wisdom did not know what to do! Rushton's had so little work in that nearly all the hands expected that
they would be slaughtered the next Saturday after the 'Beano' and there
was one man--Jim Smith he was called--who was not allowed to live even
till then: he got the sack before breakfast on the Monday morning after
the Beano. This man was about forty-five years old, but very short for his age,
being only a little over five feet in height. The other men used to
say that Little Jim was not made right, for while his body was big
enough for a six-footer, his legs were very short, and the fact that he
was rather inclined to be fat added to the oddity of his appearance. On the Monday morning after the Beano he was painting an upper room in
a house where several other men were working, and it was customary for
the coddy to shout 'Yo! at mealtimes, to let the hands know when
it was time to leave off work. At about ten minutes to eight, Jim had
squared the part of the work he had been doing--the window--so he
decided not to start on the door or the skirting until after breakfast. Whilst he was waiting for the foreman to shout 'Yo! his mind
reverted to the Beano, and he began to hum the tunes of some of the
songs that had been sung. He hummed the tune of 'He's a jolly good
fellow', and he could not get the tune out of his mind: it kept buzzing
in his head. It could not be very far
off eight now, to judge by the amount of work he had done since six
o'clock. He had rubbed down and stopped all the woodwork and painted
the window. He was only getting
sixpence-halfpenny an hour and if he hadn't earned a bob he hadn't
earned nothing! Anyhow, whether he had done enough for 'em or not he
wasn't goin' to do no more before breakfast. The tune of 'He's a jolly good fellow' was still buzzing in his head;
he thrust his hands deep down in his trouser pockets, and began to
polka round the room, humming softly:

'I won't do no more before breakfast! So 'ip 'ip 'ip 'ooray! So 'ip 'ip 'ip 'ooray So 'ip 'ip 'ooray! I won't do no more before breakfast--etc.' and you won't do but very little after breakfast, here!' 'I've bin watchin' of you through the crack of the door for the last
'arf hour; and you've not done a dam' stroke all the time. You make
out yer time sheet, and go to the office at nine o'clock and git yer
money; we can't afford to pay you for playing the fool.' Leaving the man dumbfounded and without waiting for a reply, Misery
went downstairs and after kicking up a devil of a row with the foreman
for the lack of discipline on the job, he instructed him that Smith was
not to be permitted to resume work after breakfast. He had come in so stealthily that no one had known anything of his
arrival until they heard him bellowing at Smith. The latter did not stay to take breakfast but went off at once, and
when he was gone the other chaps said it served him bloody well right:
he was always singing, he ought to have more sense. You can't do as
you like nowadays you know! Easton--who was working at another job with Crass as his foreman--knew
that unless some more work came in he was likely to be one of those who
would have to go. John moved to the bedroom. As far as he could see it was only a week or two at
the most before everything would be finished up. But notwithstanding
the prospect of being out of work so soon he was far happier than he
had been for several months past, for he imagined he had discovered the
cause of Ruth's strange manner. This knowledge came to him on the night of the Beano. When he arrived
home he found that Ruth had already gone to bed: she had not been well,
and it was Mrs Linden's explanation of her illness that led Easton to
think that he had discovered the cause of the unhappiness of the last
few months. Now that he knew--as he thought--he blamed himself for not
having been more considerate and patient with her. At the same time he
was at a loss to understand why she had not told him about it herself. The only explanation he could think of was the one suggested by Mrs
Linden--that at such times women often behaved strangely. However that
might be, he was glad to think he knew the reason of it all, and he
resolved that he would be more gentle and forebearing with her. The place where he was working was practically finished. It was a
large house called 'The Refuge', very similar to 'The Cave', and during
the last week or two, it had become what they called a 'hospital'. That is, as the other jobs became finished the men were nearly all sent
to this one, so that there was quite a large crowd of them there. The
inside work was all finished--with the exception of the kitchen, which
was used as a mess room, and the scullery, which was the paint shop. Poor old Joe Philpot, whose
rheumatism had been very bad lately, was doing a very rough
job--painting the gable from a long ladder. But though there were plenty of younger men more suitable for this,
Philpot did not care to complain for fear Crass or Misery should think
he was not up to his work. At dinner time all the old hands assembled
in the kitchen, including Crass, Easton, Harlow, Bundy and Dick
Wantley, who still sat on a pail behind his usual moat. Philpot and Harlow were absent and everybody wondered what had become
of them. Several times during the morning they had been seen whispering together
and comparing scraps of paper, and various theories were put forward to
account for their disappearance. Most of the men thought they must
have heard something good about the probable winner of the Handicap and
had gone to put something on. Some others thought that perhaps they
had heard of another 'job' about to be started by some other firm and
had gone to inquire about it. 'Looks to me as if they'll stand a very good chance of gettin' drowned
if they're gone very far,' remarked Easton, referring to the weather. It had been threatening to rain all the morning, and during the last
few minutes it had become so dark that Crass lit the gas, so that--as
he expressed it--they should be able to see the way to their mouths. Outside, the wind grew more boisterous every moment; the darkness
continued to increase, and presently there succeeded a torrential
downfall of rain, which beat fiercely against the windows, and poured
in torrents down the glass. No
more work could be done outside that day, and there was nothing left to
do inside. As they were paid by the hour, this would mean that they
would have to lose half a day's pay. 'If it keeps on like this we won't be able to do no more work, and we
won't be able to go home either,' remarked Easton. 'Well, we're all right 'ere, ain't we?' said the man behind the moat;
'there's a nice fire and plenty of heasy chairs. Wot the 'ell more do
you want?' 'If we only had a shove-ha'penny
table or a ring board, I reckon we should be able to enjoy ourselves
all right.' Philpot and Harlow were still absent, and the others again fell to
wondering where they could be. 'I see old Joe up on 'is ladder only a few minutes before twelve,'
remarked Wantley. At this moment the two truants returned, looking very important. Philpot was armed with a hammer and carried a pair of steps, while
Harlow bore a large piece of wallpaper which the two of them proceeded
to tack on the wall, much to the amusement of the others, who read the
announcement opposite written in charcoal. Every day at meals since Barrington's unexpected outburst at the Beano
dinner, the men had been trying their best to 'kid him on' to make
another speech, but so far without success. If anything, he had been
even more silent and reserved than before, as if he felt some regret
that he had spoken as he had on that occasion. Crass and his disciples
attributed Barrington's manner to fear that he was going to get the
sack for his trouble and they agreed amongst themselves that it would
serve him bloody well right if 'e did get the push. When they had fixed the poster on the wall, Philpot stood the steps in
the corner of the room, with the back part facing outwards, and then,
everything being ready for the lecturer, the two sat down in their
accustomed places and began to eat their dinners, Harlow remarking that
they would have to buck up or they would be too late for the meeting;
and the rest of the crowd began to discuss the poster. 'Wot the 'ell does PLO mean?' 'Plain Layer On,' answered Philpot modestly. ''Ave you ever 'eard the Professor preach before?' inquired the man on
the pail, addressing Bundy. Imperial Bankquet Hall
'The Refuge'
on Thursday at 12.30 prompt

Professor Barrington
WILL DELIVER A

ORATION

ENTITLED

THE GREAT SECRET, OR
HOW TO LIVE WITHOUT WORK

The Rev. Joe Philpot PLO
(Late absconding secretary of the light refreshment fund)
Will take the chair and anything else
he can lay his hands on. At The End Of The Lecture
A MEETING WILL BE
ARRANGED
And carried out according to the
Marquis of Queensbury's Rules. A Collection will be took up
in aid of the cost of printing

'Only once, at the Beano,' replied that individual; 'an' that was once
too often!' 'Finest speaker I ever 'eard,' said the man on the pail with
enthusiasm. 'I wouldn't miss this lecture for anything: this is one of
'is best subjects. I got 'ere about two hours before the doors was
opened, so as to be sure to get a seat.' 'Yes, it's a very good subject,' said Crass, with a sneer. 'I believe
most of the Labour Members in Parliament is well up in it.' 'Seems to me as
if most of them knows something about it too.' 'The difference is,' said Owen, 'the working classes voluntarily pay to
keep the Labour Members, but whether they like it or not, they have to
keep the others.' 'The Labour members is sent to the 'Ouse of Commons,' said Harlow, 'and
paid their wages to do certain work for the benefit of the working
classes, just the same as we're sent 'ere and paid our wages by the
Bloke to paint this 'ouse.' 'Yes,' said Crass; 'but if we didn't do the work we're paid to do, we
should bloody soon get the sack.' 'I can't see how we've got to keep the other members,' said Slyme;
'they're mostly rich men, and they live on their own money.' 'And I should like to know where we should be
without 'em! It seems to me more like it
that they keeps us! Where
should we be if it wasn't for all the money they spend and the work
they 'as done? If the owner of this 'ouse 'adn't 'ad the money to
spend to 'ave it done up, most of us would 'ave bin out of work this
last six weeks, and starvin', the same as lots of others 'as been.' 'Oh yes, that's right enough,' agreed Bundy. Before any work can be done there's one thing
necessary, and that's money. It would be easy to find work for all the
unemployed if the local authorities could only raise the money.' 'Yes; that's quite true,' said Owen. 'And that proves that money is
the cause of poverty, because poverty consists in being short of the
necessaries of life: the necessaries of life are all produced by labour
applied to the raw materials: the raw materials exist in abundance and
there are plenty of people able and willing to work; but under present
conditions no work can be done without money; and so we have the
spectacle of a great army of people compelled to stand idle and starve
by the side of the raw materials from which their labour could produce
abundance of all the things they need--they are rendered helpless by
the power of Money! Those who possess all the money say that the
necessaries of life shall not be produced except for their profit.' and you can't alter it,' said Crass, triumphantly. 'It's always
been like it, and it always will be like it.' 'There's always been
rich and poor in the world, and there always will be.' Several others expressed their enthusiastic agreement with Crass's
opinion, and most of them appeared to be highly delighted to think that
the existing state of affairs could never be altered. 'It hasn't always been like it, and it won't always be like it,' said
Owen. 'The time will come, and it's not very far distant, when the
necessaries of life will be produced for use and not for profit. The
time is coming when it will no longer be possible for a few selfish
people to condemn thousands of men and women and little children to
live in misery and die of want.' 'Ah well, it won't be in your time, or mine either,' said Crass
gleefully, and most of the others laughed with imbecile satisfaction. 'I've 'eard a 'ell of a lot about this 'ere Socialism,' remarked the
man behind the moat, 'but up to now I've never met nobody wot could
tell you plainly exactly wot it is.' 'Yes; that's what I should like to know too,' said Easton. 'Socialism means, "What's yours is mine, and what's mine's me own,"'
observed Bundy, and during the laughter that greeted this definition
Slyme was heard to say that Socialism meant Materialism, Atheism and
Free Love, and if it were ever to come about it would degrade men and
women to the level of brute beasts. Harlow said Socialism was a
beautiful ideal, which he for one would be very glad to see realized,
and he was afraid it was altogether too good to be practical, because
human nature is too mean and selfish. Sawkins said that Socialism was
a lot of bloody rot, and Crass expressed the opinion--which he had
culled from the delectable columns of the Obscurer--that it meant
robbing the industrious for the benefit of the idle and thriftless. Philpot had by this time finished his bread and cheese, and, having
taken a final draught of tea, he rose to his feet, and crossing over to
the corner of the room, ascended the pulpit, being immediately greeted
with a tremendous outburst of hooting, howling and booing, which he
smilingly acknowledged by removing his cap from his bald head and
bowing repeatedly. When the storm of shrieks, yells, groans and
catcalls had in some degree subsided, and Philpot was able to make
himself heard, he addressed the meeting as follows:

'Gentlemen: First of all I beg to thank you very sincerely for the
magnificent and cordial reception you have given me on this occasion,
and I shall try to deserve your good opinion by opening the meeting as
briefly as possible. 'Putting all jokes aside, I think we're all agreed about one thing, and
that is, that there's plenty of room for improvement in things in
general. As our other lecturer, Professor Owen, pointed
out in one of 'is lectures and as most of you 'ave read in the
newspapers, although British trade was never so good before as it is
now, there was never so much misery and poverty, and so many people out
of work, and so many small shopkeepers goin' up the spout as there is
at this partickiler time. Now, some people tells us as the way to put
everything right is to 'ave Free Trade and plenty of cheap food. Well,
we've got them all now, but the misery seems to go on all around us all
the same. Then there's other people tells us as the 'Friscal Policy'
is the thing to put everything right. ("Hear, hear" from Crass and
several others.) And then there's another lot that ses that Socialism
is the only remedy. Well, we all know pretty well wot Free Trade and
Protection means, but most of us don't know exactly what Socialism
means; and I say as it's the dooty of every man to try and find out
which is the right thing to vote for, and when 'e's found it out, to do
wot 'e can to 'elp to bring it about. And that's the reason we've gorn
to the enormous expense of engaging Professor Barrington to come 'ere
this afternoon and tell us exactly what Socialism is. ''As I 'ope you're all just as anxious to 'ear it as I am myself, I
will not stand between you and the lecturer no longer, but will now
call upon 'im to address you.' Philpot was loudly applauded as he descended from the pulpit, and in
response to the clamorous demands of the crowd, Barrington, who in the
meantime had yielded to Owen's entreaties that he would avail himself
of this opportunity of proclaiming the glad tidings of the good time
that is to be, got up on the steps in his turn. Harlow, desiring that everything should be done decently and in order,
had meantime arranged in front of the pulpit a carpenter's sawing
stool, and an empty pail with a small piece of board laid across it, to
serve as a seat and a table for the chairman. Over the table he draped
a large red handkerchief. At the right he placed a plumber's large
hammer; at the left, a battered and much-chipped jam-jar, full of tea. Philpot having taken his seat on the pail at this table and announced
his intention of bashing out with the hammer the brains of any
individual who ventured to disturb the meeting, Barrington commenced:

'Mr Chairman and Gentlemen. For the sake of clearness, and in order to
avoid confusing one subject with another, I have decided to divide the
oration into two parts. First, I will try to explain as well as I am
able what Socialism is. I will try to describe to you the plan or
system upon which the Co-operative Commonwealth of the future will be
organized; and, secondly, I will try to tell you how it can be brought
about. But before proceeding with the first part of the subject, I
would like to refer very slightly to the widespread delusion that
Socialism is impossible because it means a complete change from an
order of things which has always existed. We constantly hear it said
that because there have always been rich and poor in the world, there
always must be. I want to point out to you first of all, that it is
not true that even in its essential features, the present system has
existed from all time; it is not true that there have always been rich
and poor in the world, in the sense that we understand riches and
poverty today. 'These statements are lies that have been invented for the purpose of
creating in us a feeling of resignation to the evils of our condition. They are lies which have been fostered by those who imagine that it is
to their interest that we should be content to see our children
condemned to the same poverty and degradation that we have endured
ourselves. I do not propose--because there is not time, although it is really part
of my subject--to go back to the beginnings of history, and describe in
detail the different systems of social organization which evolved from
and superseded each other at different periods, but it is necessary to
remind you that the changes that have taken place in the past have been
even greater than the change proposed by Socialists today. The change
from savagery and cannibalism when men used to devour the captives they
took in war--to the beginning of chattel slavery, when the tribes or
clans into which mankind were divided--whose social organization was a
kind of Communism, all the individuals belonging to the tribe being
practically social equals, members of one great family--found it more
profitable to keep their captives as slaves than to eat them. The
change from the primitive Communism of the tribes, into the more
individualistic organization of the nations, and the development of
private ownership of the land and slaves and means of subsistence. The
change from chattel slavery into Feudalism; and the change from
Feudalism into the earlier form of Capitalism; and the equally great
change from what might be called the individualistic capitalism which
displaced Feudalism, to the system of Co-operative Capitalism and Wage
Slavery of today.' 'I believe you must 'ave swollered a bloody dictionary,' exclaimed the
man behind the moat. 'Keep horder,' shouted Philpot, fiercely, striking the table with the
hammer, and there were loud shouts of 'Chair' and 'Chuck 'im out,' from
several quarters. When order was restored, the lecturer proceeded:

'So it is not true that practically the same state of affairs as we
have today has always existed. It is not true that anything like the
poverty that prevails at present existed at any previous period of the
world's history. When the workers were the property of their masters,
it was to their owners' interest to see that they were properly clothed
and fed; they were not allowed to be idle, and they were not allowed to
starve. Under Feudalism also, although there were certain intolerable
circumstances, the position of the workers was, economically,
infinitely better than it is today. The worker was in subjection to
his Lord, but in return his lord had certain responsibilities and
duties to perform, and there was a large measure of community of
interest between them. 'I do not intend to dwell upon this pout at length, but in support of
what I have said I will quote as nearly as I can from memory the words
of the historian Froude. '"I do not believe," says Mr Froude, "that the condition of the people
in Mediaeval Europe was as miserable as is pretended. I do not believe
that the distribution of the necessaries of life was as unequal as it
is at present. If the tenant lived hard, the lord had little luxury. Earls and countesses breakfasted at five in the morning, on salt beef
and herring, a slice of bread and a draught of ale from a blackjack. Lords and servants dined in the same hall and shared the same meal." 'When we arrive at the system that displaced Feudalism, we find that
the condition of the workers was better in every way than it is at
present. The instruments of production--the primitive machinery and
the tools necessary for the creation of wealth--belonged to the skilled
workers who used them, and the things they produced were also the
property of those who made them. 'In those days a master painter, a master shoemaker, a master saddler,
or any other master tradesmen, was really a skilled artisan working on
his own account. He usually had one or two apprentices, who were
socially his equals, eating at the same table and associating with the
other members of his family. It was quite a common occurrence for the
apprentice--after he had attained proficiency in his work--to marry his
master's daughter and succeed to his master's business. In those days
to be a "master" tradesman meant to be master of the trade, not merely
of some underpaid drudges in one's employment. The apprentices were
there to master the trade, qualifying themselves to become master
workers themselves; not mere sweaters and exploiters of the labour of
others, but useful members of society. In those days, because there
was no labour-saving machinery the community was dependent for its
existence on the productions of hand labour. Consequently the majority
of the people were employed in some kind of productive work, and the
workers were honoured and respected citizens, living in comfort on the
fruits of their labour. They were not rich as we understand wealth
now, but they did not starve and they were not regarded with contempt,
as are their successors of today. 'The next great change came with the introduction of steam machinery. That power came to the aid of mankind in their struggle for existence,
enabling them to create easily and in abundance those things of which
they had previously been able to produce only a bare sufficiency. A
wonderful power--equalling and surpassing the marvels that were
imagined by the writers of fairy tales and Eastern stories--a power so
vast--so marvellous, that it is difficult to find words to convey
anything like an adequate conception of it. 'We all remember the story, in The Arabian Nights, of Aladdin, who in
his poverty became possessed of the Wonderful Lamp and--he was poor no
longer. He merely had to rub the Lamp--the Genie appeared, and at
Aladdin's command he produced an abundance of everything that the youth
could ask or dream of. With the discovery of steam machinery, mankind
became possessed of a similar power to that imagined by the Eastern
writer. At the command of its masters the Wonderful Lamp of Machinery
produces an enormous, overwhelming, stupendous abundance and
superfluity of every material thing necessary for human existence and
happiness. With less labour than was formerly required to cultivate
acres, we can now cultivate miles of land. In response to human
industry, aided by science and machinery, the fruitful earth teems with
such lavish abundance as was never known or deemed possible before. If
you go into the different factories and workshops you will see
prodigious quantities of commodities of every kind pouring out of the
wonderful machinery, literally like water from a tap. 'One would naturally and reasonably suppose that the discovery or
invention of such an aid to human industry would result in increased
happiness and comfort for every one; but as you all know, the reverse
is the case; and the reason of that extraordinary result, is the reason
of all the poverty and unhappiness that we see around us and endure
today--it is simply because--the machinery became the property of a
comparatively few individuals and private companies, who use it not for
the benefit of the community but to create profits for themselves. 'As this labour-saving machinery became more extensively used, the
prosperous class of skilled workers gradually disappeared. Some of the
wealthier of them became distributers instead of producers of wealth;
that is to say, they became shopkeepers, retailing the commodities that
were produced for the most part by machinery. But the majority of them
in course of time degenerated into a class of mere wage earners, having
no property in the machines they used, and no property in the things
they made. 'They sold their labour for so much per hour, and when they could not
find any employer to buy it from them, they were reduced to destitution. 'Whilst the unemployed workers were starving and those in employment
not much better off, the individuals and private companies who owned
the machinery accumulated fortunes; but their profits were diminished
and their working expenses increased by what led to the latest great
change in the organization of the production of the necessaries of
life--the formation of the Limited Companies and the Trusts; the
decision of the private companies to combine and co-operate with each
other in order to increase their profits and decrease their working
expenses. The results of these combines have been--an increase in the
quantities of the things produced: a decrease in the number of wage
earners employed--and enormously increased profits for the shareholders. 'But it is not only the wage-earning class that is being hurt; for
while they are being annihilated by the machinery and the efficient
organization of industry by the trusts that control and are beginning
to monopolize production, the shopkeeping classes are also being slowly
but surely crushed out of existence by the huge companies that are able
by the greater magnitude of their operations to buy and sell more
cheaply than the small traders. 'The consequence of all this is that the majority of the people are in
a condition of more or less abject poverty--living from hand to mouth. It is an admitted fact that about thirteen millions of our people are
always on the verge of starvation. The significant results of this
poverty face us on every side. The alarming and persistent increase of
insanity. The large number of would-be recruits for the army who have
to be rejected because they are physically unfit; and the shameful
condition of the children of the poor. More than one-third of the
children of the working classes in London have some sort of mental or
physical defect; defects in development; defects of eyesight; abnormal
nervousness; rickets, and mental dullness. The difference in height
and weight and general condition of the children in poor schools and
the children of the so-called better classes, constitutes a crime that
calls aloud to Heaven for vengeance upon those who are responsible for
it. 'It is childish to imagine that any measure of Tariff Reform or
Political Reform such as a paltry tax on foreign-made goods or
abolishing the House of Lords, or disestablishing the Church--or
miserable Old Age Pensions, or a contemptible tax on land, can deal
with such a state of affairs as this. They have no House of Lords in
America or France, and yet their condition is not materially different
from ours. You may be deceived into thinking that such measures as
those are great things. You may fight for them and vote for them, but
after you have got them you will find that they will make no
appreciable improvement in your condition. You will still have to
slave and drudge to gain a bare sufficiency of the necessaries of life. You will still have to eat the same kind of food and wear the same kind
of clothes and boots as now. Your masters will still have you in their
power to insult and sweat and drive. Your general condition will be
just the same as at present because such measures as those are not
remedies but red herrings, intended by those who trail them to draw us
away from the only remedy, which is to be found only in the Public
Ownership of the Machinery, and the National Organization of Industry
for the production and distribution of the necessaries of life, not for
the profit of a few but for the benefit of all! 'That is the next great change; not merely desirable, but imperatively
necessary and inevitable! 'It is not a wild dream of Superhuman Unselfishness. No one will be
asked to sacrifice himself for the benefit of others or to love his
neighbours better than himself as is the case under the present system,
which demands that the majority shall unselfishly be content to labour
and live in wretchedness for the benefit of a few. There is no such
principle of Philanthropy in Socialism, which simply means that even as
all industries are now owned by shareholders, and organized and
directed by committees and officers elected by the shareholders, so
shall they in future belong to the State, that is, the whole
people--and they shall be organized and directed by committees and
officers elected by the community. 'Under existing circumstances the community is exposed to the danger of
being invaded and robbed and massacred by some foreign power. Therefore
the community has organized and owns and controls an Army and Navy to
protect it from that danger. Under existing circumstances the
community is menaced by another equally great danger--the people are
mentally and physically degenerating from lack of proper food and
clothing. Socialists say that the community should undertake and
organize the business of producing and distributing all these things;
that the State should be the only employer of labour and should own all
the factories, mills, mines, farms, railways, fishing fleets, sheep
farms, poultry farms and cattle ranches. 'Under existing circumstances the community is degenerating mentally
and physically because the majority cannot afford to have decent houses
to live in. Socialists say that the community should take in hand the
business of providing proper houses for all its members, that the State
should be the only landlord, that all the land and all the houses
should belong to the whole people...

'We must do this if we are to keep our old place in the van of human
progress. A nation of ignorant, unintelligent, half-starved,
broken-spirited degenerates cannot hope to lead humanity in its
never-ceasing march onward to the conquest of the future. 'Vain, mightiest fleet of iron framed;
Vain the all-shattering guns
Unless proud England keep, untamed,
The stout hearts of her sons. 'All the evils that I have referred to are only symptoms of the one
disease that is sapping the moral, mental and physical life of the
nation, and all attempts to cure these symptoms are foredoomed to
failure, simply because they are the symptoms and not the disease. All
the talk of Temperance, and the attempts to compel temperance, are
foredoomed to failure, because drunkenness is a symptom, and not the
disease. Every year millions of pounds
worth of wealth are produced by her people, only to be stolen from them
by means of the Money Trick by the capitalist and official class. Her
industrious sons and daughters, who are nearly all total abstainers,
live in abject poverty, and their misery is not caused by laziness or
want of thrift, or by Intemperance. They are poor for the same reason
that we are poor--Because we are Robbed. 'The hundreds of thousands of pounds that are yearly wasted in
well-meant but useless charity accomplish no lasting good, because
while charity soothes the symptoms it ignores the disease, which
is--the PRIVATE OWNERSHIP of the means of producing the necessaries of
life, and the restriction of production, by a few selfish individuals
for their own profit. And for that disease there is no other remedy
than the one I have told you of--the PUBLIC OWNERSHIP and cultivation
of the land, the PUBLIC OWNERSHIP OF the mines, railways, canals,
ships, factories and all the other means of production, and the
establishment of an Industrial Civil Service--a National Army of
Industry--for the purpose of producing the necessaries, comforts and
refinements of life in that abundance which has been made possible by
science and machinery--for the use and benefit of THE WHOLE OF THE
PEOPLE.' 'Yes: and where's the money to come from for all this?' 'Hear, hear,' cried the man behind the moat. 'There's no money difficulty about it,' replied Barrington. 'We can
easily find all the money we shall need.' 'Of course,' said Slyme, who had been reading the Daily Ananias,
'there's all the money in the Post Office Savings Bank. The Socialists
could steal that for a start; and as for the mines and land and
factories, they can all be took from the owners by force.' 'There will be no need for force and no need to steal anything from
anybody.' 'And there's another thing I objects to,' said Crass. 'And that's all
this 'ere talk about hignorance: wot about all the money wots spent
every year for edication?' 'You should rather say--"What about all the money that's wasted every
year on education?" What can be more brutal and senseless than trying
to "educate" a poor little, hungry, ill-clad child? Such so-called
"instruction" is like the seed in the parable of the Sower, which fell
on stony ground and withered away because it had no depth of earth; and
even in those cases where it does take root and grow, it becomes like
the seed that fell among thorns and the thorns grew up and choked it,
and it bore no fruit. 'The majority of us forget in a year or two all that we learnt at
school because the conditions of our lives are such as to destroy all
inclination for culture or refinement. We must see that the children
are properly clothed and fed and that they are not made to get up in
the middle of the night to go to work for several hours before they go
to school. We must make it illegal for any greedy, heartless
profit-hunter to hire them and make them labour for several hours in
the evening after school, or all day and till nearly midnight on
Saturday. We must first see that our children are cared for, as well
as the children of savage races, before we can expect a proper return
for the money that we spend on education.' 'I don't mind admitting that this 'ere scheme of national ownership and
industries is all right if it could only be done,' said Harlow, 'but at
present, all the land, railways and factories, belongs to private
capitalists; they can't be bought without money, and you say you ain't
goin' to take 'em away by force, so I should like to know how the
bloody 'ell you are goin' to get 'em?' 'We certainly don't propose to buy them with money, for the simple
reason that there is not sufficient money in existence to pay for them. 'If all the gold and silver money in the World were gathered together
into one heap, it would scarcely be sufficient to buy all the private
property in England. The people who own all these things now never
really paid for them with money--they obtained possession of them by
means of the "Money Trick" which Owen explained to us some time ago.' 'They obtained possession of them by usin' their brain,' said Crass. 'They tell us themselves that that is
how they got them away from us; they call their profits the "wages of
intelligence". Whilst we have been working, they have been using their
intelligence in order to obtain possession of the things we have
created. The time has now arrived for us to use our intelligence in
order to get back the things they have robbed us of, aid to prevent
them from robbing us any more. As for how it is to be done, we might
copy the methods that they have found so successful.' 'Oh, then you DO mean to rob them after all,' cried Slyme,
triumphantly. 'If it's true that they robbed the workers, and if we're
to adopt the same method then we'll be robbers too!' 'When a thief is caught having in his possession the property of others
it is not robbery to take the things away from him and to restore them
to their rightful owners,' retorted Barrington. 'I can't allow this 'ere disorder to go on no longer,' shouted Philpot,
banging the table with the plumber's hammer as several men began
talking at the same time. 'There will be plenty of tuneropperty for questions and opposition at
the hend of the horation, when the pulpit will be throwed open to
anyone as likes to debate the question. I now calls upon the professor
to proceed with the second part of the horation: and anyone wot
interrupts will get a lick under the ear-'ole with this'--waving the
hammer--'and the body will be chucked out of the bloody winder.' It was still raining heavily,
so they thought they might as well pass the time listening to
Barrington as in any other way. 'A large part of the land may be got back in the same way as it was
taken from us. The ancestors of the present holders obtained
possession of it by simply passing Acts of Enclosure: the nation should
regain possession of those lands by passing Acts of Resumption. And
with regard to the other land, the present holders should be allowed to
retain possession of it during their lives and then it should revert to
the State, to be used for the benefit of all. Britain should belong to
the British people, not to a few selfish individuals. As for the
railways, they have already been nationalized in some other countries,
and what other countries can do we can do also. In New Zealand,
Australia, South Africa, Germany, Belgium, Italy, Japan and some other
countries some of the railways are already the property of the State. As for the method by which we can obtain possession of them, the
difficulty is not to discover a method, but rather to decide which of
many methods we shall adopt. One method would be to simply pass an Act
declaring that as it was contrary to the public interest that they
should be owned by private individuals, the railways would henceforth
be the property of the nation. All railways servants, managers and
officials would continue in their employment; the only difference being
that they would now be in the employ of the State. As to the
shareholders--'

'They could all be knocked on the 'ead, I suppose,' interrupted Crass. 'Or go to the workhouse,' said Slyme. 'Or to 'ell,' suggested the man behind the moat.

' --The State would continue to pay to the shareholders the same
dividends they had received on an average for, say, the previous three
years. These payments would be continued to the present shareholders
for life, or the payments might be limited to a stated number of years
and the shares would be made non-transferable, like the railway tickets
of today. As for the factories, shops, and other means of production
and distribution, the State must adopt the same methods of doing
business as the present owners. I mean that even as the big Trusts and
companies are crushing--by competition--the individual workers and
small traders, so the State should crush the trusts by competition. It
is surely justifiable for the State to do for the benefit of the whole
people that which the capitalists are already doing for the profit of a
few shareholders. The first step in this direction will be the
establishment of Retail Stores for the purpose of supplying all
national and municipal employees with the necessaries of life at the
lowest possible prices. At first the Administration will purchase
these things from the private manufacturers, in such large quantities
that it will be able to obtain them at the very cheapest rate, and as
there will be no heavy rents to pay for showy shops, and no advertising
expenses, and as the object of the Administration will be not to make
profit, but to supply its workmen and officials with goods at the
lowest price, they will be able to sell them much cheaper than the
profit-making private stores. 'The National Service Retail Stores will be for the benefit of only
those in the public service; and gold, silver or copper money will not
be accepted in payment for the things sold. At first, all public
servants will continue to be paid in metal money, but those who desire
it will be paid all or part of their wages in paper money of the same
nominal value, which will be accepted in payment for their purchases at
the National Stores and at the National Hotels, Restaurants and other
places which will be established for the convenience of those in the
State service. It will be made of
a special very strong paper, and will be of all value, from a penny to
a pound. 'As the National Service Stores will sell practically everything that
could be obtained elsewhere, and as twenty shillings in paper money
will be able to purchase much more at the stores than twenty shillings
of metal money would purchase anywhere else, it will not be long before
nearly all public servants will prefer to be paid in paper money. As
far as paying the salaries and wages of most of its officials and
workmen is concerned, the Administration will not then have any need of
metal money. But it will require metal money to pay the private
manufacturers who supply the goods sold in the National Stores. But--all these things are made by labour; so in order to avoid having
to pay metal money for them, the State will now commence to employ
productive labour. All the public land suitable for the purpose will
be put into cultivation and State factories will be established for
manufacturing food, boots, clothing, furniture and all other
necessaries and comforts of life. All those who are out of employment
and willing to work, will be given employment on these farms and in
these factories. In order that the men employed shall not have to work
unpleasantly hard, and that their hours of labour may be as short as
possible--at first, say, eight hours per day--and also to make sure
that the greatest possible quantity of everything shall be produced,
these factories and farms will be equipped with the most up-to-date and
efficient labour-saving machinery. The people employed in the farms
and factories will be paid with paper money... The commodities they
produce will go to replenish the stocks of the National Service Stores,
where the workers will be able to purchase with their paper money
everything they need. 'As we shall employ the greatest possible number of labour-saving
machines, and adopt the most scientific methods in our farms and
factories, the quantities of goods we shall be able to produce will be
so enormous that we shall be able to pay our workers very high
wages--in paper money--and we shall be able to sell our produce so
cheaply, that all public servants will be able to enjoy abundance of
everything. 'When the workers who are being exploited and sweated by the private
capitalists realize how much worse off they are than the workers in the
employ of the State, they will come and ask to be allowed to work for
the State, and also, for paper money. That will mean that the State
Army of Productive Workers will be continually increasing in numbers. More State factories will be built, more land will be put into
cultivation. Men will be given employment making bricks, woodwork,
paints, glass, wallpapers and all kinds of building materials and
others will be set to work building--on State land--beautiful houses,
which will be let to those employed in the service of the State. The
rent will be paid with paper money. 'State fishing fleets will be established and the quantities of
commodities of all kinds produced will be so great that the State
employees and officials will not be able to use it all. With their
paper money they will be able to buy enough and more than enough to
satisfy all their needs abundantly, but there will still be a great and
continuously increasing surplus stock in the possession of the State. 'The Socialist Administration will now acquire or build fleets of steam
trading vessels, which will of course be manned and officered by State
employees--the same as the Royal Navy is now. These fleets of National
trading vessels will carry the surplus stocks I have mentioned, to
foreign countries, and will there sell or exchange them for some of the
products of those countries, things that we do not produce ourselves. These things will be brought to England and sold at the National
Service Stores, at the lowest possible price, for paper money, to those
in the service of the State. This of course will only have the effect
of introducing greater variety into the stocks--it will not diminish
the surplus: and as there would be no sense in continuing to produce
more of these things than necessary, it would then be the duty of the
Administration to curtail or restrict production of the necessaries of
life. This could be done by reducing the hours of the workers without
reducing their wages so as to enable them to continue to purchase as
much as before. 'Another way of preventing over production of mere necessaries and
comforts will be to employ a large number of workers producing the
refinements and pleasures of life, more artistic houses, furniture,
pictures, musical instruments and so forth. 'In the centre of every district a large Institute or pleasure house
could be erected, containing a magnificently appointed and decorated
theatre; Concert Hall, Lecture Hall, Gymnasium, Billiard Rooms, Reading
Rooms, Refreshment Rooms, and so on. A detachment of the Industrial
Army would be employed as actors, artistes, musicians, singers and
entertainers. In fact everyone that could be spared from the most
important work of all--that of producing the necessaries of life--would
be employed in creating pleasure, culture, and education. All these
people--like the other branches of the public service--would be paid
with paper money, and with it all of them would be able to purchase
abundance of all those things which constitute civilization. 'Meanwhile, as a result of all this, the kind-hearted private employers
and capitalists would find that no one would come and work for them to
be driven and bullied and sweated for a miserable trifle of metal money
that is scarcely enough to purchase sufficient of the necessaries of
life to keep body and soul together. 'These kind-hearted capitalists will protest against what they will
call the unfair competition of State industry, and some of them may
threaten to leave the country and take their capital with them... As
most of these persons are too lazy to work, and as we will not need
their money, we shall be very glad to see them go. But with regard to
their real capital--their factories, farms, mines or machinery--that
will be a different matter... To allow these things to remain idle and
unproductive would constitute an injury to the community. So a law
will be passed, declaring that all land not cultivated by the owner, or
any factory shut down for more than a specified time, will be taken
possession of by the State and worked for the benefit of the
community... Fair compensation will be paid in paper money to the
former owners, who will be granted an income or pension of so much a
year either for life or for a stated period according to circumstances
and the ages of the persons concerned. 'As for the private traders, the wholesale and retail dealers in the
things produced by labour, they will be forced by the State competition
to close down their shops and warehouses--first, because they will not
be able to replenish their stocks; and, secondly, because even if they
were able to do so, they would not be able to sell them. This will
throw out of work a great host of people who are at present engaged in
useless occupations; the managers and assistants in the shops of which
we now see half a dozen of the same sort in a single street; the
thousands of men and women who are slaving away their lives producing
advertisements, for, in most cases, a miserable pittance of metal
money, with which many of them are unable to procure sufficient of the
necessaries of life to secure them from starvation. 'The masons, carpenters, painters, glaziers, and all the others engaged
in maintaining these unnecessary stores and shops will all be thrown
out of employment, but all of them who are willing to work will be
welcomed by the State and will be at once employed helping either to
produce or distribute the necessaries and comforts of life. They will
have to work fewer hours than before... They will not have to work so
hard--for there will be no need to drive or bully, because there will
be plenty of people to do the work, and most of it will be done by
machinery--and with their paper money they will be able to buy
abundance of the things they help to produce. The shops and stores
where these people were formerly employed will be acquired by the
State, which will pay the former owners fair compensation in the same
manner as to the factory owners. Some of the buildings will be
utilized by the State as National Service Stores, others transformed
into factories and others will be pulled down to make room for
dwellings, or public buildings... It will be the duty of the
Government to build a sufficient number of houses to accommodate the
families of all those in its employment, and as a consequence of this
and because of the general disorganization and decay of what is now
called "business", all other house property of all kinds will rapidly
depreciate in value. The slums and the wretched dwellings now occupied
by the working classes--the miserable, uncomfortable, jerry-built
"villas" occupied by the lower middle classes and by "business" people,
will be left empty and valueless upon the hands of their rack renting
landlords, who will very soon voluntarily offer to hand them and the
ground they stand upon to the state on the same terms as those accorded
to the other property owners, namely--in return for a pension. Some of
these people will be content to live in idleness on the income allowed
them for life as compensation by the State: others will devote
themselves to art or science and some others will offer their services
to the community as managers and superintendents, and the State will
always be glad to employ all those who are willing to help in the Great
Work of production and distribution. 'By this time the nation will be the sole employer of labour, and as no
one will be able to procure the necessaries of life without paper
money, and as the only way to obtain this will be working, it will mean
that every mentally and physically capable person in the community will
be helping in the great work of PRODUCTION and DISTRIBUTION. We shall
not need as at present, to maintain a police force to protect the
property of the idle rich from the starving wretches whom they have
robbed. There will be no unemployed and no overlapping of labour,
which will be organized and concentrated for the accomplishment of the
only rational object--the creation of the things we require... For
every one labour-saving machine in use today, we will, if necessary,
employ a thousand machines! and consequently there will be produced
such a stupendous, enormous, prodigious, overwhelming abundance of
everything that soon the Community will be faced once more with the
serious problem of OVER-PRODUCTION. 'To deal with this, it will be necessary to reduce the hours of our
workers to four or five hours a day... All young people will be
allowed to continue at public schools and universities and will not be
required to take any part in the work or the nation until they are
twenty-one years of age. At the age of forty-five, everyone will be
allowed to retire from the State service on full pay... All these will
be able to spend the rest of their days according to their own
inclinations; some will settle down quietly at home, and amuse
themselves in the same ways as people of wealth and leisure do at the
present day--with some hobby, or by taking part in the organization of
social functions, such as balls, parties, entertainments, the
organization of Public Games and Athletic Tournaments, Races and all
kinds of sports. 'Some will prefer to continue in the service of the State. Actors,
artists, sculptors, musicians and others will go on working for their
own pleasure and honour... Some will devote their leisure to science,
art, or literature. Others will prefer to travel on the State
steamships to different parts of the world to see for themselves all
those things of which most of us have now but a dim and vague
conception. The wonders of India and Egypt, the glories of Rome, the
artistic treasures of the continent and the sublime scenery of other
lands. 'Thus--for the first time in the history of humanity--the benefits and
pleasures conferred upon mankind by science and civilization will be
enjoyed equally by all, upon the one condition, that they shall do
their share of the work, that is necessary in order to, make all these
things possible. 'These are the principles upon which the CO-OPERATIVE COMMONWEALTH of
the future will be organized. The State in which no one will be
distinguished or honoured above his fellows except for Virtue or
Talent. Where no man will find his profit in another's loss, and we
shall no longer be masters and servants, but brothers, free men, and
friends. Where there will be no weary, broken men and women passing
their joyless lives in toil and want, and no little children crying
because they are hungry or cold. 'A State wherein it will be possible to put into practice the teachings
of Him whom so many now pretend to follow. A society which shall have
justice and co-operation for its foundation, and International
Brotherhood and love for its law. but
What are the deeds of today,
In the days of the years we dwell in,
That wear our lives away? Why, then, and for what we are waiting? There are but three words to speak
"We will it," and what is the foreman
but the dream strong wakened and weak? 'Oh, why and for what are we waiting, while
our brothers droop and die? And on every wind of the heavens, a
wasted life goes by. 'How long shall they reproach us, where
crowd on crowd they dwell
Poor ghosts of the wicked city,
gold crushed, hungry hell? 'Through squalid life they laboured in
sordid grief they died
Those sons of a mighty mother, those
props of England's pride. They are gone, there is none can undo
it, nor save our souls from the curse,
But many a million cometh, and shall
they be better or worse? 'It is We must answer and hasten and open wide the door,
For the rich man's hurrying terror, and the slow foot hope of
the poor,
Yea, the voiceless wrath of the wretched and their unlearned
discontent,
We must give it voice and wisdom, till the waiting tide be
spent
Come then since all things call us, the living and the dead,
And o'er the weltering tangle a glimmering light is shed.' As Barrington descended from the Pulpit and walked back to his
accustomed seat, a loud shout of applause burst from a few men in the
crowd, who stood up and waved their caps and cheered again and again. When order was restored, Philpot rose and addressed the meeting:

'Is there any gentleman wot would like to ask the Speaker a question?' No one spoke and the Chairman again put the question without obtaining
any response, but at length one of the new hands who had been 'taken
on' about a week previously to replace another painter who had been
sacked for being too slow--stood up and said there was one point that
he would like a little more information about. This man had two
patches on the seat of his trousers, which were also very much frayed
and ragged at the bottoms of the legs: the lining of his coat was all
in rags, as were also the bottoms of the sleeves; his boots were old
and had been many times mended and patched; the sole of one of them had
begun to separate from the upper and he had sewn these parts together
with a few stitches of copper wire. He had been out of employment for
several weeks and it was evident from the pinched expression of his
still haggard face that during that time he had not had sufficient to
eat. This man was not a drunkard, neither was he one of those
semi-mythical persons who are too lazy to work. He was married and had
several children. One of them, a boy of fourteen years old, earned
five shillings a week as a light porter at a Grocer's. Being a householder the man had a vote, but he had never hitherto taken
much interest in what he called 'politics'. In his opinion, those
matters were not for the likes of him. He believed in leaving such
difficult subjects to be dealt with by his betters. In his present
unhappy condition he was a walking testimonial to the wisdom and virtue
and benevolence of those same 'betters' who have hitherto managed the
affairs of the world with results so very satisfactory for themselves. 'I should like to ask the speaker,' he said,'supposin' all this that
'e talks about is done--what's to become of the King, and the Royal
Family, and all the Big Pots?' ''Ear, 'ear,' cried Crass, eagerly--and Ned Dawson and the man behind
the moat both said that that was what they would like to know, too. 'I am much more concerned about what is to become of ourselves if these
things are not done,' replied Barrington. 'I think we should try to
cultivate a little more respect of our own families and to concern
ourselves a little less about "Royal" Families. I fail to see any
reason why we should worry ourselves about those people; they're all
right--they have all they need, and as far as I am aware, nobody wishes
to harm them and they are well able to look after themselves. They will
fare the same as the other rich people.' 'I should like to ask,' said Harlow, 'wot's to become of all the gold
and silver and copper money? Wouldn't it be of no use at all?' 'It would be of far more use under Socialism than it is at present. The
State would of course become possessed of a large quantity of it in the
early stages of the development of the Socialist system, because--at
first--while the State would be paying all its officers and productive
workers in paper, the rest of the community--those not in State
employ--would be paying their taxes in gold as at present. All
travellers on the State railways--other than State employees--would pay
their fares in metal money, and gold and silver would pour into the
State Treasury from many other sources. The State would receive gold
and silver and--for the most part--pay out paper. By the time the
system of State employment was fully established, gold and silver would
only be of value as metal and the State would purchase it from whoever
possessed and wished to sell it--at so much per pound as raw material:
instead of hiding it away in the vaults of banks, or locking it up in
iron safes, we shall make use of it. Some of the gold will be
manufactured into articles of jewellery, to be sold for paper money and
worn by the sweethearts and wives and daughters of the workers; some of
it will be beaten out into gold leaf to be used in the decoration of
the houses of the citizens and of public buildings. As for the silver,
it will be made into various articles of utility for domestic use. The
workers will not then, as now, have to eat their food with poisonous
lead or brass spoons and forks, we shall have these things of silver
and if there is not enough silver we shall probably have a
non-poisonous alloy of that metal.' 'As far as I can make out,' said Harlow, 'the paper money will be just
as valuable as gold and silver is now. Well, wot's to prevent artful
dodgers like old Misery and Rushton saving it up and buying and selling
things with it, and so livin' without work?' 'Of course,' said Crass, scornfully. 'That's a very simple matter; any man who lives without doing any
useful work is living on the labour of others, he is robbing others of
part of the result of their labour. The object of Socialism is to stop
this robbery, to make it impossible. So no one will be able to hoard
up or accumulate the paper money because it will be dated, and will
become worthless if it is not spent within a certain time after its
issue. As for buying and selling for profit--from whom would they buy? 'Well, they might buy some of the things the workers didn't want, for
less than the workers paid for them, and then they could sell 'em
again.' 'They'd have to sell them for less than the price charged at the
National Stores, and if you think about it a little you'll see that it
would not be very profitable. It would be with the object of
preventing any attempts at private trading that the Administration
would refuse to pay compensation to private owners in a lump sum. All
such compensations would be paid, as I said, in the form of a pension
of so much per year. 'Another very effective way to prevent private trading would be to make
it a criminal offence against the well-being of the community. At
present many forms of business are illegal unless you take out a
licence; under Socialism no one would be allowed to trade without a
licence, and no licences would be issued.' 'Wouldn't a man be allowed to save up his money if he wanted to,
demanded Slyme with indignation. 'There will be nothing to prevent a man going without some of the
things he might have if he is foolish enough to do so, but he would
never be able to save up enough to avoid doing his share of useful
service. Besides, what need would there be for anyone to save? One's
old age would be provided for. If one was ill the State hospitals and Medical Service would be free. As for one's children, they would attend the State Free Schools and
Colleges and when of age they would enter the State Service, their
futures provided for. Can you tell us why anyone would need or wish to
save?' 'While we are speaking of money,' added Barrington, 'I should like to
remind you that even under the present system there are many things
which cost money to maintain, that we enjoy without having to pay for
directly. The public roads and pavements cost money to make and
maintain and light. Under a Socialist Administration this principle will
be extended--in addition to the free services we enjoy now we shall
then maintain the trains and railways for the use of the public, free. And as time goes on, this method of doing business will be adopted in
many other directions.' 'I've read somewhere,' said Harlow, 'that whenever a Government in any
country has started issuing paper money it has always led to
bankruptcy. How do you know that the same thing would not happen under
a Socialist Administration?' ''Ear, 'ear,' said Crass. 'I was just goin' to say the same thing.' 'If the Government of a country began to issue large amounts of paper
money under the present system,' Barrington replied, 'it would
inevitably lead to bankruptcy, for the simple reason that paper money
under the present system--bank-notes, bank drafts, postal orders,
cheques or any other form--is merely a printed promise to pay the
amount--in gold or silver--on demand or at a certain date. Under the
present system if a Government issues more paper money than it
possesses gold and silver to redeem, it is of course bankrupt. But the
paper money that will be issued under a Socialist Administration will
not be a promise to pay in gold or silver on demand or at any time. It
will be a promise to supply commodities to the amount specified on the
note, and as there could be no dearth of those things there could be no
possibility of bankruptcy.' 'I should like to know who's goin' to appoint the hofficers of this
'ere hindustrial harmy,' said the man on the pail. 'We don't want to
be bullied and chivied and chased about by a lot of sergeants and
corporals like a lot of soldiers, you know.' ''Ear, 'ear,' said Crass. Someone's got
to be in charge of the work.' 'We don't have to put up with any bullying or chivying or chasing now,
do we?' 'So of course we could not have anything of
that sort under Socialism. We could not put up with it at all! Even
if it were only for four or five hours a day. Under the present system
we have no voice in appointing our masters and overseers and
foremen--we have no choice as to what master we shall work under. If
our masters do not treat us fairly we have no remedy against them. Under Socialism it will be different; the workers will be part of the
community; the officers or managers and foremen will be the servants of
the community, and if any one of these men were to abuse his position
he could be promptly removed. As for the details of the organization
of the Industrial Army, the difficulty is, again, not so much to devise
a way, but to decide which of many ways would be the best, and the
perfect way will probably be developed only after experiment and
experience. The one thing we have to hold fast to is the fundamental
principle of State employment or National service. The national organization of industry under
democratic control. One way of arranging this business would be for
the community to elect a Parliament in much the same way as is done at
present. The only persons eligible for election to be veterans of the
industrial Army, men and women who had put in their twenty-five years
of service. 'This Administrative Body would have control of the different State
Departments. There would be a Department of Agriculture, a Department
of Railways and so on, each with its minister and staff. 'All these Members of Parliament would be the relatives--in some cases
the mothers and fathers of those in the Industrial Service, and they
would be relied upon to see that the conditions of that service were
the best possible. 'As for the different branches of the State Service, they could be
organized on somewhat the same lines as the different branches of the
Public Service are now--like the Navy, the Post Office and as the State
Railways in some other countries, or as are the different branches of
the Military Army, with the difference that all promotions will be from
the ranks, by examinations, and by merit only. As every recruit will
have had the same class of education they will all have absolute
equality of opportunity and the men who would attain to positions of
authority would be the best men, and not as at present, the worst.' 'Under the present system, the men who become masters and employers
succeed because they are cunning and selfish, not because they
understand or are capable of doing the work out of which they make
their money. Most of the employers in the building trade for instance
would be incapable of doing any skilled work. Very few of them would
be worth their salt as journeymen. The only work they do is to scheme
to reap the benefit of the labour of others. 'The men who now become managers and foremen are selected not because
of their ability as craftsmen, but because they are good slave-drivers
and useful producers of profit for their employers.' 'How are you goin' to prevent the selfish and cunnin', as you call 'em,
from gettin' on top THEN as they do now?' 'The fact that all workers will receive the same pay, no matter what
class of work they are engaged in, or what their position, will ensure
our getting the very best man to do all the higher work and to organize
our business.' 'Yes: there will be such an enormous quantity of everything produced,
that their wages will enable everyone to purchase abundance of
everything they require. Even if some were paid more than others they
would not be able to spend it. There would be no need to save it, and
as there will be no starving poor, there will be no one to give it away
to. If it were possible to save and accumulate money it would bring
into being an idle class, living on their fellows: it would lead to the
downfall of our system, and a return to the same anarchy that exists at
present. Besides, if higher wages were paid to those engaged in the
higher work or occupying positions of authority it would prevent our
getting the best men. Unfit persons would try for the positions
because of the higher pay. Under the present
system men intrigue for and obtain or are pitchforked into positions
for which they have no natural ability at all; the only reason they
desire these positions is because of the salaries attached to them. These fellows get the money and the work is done by underpaid
subordinates whom the world never hears of. Under Socialism, this money
incentive will be done away with, and consequently the only men who
will try for these positions will be those who, being naturally fitted
for the work, would like to do it. For instance a man who is a born
organizer will not refuse to undertake such work because he will not be
paid more for it. Such a man will desire to do it and will esteem it a
privilege to be allowed to do it. To think out
all the details of some undertaking, to plan and scheme and organize,
is not work for a man like that. But for a man who
has sought and secured such a position, not because he liked the work,
but because he liked the salary--such work as this would be unpleasant
labour. Under Socialism the unfit man would not apply for that post but
would strive after some other for which he was fit and which he would
therefore desire and enjoy. There are some men who would rather have
charge of and organize and be responsible for work than do it with
their hands. There are others who would rather do delicate or
difficult or artistic work, than plain work. A man who is a born
artist would rather paint a frieze or a picture or carve a statue than
he would do plain work, or take charge of and direct the labour of
others. And there are another sort of men who would rather do ordinary
plain work than take charge, or attempt higher branches for which they
have neither liking or natural talent. 'But there is one thing--a most important point that you seem to
entirely lose sight of, and that is, that all these different kinds and
classes are equal in one respect--THEY ARE ALL EQUALLY NECESSARY. Each
is a necessary and indispensable part of the whole; therefore everyone
who has done his full share of necessary work is justly entitled to a
full share of the results. The men who put the slates on are just as
indispensable as the men who lay the foundations. The work of the men
who build the walls and make the doors is just as necessary as the work
of the men who decorate the cornice. None of them would be of much use
without the architect, and the plans of the architect would come to
nothing, his building would be a mere castle in the air, if it were not
for the other workers. Each part of the work is equally necessary,
useful and indispensable if the building is to be perfected. Some of
these men work harder with their brains than with their hands and some
work harder with their hands than with their brains, BUT EACH ONE DOES
HIS FULL SHARE OF THE WORK. This truth will be recognized and acted
upon by those who build up and maintain the fabric of our Co-operative
Commonwealth. Every man who does his full share of the useful and
necessary work according to his abilities shall have his full share of
the total result. Herein will be its great difference from the present
system, under which it is possible for the cunning and selfish ones to
take advantage of the simplicity of others and rob them of part of the
fruits of their labour. As for those who will be engaged in the higher
branches, they will be sufficiently rewarded by being privileged to do
the work they are fitted for and enjoy. The only men and women who are
capable of good and great work of any kind are those who, being
naturally fit for it, love the work for its own sake and not for the
money it brings them. Under the present system, many men who have no
need of money produce great works, not for gain but for pleasure: their
wealth enables them to follow their natural inclinations. Under the
present system many men and women capable of great works are prevented
from giving expression to their powers by poverty and lack of
opportunity: they live in sorrow and die heartbroken, and the community
is the loser. These are the men and women who will be our artists,
sculptors, architects, engineers and captains of industry. 'Under the present system there are men at the head of affairs whose
only object is the accumulation of money. Some of them possess great
abilities and the system has practically compelled them to employ those
abilities for their own selfish ends to the hurt of the community. Some of them have built up great fortunes out of the sweat and blood
and tears of men and women and little children. For those who delight
in such work as this, there will be no place in our Co-operative
Commonwealth.' 'If there won't be no extry pay and if anybody
will have all they need for just doing their part of the work, what
encouragement will there be for anyone to worry his brains out trying
to invent some new machine, or make some new discovery?' 'Well,' said Barrington, 'I think that's covered by the last answer,
but if it were found necessary--which is highly improbable--to offer
some material reward in addition to the respect, esteem or honour that
would be enjoyed by the author of an invention that was a boon to the
community, it could be arranged by allowing him to retire before the
expiration of his twenty-five years service. The boon he had conferred
on the community by the invention, would be considered equivalent to so
many years work. But a man like that would not desire to cease
working; that sort go on working all their lives, for love. He is one of the very few inventors who have made
money out of their work; he is a rich man, but the only use his wealth
seems to be to him is to procure himself facilities for going on with
his work; his life is a round of what some people would call painful
labour: but it is not painful labour to him; it's just pleasure, he
works for the love of it. Another way would be to absolve a man of
that sort from the necessity of ordinary work, so as to give him a
chance to get on with other inventions. It would be to the interests
of the community to encourage him in every way and to place materials
and facilities at his disposal. 'But you must remember that even under the present system, Honour and
Praise are held to be greater than money. How many soldiers would
prefer money to the honour of wearing the intrinsically valueless
Victoria Cross? 'Even now men think less of money than they do of the respect, esteem
or honour they are able to procure with it. Many men spend the greater
part of their lives striving to accumulate money, and when they have
succeeded, they proceed to spend it to obtain the respect of their
fellow-men. Some of them spend thousands of pounds for the honour of
being able to write "MP" after their names. Others
pay huge sums to gain admission to exclusive circles of society. Others give the money away in charity, or found libraries or
universities. The reason they do these things is that they desire to
be applauded and honoured by their fellow-men. 'This desire is strongest in the most capable men--the men of genius. Therefore, under Socialism the principal incentive to great work will
be the same as now--Honour and Praise. But, under the present system,
Honour and Praise can be bought with money, and it does not matter much
how the money was obtained. The Cross of Honour and the
Laurel Crown will not be bought and sold for filthy lucre. They will
be the supreme rewards of Virtue and of Talent.' 'What would you do with them what spends all their money in drink?' 'I might reasonably ask you, "What's done with them or what you propose
to do with them now?" There are many men and women whose lives are so
full of toil and sorrow and the misery caused by abject poverty, who
are so shut out from all that makes life worth living, that the time
they spend in the public house is the only ray of sunshine in their
cheerless lives. Their mental and material poverty is so great that
they are deprived of and incapable of understanding the intellectual
and social pleasures of civilization... Under Socialism there will be
no such class as this. Everyone will be educated, and social life and
rational pleasure will be within the reach of all. Therefore we do not
believe that there will be such a class. Any individuals who abandoned
themselves to such a course would be avoided by their fellows; but if
they became very degraded, we should still remember that they were our
brother men and women, and we should regard them as suffering from a
disease inherited from their uncivilized forefathers and try to cure
them by placing them under some restraint: in an institute for
instance.' 'Another good way to deal with 'em,' said Harlow, 'would be to allow
them double pay, so as they could drink themselves to death. We could
do without the likes of them.' 'Call the next case,' said Philpot. 'This 'ere abundance that you're always talking about,' said Crass, you
can't be sure that it would be possible to produce all that. You're
only assoomin' that it could be done.' Barrington pointed to the still visible outlines of the 'Hoblong' that
Owen had drawn on the wall to illustrate a previous lecture. 'Even under the present silly system of restricted production, with the
majority of the population engaged in useless,}