{Here is a bunch of text that you should pay attention to: Oh Miss Jinny, you an' Miss Lill an' Mammy
Easter an' Susan's gwine with Jackson, an' de othah niggahs can walk. Ephum an' me'll jes' put up de shutters an' load de Colonel's gun." By this time the room was filled with excited <DW64>s, some crying,
and some laughing hysterically. Uncle Ben had come in from the kitchen;
Jackson was there, and the women were a wailing bunch in the corner by
the sideboard. Old Ephum, impassive, and Ned stood together. Virginia's
eye rested upon them, and the light of love and affection was in it. Yes, carriages were indeed rattling outside, though
a sharp shower was falling. Across the street Alphonse, M. Renault's
butler, was depositing bags and bundles on the steps. M. Renault himself
bustled out into the rain, gesticulating excitedly. Spying her at the
window, he put his hands to his mouth, cried out something, and ran in
again. Virginia flung open the sash and listened for the dreaded sound
of drums. Then she crossed quickly over to where her aunt was lying on
the lounge. "O Jinny," murmured that lady, who had revived, "can't you do something? They will be here any moment to burn us, to
murder us--to--oh, my poor boy! Why isn't he here to protect his mother! Why was Comyn so senseless, so thoughtless, as to leave us at such a
time!" "I don't think there is any need to be frightened," said Virginia, with
a calmness that made her aunt tremble with anger. "It is probably only a
rumor. Brinsmade's and ask him about it." However loath to go, Ned departed at once. All honor to those old-time
<DW64>s who are now memories, whose devotion to their masters was next
to their love of God. A great fear was in Ned's heart, but he went. And he believed devoutly that he would never see his young mistress any
more. Colfax is summoning
that courage which comes to persons of her character at such times. She
gathers her jewels into a bag, and her fine dresses into her trunk,
with trembling hands, although she is well enough now. The picture of
Clarence in the diamond frame she puts inside the waist of her gown. No,
she will not go to Bellegarde. With frantic
haste she closes the trunk, which Ephum and Jackson carry downstairs and
place between the seats of the carriage. Ned had had the horses in it
since church time. It is three in the afternoon, and Jackson explains that,
with the load, they would not reach there until midnight, if at all. Yes; many of the first families live there,
and would take them in for the night. Equipages of all sorts are
passing,--private carriages and public, and corner-stand hacks. The
black drivers are cracking whips over galloping horses. Pedestrians are hurrying by with bundles under their arms, some running
east, and some west, and some stopping to discuss excitedly the chances
of each direction. From the river comes the hoarse whistle of the boats
breaking the Sabbath stillness there. Virginia leaned against the iron railing of the steps, watching the
scene, and waiting for Ned to return from Mr. Her face was
troubled, as well it might be. The most alarming reports were cried up
to her from the street, and she looked every moment for the black smoke
of destruction to appear to the southward. Around her were gathered the
Carvel servants, most of them crying, and imploring her not to leave
them. Colfax's trunk was brought down and placed in the
carriage where three of them might have ridden to safety, a groan of
despair and entreaty rose from the faithful group that went to her
heart. "Miss Jinny, you ain't gwineter leave yo' ol mammy?" "Hush, Mammy," she said. "No, you shall all go, if I have to stay
myself. Ephum, go to the livery stable and get another carriage." She went up into her own deserted room to gather the few things she
would take with her--the little jewellery case with the necklace of
pearls which her great-grandmother had worn at her wedding. Rosetta and
Mammy Easter were of no use, and she had sent them downstairs again. With a flutter she opened her wardrobe door, to take one last look at
the gowns there. They were part of happier days
gone by. She fell down on her knees and opened the great drawer at the
bottom, and there on the top lay the dainty gown which had belonged
to Dorothy Manners. A tear fell upon one of the flowers of the stays. Irresistibly pressed into her mind the memory of Anne's fancy dress
ball,--of the episode by the gate, upon which she had thought so often
with burning face. The voices below grow louder, but she does not hear. She is folding the
gown hurriedly into a little package. It was her great-grandmother's;
her chief heirloom after the pearls. Silk and satin from Paris are
left behind. With one glance at the bed in which she had slept since
childhood, and at the picture over it which had been her mother's, she
hurries downstairs. And Dorothy Manners's gown is under her arm. On the
landing she stops to brush her eyes with her handkerchief. Ned simply pointed out a young man standing on the
steps behind the <DW64>s. Crimson stains were on Virginia's cheeks,
and the package she carried under her arm was like lead. The young
man, although he showed no signs of excitement, reddened too as he came
forward and took off his hat. But the sight of him had acurious effect
upon Virginia, of which she was at first unconscious. A sense of
security came upon her as she looked at his face and listened to his
voice. Brinsmade has gone to the hospital, Miss Carvel," he said. Brinsmade asked me to come here with your man in the hope that I might
persuade you to stay where you are." "Then the Germans are not moving on the city?" It was that smile that angered her,
that made her rebel against the advice he had to offer; that made her
forget the insult he had risked at her hands by coming there. For she
believed him utterly, without reservation. The moment he had spoken she
was convinced that the panic was a silly scare which would be food for
merriment in future years. And yet--was not that smile in derision of
herself--of her friends who were running away? Was it not an assumption
of Northern superiority, to be resented? "It is only a malicious rumor, Miss Carvel," he answered. "You have
been told so upon good authority, I suppose," she said dryly. And at the
change in her tone she saw his face fall. "I have not," he replied honestly, "but I will submit it to your own
judgment. Yesterday General Harney superseded Captain Lyon in command
in St. Some citizens of prominence begged the General to send the
troops away, to avoid further ill-feeling and perhaps--bloodshed." (They
both winced at the word.) "Colonel Blair represented to the General that
the troops could not be sent away, as they had been enlisted to serve
only in St. Louis; whereupon the General in his proclamation states that
he has no control over these Home Guards. That sentence has been twisted
by some rascal into a confession that the Home Guards are not to be
controlled. I can assure you, Miss Carvel," added Stephen, speaking
with a force which made her start and thrill, "I can assure you from a
personal knowledge of the German troops that they are not a riotous lot,
and that they are under perfect control. If they were not, there are
enough regulars in the city to repress them." And she was silent, forgetful of the hub-bub around her. It
was then that her aunt called out to her, with distressing shrillness,
from the carriage:-- "Jinny, Jinny, how can you stand there talking to
young men when our lives are in danger?" She glanced hurriedly at Stephen, who said gently; "I do not wish to
delay you, Miss Carvel, if you are bent upon going." His tone was not resentful, simply quiet. Ephum turned the
corner of the street, the perspiration running on his black face. "Miss Jinny, dey ain't no carridges to be had in this town. This was the occasion for another groan from the <DW64>s, and they began
once more to beseech her not to leave them. In the midst of their cries
she heard her aunt calling from the carriage, where, beside the trunk,
there was just room for her to squeeze in. "Jinny," cried that lady, frantically, "are you to go or stay? The
Hessians will be here at any moment. Oh, I cannot stay here to be
murdered!" Unconsciously the girl glanced again at Stephen. He had not gone, but
was still standing in the rain on the steps, the one figure of strength
and coolness she had seen this afternoon. Distracted, she blamed the
fate which had made this man an enemy. How willingly would she have
leaned upon such as he, and submitted to his guidance. Unluckily at
that moment came down the street a group which had been ludicrous on any
other day, and was, in truth, ludicrous to Stephen then. At the head
of it was a little gentleman with red mutton-chop whiskers, hatless, in
spite of the rain beginning to fall. His face was the very caricature of
terror. His clothes, usually neat, were awry, and his arms were full
of various things, not the least conspicuous of which was a magnificent
bronze clock. It was this object that caught Virginia's eye. But years
passed before she laughed over it. Cluyme (for it was he)
trotted his family. Cluyme, in a pink wrapper, carried an armful
of the family silver; then came Belle with certain articles of feminine
apparel which need not be enumerated, and the three small Cluymes of
various ages brought up the rear. Cluyme, at the top of his speed, was come opposite to the carriage
when the lady occupant got out of it. Clutching at his sleeve, she
demanded where he was going. His wife coming after
him had a narrower escape still. Colfax retained a handful of lace
from the wrapper, the owner of which emitted a shriek of fright. "Virginia, I am going to the river," said Mrs. "No, indeedy, Miss Lilly, I ain't a-gwine 'thout
young Miss. The Dutch kin cotch me an' hang me, but I ain't a-gwine
'thout Miss Jinny." Colfax drew her shawl about her shoulders with dignity. "Ill as I am, I shall walk. Bear
witness that I have spent a precious hour trying to save you. If I live
to see your father again, I shall tell him that you preferred to stay
here and carry on disgracefully with a Yankee, that you let your own
aunt risk her life alone in the rain. She did not run down the steps, but she caught
her aunt by the arm ere that lady had taken six paces. The girl's face
frightened Mrs. Colfax into submission, and she let herself be led back
into the carriage beside the trunk. Colfax's stung
Stephen to righteous anger and resentment--for Virginia. As to himself, he had looked for insult. He turned to go that he might
not look upon her confusion; and hanging on the resolution, swung on his
heel again, his eyes blazeing. He saw in hers the deep blue light of
the skies after an evening's storm. She was calm, and save for a little
quiver of the voice, mistress of herself as she spoke to the group of
cowering servants. "Mammy," she said, "get up on the box with Ned. And, Ned, walk the
horses to the levee, so that the rest may follow. Ephum, you stay here
with the house, and I will send Ned back to keep you company." With these words, clasping tightly the precious little bundle under her
arm, she stepped into the carriage. Heedless of the risk he ran, sheer
admiration sent Stephen to the carriage door. "If I can be of any service, Miss Carvel," he said, "I shall be happy." And as the horses slipped and started she slammed the door in his face. Down on the levee wheels rattled over the white stones washed clean by
the driving rain. The drops pelted the chocolate water into froth, and a
blue veil hid the distant bluffs beyond the Illinois bottom-lands. Down
on the Levee rich and poor battled for places on the landing-stages, and
would have thrown themselves into the flood had there been no boats
to save them from the dreaded Dutch. Attila and his Huns were not
more feared. What might not its
Barbarians do when roused? The rich and poor struggled together; but
money was a power that day, and many were pitilessly turned off because
they did not have the high price to carry them--who knew where? Boats which screamed, and boats which had a dragon's roar were backing
out of the close ranks where they had stood wheel-house to wheel-house,
and were dodging and bumping in the channel. See, their guards are black
with people! Colfax, when they are come out of the narrow street
into the great open space, remarks this with alarm. All the boats will
be gone before they can get near one. She
is thinking of other things than the steamboats, and wondering whether
it had not been preferable to be killed by Hessians. Vance, is
a friend of the family. What a mighty contempt did Ned and his kind have
for foot passengers! Laying about him with his whip, and shouting at the
top of his voice to make himself heard, he sent the Colonel's Kentucky
bays through the crowd down to the Barbara's landing stage, the people
scampering to the right and left, and the Carvel servants, headed by
Uncle Ben, hanging on to the carriage springs, trailing behind. He will tell you to this day how
Mr. Catherwood's carriage was pocketed by drays and bales, and how Mrs. James's horses were seized by the bridles and turned back. Ned had a
head on his shoulders, and eyes in his head. He spied Captain Vance
himself on the stage, and bade Uncle Ben hold to the horses while he
shouldered his way to that gentleman. The result was that the Captain
came bowing to the carriage door, and offered his own cabin to the
ladies. But the <DW65>s---he would take no <DW65>s except a maid for
each; and he begged Mrs. Colfax's pardon--he could not carry her trunk. So Virginia chose Mammy Easter, whose red and yellow turban was awry
from fear lest she be left behind and Ned was instructed to drive the
rest with all haste to Bellegarde. Colfax his
arm, and Virginia his eyes. He escorted the ladies to quarters in the
texas, and presently was heard swearing prodigiously as the boat was
cast off. It was said of him that he could turn an oath better than any
man on the river, which was no mean reputation. Virginia stood by the little
window of the cabin, and as the Barbara paddled and floated down the
river she looked anxiously for signals of a conflagration. Nay, in that
hour she wished that the city might burn. So it is that the best of us
may at times desire misery to thousands that our own malice may be
fed. Virginia longed to see the yellow flame creep along the wet,
gray clouds. Passionate tears came to her eyes at the thought of the
humiliation she had suffered,--and before him, of all men. Could she
ever live with her aunt after what she had said? "Carrying on with that
Yankee!" Her anger, too, was still against Stephen. Once more he had been sent by
circumstances to mock her and her people. If the city would only burn,
that his cocksure judgment might for once be mistaken, his calmness for
once broken! The rain ceased, the clouds parted, and the sun turned the muddy river
to gold. The bluffs shone May-green in the western flood of light, and a
haze hung over the bottom-lands. Not a sound disturbed the quiet of
the city receding to the northward, and the rain had washed the pall
of smoke from over it. On the boat excited voices died down to natural
tones; men smoked on the guards and promenaded on the hurricane deck,
as if this were some pleasant excursion. Women waved to the other boats
flocking after. Colfax stirred in
her berth and began to talk. Virginia did not move

"Jinny!" In that hour she remembered that great good-natured man, her
mother's brother, and for his sake Colonel Carvel had put up with much
from his wife's sister in-law. She could pass over, but never forgive
what her aunt had said to her that afternoon. Colfax had often been
cruel before, and inconsiderate. But as the girl thought of the speech,
staring out on the waters, it suddenly occurred to her that no lady
would have uttered it. In all her life she had never realized till now
that her aunt was not a lady. From that time forth Virginia's attitude
toward her aunt was changed. She controlled herself, however, and answered something, and went out
listlessly to find the Captain and inquire the destination of the boat. At the foot of the companionway
leading to the saloon deck she saw, of all people, Mr. Eliphalet Hopper
leaning on the rail, and pensively expectorating on the roof of the
wheel-house. In another mood Virginia would have laughed, for at sight
of her he straightened convulsively, thrust his quid into his cheek, and
removed his hat with more zeal than the grudging deference he usually
accorded to the sex. Clearly Eliphalet would not have chosen the
situation. "I cal'late we didn't get out any too soon, Miss Carvel," he remarked,
with a sad attempt at jocoseness. "There won't be a great deal in that
town when the Dutch get through with it." "I think that there are enough men left in it to save it," said
Virginia. Hopper found no suitable answer to this, for he made
none. He continued to glance at her uneasily. There was an impudent
tribute in his look which she resented strongly. "He's down below--ma'am," he replied. "Yes," she said, with abrupt maliciousness, "you may tell me where you
are going." "I cal'late, up the Cumberland River. That's where she's bound for,
if she don't stop before she gets there Guess there ain't many of 'em
inquired where she was goin', or cared much," he added, with a ghastly
effort to be genial. "I didn't see any use in gettin' murdered, when I couldn't do anything." He stared after her up the companionway, bit off a
generous piece of tobacco, and ruminated. If to be a genius is to
possess an infinite stock of patience, Mr. But it was not a pleasant smile to look upon. She had told her aunt the news, and stood
in the breeze on the hurricane deck looking southward, with her hand
shading her eyes. The 'Barbara Lane' happened to be a boat with a
record, and her name was often in the papers. She had already caught up
with and distanced others which had had half an hour's start of her, and
was near the head of the procession. Virginia presently became aware that people were gathering around her in
knots, gazing at a boat coming toward them. Others had been met which,
on learning the dread news, turned back. But this one kept her bow
steadily up the current, although she had passed within a biscuit-toss
of the leader of the line of refugees. It was then that Captain Vance's
hairy head appeared above the deck. he said, "if here ain't pig-headed Brent, steaming the
'Jewanita' straight to destruction." "Oh, are you sure it's Captain Brent?" "If that there was Shreve's old Enterprise come to life again, I'd lay
cotton to sawdust that Brent had her. Danged if he wouldn't take her
right into the jaws of the Dutch." The Captain's words spread, and caused considerable excitement. On board
the Barbara Lane were many gentlemen who had begun to be shamefaced over
their panic, and these went in a body to the Captain and asked him to
communicate with the 'Juanita'. Whereupon a certain number of whistles
were sounded, and the Barbara's bows headed for the other side of the
channel. As the Juanita drew near, Virginia saw the square figure and clean,
smooth-shaven face of Captain Lige standing in front of his wheel-house
Peace crept back into her soul, and she tingled with joy as the bells
clanged and the bucket-planks churned, and the great New Orleans packet
crept slowly to the Barbara's side. "You ain't goin' in, Brent?" At the sound of his voice Virginia could
have wept. "The Dutch are sacking the city," said Vance. A general titter went along the guards, and Virginia blushed. "I'm on my reg'lar trip, of course," said Vance. Out there on the sunlit
river the situation seemed to call for an apology. "Seems to be a little more loaded than common," remarked Captain Lige,
dryly, at which there was another general laugh. "If you're really goin' up," said Captain Vance, "I reckon there's a few
here would like to be massacred, if you'll take 'em." Brent; "I'm bound for the barbecue." While the two great boats were manoeuvring, and slashing with one wheel
and the other, the gongs sounding, Virginia ran into the cabin. "Oh, Aunt Lillian," she exclaimed, "here is Captain Lige and the
Juanita, and he is going to take us back with him. It its unnecessary here to repeat the moral persuasion which Virginia
used to get her aunt up and dressed. That lady, when she had heard the
whistle and the gongs, had let her imagination loose. Turning her face
to the wall, she was in the act of repeating her prayers as her niece
entered. A big stevedore carried her down two decks to where the gang-plank
was thrown across. Captain Lige himself was at the other end. His face
lighted, Pushing the people aside, he rushed across, snatched the lady
from the <DW64>'s arms, crying:

"Jinny! The stevedore's
services were required for Mammy Easter. And behind the burly shield
thus formed, a stoutish gentleman slipped over, all unnoticed, with a
carpet-bag in his hand It bore the initials E. H.

The plank was drawn in. The great wheels began to turn and hiss, the
Barbara's passengers waved good-by to the foolhardy lunatics who had
elected to go back into the jaws of destruction. Colfax was put
into a cabin; and Virginia, in a glow, climbed with Captain Lige to the
hurricane deck. There they stood for a while in silence, watching the
broad stern of the Barbara growing smaller. "Just to think," Miss Carvel
remarked, with a little hysterical sigh, "just to think that some of
those people brought bronze clocks instead of tooth-brushes." "And what did you bring, my girl?" asked the Captain, glancing at the
parcel she held so tightly under her arm. He never knew why she blushed so furiously. THE STRAINING OF ANOTHER FRIENDSHIP

Captain Lige asked but two questions: where was the Colonel, and was
it true that Clarence had refused to be paroled? Though not possessing
over-fine susceptibilities, the Captain knew a mud-drum from a lady's
watch, as he himself said. In his solicitude for Virginia, he saw that
she was in no state of mind to talk of the occurrences of the last few
days. So he helped her to climb the little stair that winds to the top
of the texas,--that sanctified roof where the pilot-house squats. The
girl clung to her bonnet Will you like her any the less when you know
that it was a shovel bonnet, with long red ribbons that tied under
her chin? "Captain Lige," she said, almost
tearfully, as she took his arm, "how I thank heaven that you came up the
river this afternoon!" "Jinny," said the Captain, "did you ever know why cabins are called
staterooms?" "Why, no," answered she, puzzled. "There was an old fellow named Shreve who ran steamboats before Jackson
fought the redcoats at New Orleans. In Shreve's time the cabins were
curtained off, just like these new-fangled sleeping-car berths. The old
man built wooden rooms, and he named them after the different states,
Kentuck, and Illinois, and Pennsylvania. So that when a fellow came
aboard he'd say: 'What state am I in, Cap?' And from this river has the
name spread all over the world--stateroom. That's mighty interesting,"
said Captain Lige. "Yea," said Virginia; "why didn't you tell me long ago." "And I'll bet you can't say," the Captain continued, "why this house
we're standing on is called the texas." "Because it is annexed to the states," she replied, quick a flash. "Well, you're bright," said he. "Old Tufts got that notion, when Texas
came in. Bill Jenks was Captain Brent's senior pilot. His skin hung on his face
in folds, like that of a rhinoceros It was very much the same color. His
grizzled hair was all lengths, like a worn-out mop; his hand reminded
one of an eagle's claw, and his teeth were a pine yellow. He greeted
only such people as he deemed worthy of notice, but he had held Virginia
in his arms. "William," said the young lady, roguishly, "how is the eye, location,
and memory?" When this happened it was put in
the Juanita's log. "So the Cap'n be still harpin' on that?" he said, "Miss Jinny, he's just
plumb crazy on a pilot's qualifications." "He says that you are the best pilot on the river, but I don't believe
it," said Virginia. He made a place for her on the leather-padded
seat at the back of the pilot house, where for a long time she sat
staring at the flag trembling on the jackstaff between the great sombre
pipes. The sun fell down, but his light lingered in the air above as the
big boat forged abreast the foreign city of South St. There
was the arsenal--grim despite its dress of green, where Clarence was
confined alone. Captain Lige came in from his duties below. "Well, Jinny, we'll soon be
at home," he said. "We've made a quick trip against the rains." "And--and do you think the city is safe?" "Jinny, would
you like to blow the whistle?" "I should just love to," said Virginia. Jenks's
directions she put her toe on the tread, and shrank back when the
monster responded with a snort and a roar. River men along the levee
heard that signal and laughed. The joke was certainly not on sturdy
Elijah Brent. An hour later, Virginia and her aunt and the Captain, followed by Mammy
aster and Rosetta and Susan, were walking through the streets of the
stillest city in the Union. All that they met was a provost's guard, for
St. Once in a while they saw the light of
some contemptuous citizen of the residence district who had stayed to
laugh. Out in the suburbs, at the country houses of the first families,
people of distinction slept five and six in a room--many with only a
quilt between body and matting. Little wonder that these dreamed of
Hessians and destruction. In town they slept with their doors open,
those who remained and had faith. Martial law means passes and
explanations, and walking generally in the light of day. Martial law
means that the Commander-in-chief, if he be an artist in well doing,
may use his boot freely on politicians bland or beetle-browed. No police
force ever gave the sense of security inspired by a provost's guard. Captain Lige sat on the steps of Colonel Carvel's house that night, long
after the ladies were gone to bed. The only sounds breaking the silence
of the city were the beat of the feet of the marching squads and the
call of the corporal's relief. But the Captain smoked in agony until the
clouds of two days slipped away from under the stars, for he was trying
to decide a Question. Then he went up to a room in the house which had
been known as his since the rafters were put down on that floor. The next morning, as the Captain and Virginia sit at breakfast together
with only Mammy Easter to cook and Rosetta to wait on them, the Colonel
bursts in. He is dusty and travel-stained from his night on the train,
but his gray eyes light with affection as he sees his friend beside his
daughter. "Jinny," he cries as he kisses her, "Jinny, I'm proud oil you, my girl! You didn't let the Yankees frighten you--But where is Jackson?" And so the whole miserable tale has to be told over again, between
laughter and tears on Virginia's part, and laughter and strong language
on Colonel Carvel's. What--blessing that Lige met them, else the
Colonel might now be starting for the Cumberland River in search of his
daughter. The Captain does not take much part in the conversation, and
he refuses the cigar which is offered him. "Lige," he says, "this is the first time to my knowledge." "I smoked too many last night," says the Captain. The Colonel sat down,
with his feet against the mantel, too full of affairs to take much
notice of Mr. "The Yanks have taken the first trick--that's sure," he said. "But I
think we'll laugh last, Jinny. The
state has got more militia, or will have more militia in a day or
two. We won't miss the thousand they stole in Camp Jackson. And I've got a few commissions right here," and he
tapped his pocket. "Pa," said Virginia, "did you volunteer?" "The Governor wouldn't have me," he answered. "He said I was more good
here in St. The Colonel listened with
many exclamations, slapping his knee from time to time as she proceeded. he cried, when she had finished, "the boy has it in him, after
all! They can't hold him a day--can they, Lige?" (No answer from the
Captain, who is eating his breakfast in silence.) "All that we have to
do is to go for Worington and get a habeas corpus from the United States
District Court. The Captain got up excitedly, his face
purple. "I reckon you'll have to excuse me, Colonel," he said. "There's a cargo
on my boat which has got to come off." And without more ado he left the
room. In consternation they heard the front door close behind him. And
yet, neither father nor daughter dared in that hour add to the trial
of the other by speaking out the dread that was in their hearts. The
Colonel smoked for a while, not a word escaping him, and then he patted
Virginia's cheek. "I reckon I'll run over and see Russell, Jinny," he said, striving to
be cheerful. He stopped
abruptly in the hall and pressed his hand to his forehead. "My God," he
whispered to himself, "if I could only go to Silas!" Colfax's lawyer, of whose politics it is not necessary to speak. There
was plenty of excitement around the Government building where his Honor
issued the writ. There lacked not gentlemen of influence who went with
Mr. Russell and Colonel Carvel and the lawyer and the Commissioner to
the Arsenal. They were admitted to the presence of the indomitable Lyon,
who informed them that Captain Colfax was a prisoner of war, and, since
the arsenal was Government property, not in the state. The Commissioner
thereupon attested the affidavit to Colonel Carvel, and thus the
application for the writ was made legal. These things the Colonel reported to Virginia; and to Mrs. Colfax, who
received them with red eyes and a thousand queries as to whether that
Yankee ruffian would pay any attention to the Sovereign law which he
pretended to uphold; whether the Marshal would not be cast over the
Arsenal wall by the slack of his raiment when he went to serve the writ. This was not the language, but the purport, of the lady's questions. Colonel Carvel had made but a light breakfast: he had had no dinner,
and little rest on the train. But he answered his sister-in-law with
unfailing courtesy. He was too honest to express a hope which he did not
feel. He had returned that evening to a dreary household. During the
day the servants had straggled in from Bellegarde, and Virginia had had
prepared those dishes which her father loved. Colfax chose to keep
her room, for which the two were silently thankful. The Colonel was humming a tune as he went down the stairs, but
Virginia was not deceived. He would not see the yearning in her eyes as
he took his chair; he would not glance at Captain Lige's empty seat. She caught her breath when she saw that the
food on his plate lay untouched. He pushed his chair away, such suffering in his look as she had never
seen. "Jinny," he said, "I reckon Lige is for the Yankees." "I have known it all along," she said, but faintly. "My God," cried the Colonel, in agony, "to think that he kept it from me
I to think that Lige kept it from me!" "It is because he loves you, Pa," answered the girl, gently, "it is
because he loves us." Virginia got up, and went softly around the
table. "Yes," he said, his voice lifeless. But her courage was not to be lightly shaken. "Pa, will you forbid him
to come here--now?" A long while she waited for his answer, while the big clock ticked out
the slow seconds in the hall, and her heart beat wildly. "As long as I have a roof, Lige may come under
it." She did not ask him where he was
going, but ordered Jackson to keep the supper warm, and went into the
drawing-room. The lights were out, then, but the great piano that was
her mother's lay open. That wondrous
hymn which Judge Whipple loved, which for years has been the comfort
of those in distress, floated softly with the night air out of the
open window. Colonel Carvel heard it, and
paused. He did not stop again until he reached the narrow street at the top
of the levee bank, where the quaint stone houses of the old French
residents were being loaded with wares. He took a few steps back-up the
hill. Then he wheeled about, walked swiftly down the levee, and on to
the landing-stage beside which the big 'Juanita' loomed in the night. On
her bows was set, fantastically, a yellow street-car. Its unexpected appearance there had
served to break the current of his meditations. He stood staring at it,
while the roustabouts passed and repassed, noisily carrying great logs
of wood on shoulders padded by their woollen caps. "That'll be the first street-car used in the city of New Orleans, if it
ever gets there, Colonel." "Reckon I'll have to stay here and boss the cargo all night. Want to
get in as many trips as I can before--navigation closes," the Captain
concluded significantly. "You were never too busy to come for
supper, Lige. Captain Lige shot at him a swift look. "Come over here on the levee," said the Colonel, sternly. They walked
out together, and for some distance in silence. "Lige," said the elder gentleman, striking his stick on the stones, "if
there ever was a straight goer, that's you. You've always dealt squarely
with me, and now I'm going to ask you a plain question. "I'm North, I reckon," answered the Captain, bluntly. It was a long time before he spoke again. The Captain waited
like a man who expects and deserve, the severest verdict. "And you wouldn't tell me, Lige? "My God, Colonel," exclaimed the other, passionately, "how could I? I
owe what I have to your charity. But for you and--and Jinny I should
have gone to the devil. If you and she are taken away, what have I left
in life? I was a coward, sir, not to tell you. And yet,--God help me,--I can't stand by and see the nation go to
pieces. Your fathers fought that
we Americans might inherit the earth--" He stopped abruptly. Then he
continued haltingly, "Colonel, I know you're a man of strong feelings
and convictions. All I ask is that you and Jinny will think of me as a
friend--"

He choked, and turned away, not heeding the direction of his feet. The
Colonel, his stick raised, stood looking after him. He was folded in the
near darkness before he called his name. He came back, wondering, across the rough stones until he stood beside
the tall figure. Below them, the lights glided along the dark water. "Lige, didn't I raise you? Haven't I taught you that my house was your
home? But--but never speak to me again of this night! Not a word passed between them as they went up the quiet street. At the
sound of their feet in the entry the door was flung open, and Virginia,
with her hands out stretched, stood under the hall light. "Oh, Pa, I knew you would bring him back," she said. OF CLARENCE

Captain Clarence Colfax, late of the State Dragoons, awoke on Sunday
morning the chief of the many topics of the conversation of a big city. His conduct drew forth enthusiastic praise from the gentlemen and ladies
who had thronged Beauregard and Davis avenues, and honest admiration
from the party which had broken up the camp. There were many doting parents, like Mr. Catherwood, whose boys had
accepted the parole, whose praise was a trifle lukewarm, to be sure. But popular opinion, when once aroused, will draw a grunt from the most
grudging. We are not permitted, alas, to go behind these stern walls and discover
how Captain Colfax passed that eventful Sunday of the Exodus. We know
that, in his loneliness, he hoped for a visit from his cousin, and took
to pacing his room in the afternoon, when a smarting sense of injustice
crept upon him. And how was he to guess, as he
looked out in astonishment upon the frightened flock of white boats
swimming southward, that his mother and his sweetheart were there? On Monday, while the Colonel and many prominent citizens were busying
themselves about procuring the legal writ which was at once to release
Mr. Colfax, and so cleanse the whole body of Camp Jackson's defenders
from any, veiled intentions toward the Government, many well known
carriages drew up before the Carvel House in Locust Street to
congratulate the widow and the Colonel upon the possession of such a
son and nephew. There were some who slyly congratulated Virginia, whose
martyrdom it was to sit up with people all the day long. Colfax
kept her room, and admitted only a few of her bosom friends to cry with
her. When the last of the callers was gone, Virginia was admitted to her
aunt's presence. "Aunt Lillian, to-morrow morning Pa and I are going to the Arsenal with
a basket for Max. Pa seems to think there is a chance that he may come
back with us. The lady smiled wearily at the proposal, and raised her hands in
protest, the lace on the sleeves of her dressing gown falling away from
her white arms. she exclaimed, "when I can't walk to my bureau after that
terrible Sunday. No," she added, with conviction,
"I never again expect to see him alive. Comyn says they may release him,
does he? The girl went away, not in anger or impatience, but in sadness. Brought
up to reverence her elders, she had ignored the shallowness of her
aunt's character in happier days. Colfax's conduct carried
a prophecy with it. Virginia sat down on the landing to ponder on the
years to come,--on the pain they were likely to bring with them from
this source--Clarence gone to the war; her father gone (for she felt
that he would go in the end), Virginia foresaw the lonely days of trial
in company with this vain woman whom accident made her cousin's mother. Ay, and more, fate had made her the mother of the man she was to marry. The girl could scarcely bear the thought--through the hurry and swing of
the events of two days she had kept it from her mind. To-morrow he would be coming home
to her joyfully for his reward, and she did not love him. She was bound
to face that again and again. She had cheated herself again and again
with other feelings. She had set up intense love of country in the
shrine where it did not belong, and it had answered--for a while. She
saw Clarence in a hero's light--until a fatal intimate knowledge made
her shudder and draw back. Captain Lige's cheery voice roused her from below--and her father's
laugh. And as she went down to them she thanked God that this friend had
been spared to him. Never had the Captain's river yarns been better told
than at the table that evening. Virginia did not see him glance at the
Colonel when at last he had brought a smile to her face. "I'm going to leave Jinny with you, Lige," said Mr. "Worington has some notion that the Marshal may go to the Arsenal
to-night with the writ. she pleaded

The Colonel was taken aback. He stood looking down at her, stroking his
goatee, and marvelling at the ways of woman. "The horses have been out all day, Jinny," he said, "I am going in the
cars." "I can go in the cars, too." "There is only a chance that we shall see Clarence," he went on,
uneasily. "It is better than sitting still," cried Virginia, as she ran away to
get the bonnet with the red strings. "Lige,--" said the Colonel, as the two stood awaiting her in the hall,
"I can't make her out. It was a long journey, in a bumping car with had springs that rattled
unceasingly, past the string of provost guards. The Colonel sat in the
corner, with his head bent down over his stick At length, cramped and
weary, they got out, and made their way along the Arsenal wall, past the
sentries to the entrance. The sergeant brought his rifle to a "port". Carver

"Captain Colfax was taken to Illinois in a skiff, quarter of an hour
since." Captain Lige gave vent to a long, low whistle. he exclaimed, "and the river this high! Before he could answer came the noise of steps from the direction of
the river, and a number of people hurried up excitedly. Worington, the lawyer, and caught him by the sleeve. Worington glanced at the sentry, and pulled the Colonel past the
entrance and into the street. "They have started across with him in a light skiff----four men and a
captain. And a lot of us, who suspected
what they were up to, were standing around. When we saw 'em come down,
we made a rush and had the guard overpowered But Colfax called out to
stand back." "Cuss me if I understand him," said Mr. "He told us to
disperse, and that he proposed to remain a prisoner and go where they
sent him." Then--"Move on please, gentlemen," said the sentry,
and they started to walk toward the car line, the lawyer and the Colonel
together. Virginia put her hand through the Captain's arm. In the
darkness he laid his big one over it. "Don't you be frightened, Jinny, at what I said, I reckon they'll fetch
up in Illinois all right, if I know Lyon. There, there," said Captain
Lige, soothingly. She had endured more in
the past few days than often falls to the lot of one-and-twenty. He thought of the
many, many times he had taken her on his knee and kissed her tears. He
might do that no more, now. There was the young Captain, a prisoner on
the great black river, who had a better right, Elijah Brent wondered, as
they waited in the silent street for the lonely car, if Clarence loved
her as well as he. It was vary late when they reached home, and Virginia went silently up
to her room. Colonel Carvel stared grimly after her, then glanced at his
friend as he turned down the lights. The eyes of the two met, as of old,
in true understanding. The sun was still slanting over the tops of the houses the next morning
when Virginia, a ghostly figure, crept down the stairs and withdrew
the lock and bolt on the front door. The street was still, save for
the twittering of birds and the distant rumble of a cart in its early
rounds. The chill air of the morning made her shiver as she scanned the
entry for the newspaper. Dismayed, she turned to the clock in the hall. She sat long behind the curtains in her father's little library, the
thoughts whirling in her brain as she watched the growing life of
another day. Once she stole softly back to
the entry, self-indulgent and ashamed, to rehearse again the bitter and
the sweet of that scene of the Sunday before. She summoned up the image
of the young man who had stood on these steps in front of the frightened
servants. She seemed to feel again the calm power and earnestness of his
face, to hear again the clear-cut tones of his voice as he advised
her. Then she drew back, frightened, into the sombre library,
conscience-stricken that she should have yielded to this temptation
then, when Clarence--She dared not follow the thought, but she saw the
light skiff at the mercy of the angry river and the dark night. If he were spared, she prayed for strength to
consecrate herself to him A book lay on the table, and Virginia took
refuge in it. And her eyes glancing over the pages, rested on this
verse:--

       "Thy voice is heard thro' rolling drums,
        That beat to battle where he stands;
        Thy face across his fancy comes,
        And gives the battle to his hands." The paper brought no news, nor mentioned the ruse to which Captain Lyon
had resorted to elude the writ by transporting his prisoner to Illinois. Newspapers were not as alert then as now. Colonel Carvel was off early
to the Arsenal in search of tidings. He would not hear of Virginia's
going with him. Captain Lige, with a surer instinct, went to the river. Twice Virginia was summoned to her aunt, and
twice she made excuse. It was the Captain who returned first, and she
met him at the door. "He is alive," said the Captain, tremulously, "alive and well, and
escaped South." She took a step toward him, and swayed. For a
brief instant he held her in his arms and then he led her to the great
armchair that was the Colonel's. "Lige," she said, "--are you sure that this is not--a kindness?" "No, Jinny," he answered quickly, "but things were mighty close. They struck out straight
across, but they drifted and drifted like log-wood. And then she began
to fill, and all five of 'em to bail. The
five soldiers came up on that bit of an island below the Arsenal. They
hunted all night, but they didn't find Clarence. And they got taken off
to the Arsenal this morning." "I knew that much this morning," he continued, "and so did your pa. But
the Andrew Jackson is just in from Memphis, and the Captain tells me
that he spoke the Memphis packet off Cape Girardeau, and that Clarence
was aboard. She picked him up by a miracle, after he had just missed a
round trip through her wheel-house." CHAPTER I. INTRODUCING A CAPITALIST

A cordon of blue regiments surrounded the city at first from Carondelet
to North St. The crowds liked best to go to
Compton Heights, where the tents of the German citizen-soldiers were
spread out like so many slices of white cake on the green beside the
city's reservoir. Thence the eye stretched across the town, catching the
dome of the Court House and the spire of St. Away to the west,
on the line of the Pacific railroad that led halfway across the state,
was another camp. Then another, and another, on the circle of the fan,
until the river was reached to the northward, far above the bend. Within
was a peace that passed understanding,--the peace of martial law. Without the city, in the great state beyond, an irate governor had
gathered his forces from the east and from the west. Letters came and
went between Jefferson City and Jefferson Davis, their purport being
that the Governor was to work out his own salvation, for a while
at least. Louis, struck in a night by the fever of
militarism, arose and went to Glencoe. Prying sergeants and commissioned
officers, mostly of hated German extraction, thundered at the door
of Colonel Carvel's house, and other houses, there--for Glencoe was
a border town. They searched the place more than once from garret to
cellar, muttered guttural oaths, and smelled of beer and sauerkraut, The
haughty appearance of Miss Carvel did not awe them--they were blind
to all manly sensations. The Colonel's house, alas, was one of many in
Glencoe written down in red ink in a book at headquarters as a place
toward which the feet of the young men strayed. Good evidence was
handed in time and time again that the young men had come and gone, and
red-faced commanding officers cursed indignant subalterns, and implied
that Beauty had had a hand in it. Councils of war were held over the
advisability of seizing Mr. Carvel's house at Glencoe, but proof was
lacking until one rainy night in June a captain and ten men spurred up
the drive and swung into a big circle around the house. The Captain
took off his cavalry gauntlet and knocked at the door, more gently than
usual. The Captain was given an
audience more formal than one with the queen of Prussia could have been,
Miss Carvel was infinitely more haughty than her Majesty. Was not the
Captain hired to do a degrading service? Indeed, he thought so as he
followed her about the house and he felt like the lowest of criminals
as he opened a closet door or looked under a bed. He was a beast of the
field, of the mire. How Virginia shrank from him if he had occasion to
pass her! Her gown would have been defiled by his touch. And yet the
Captain did not smell of beer, nor of sauerkraut; nor did he swear in
any language. He did his duty apologetically, but he did it. He pulled
a man (aged seventeen) out from under a great hoop skirt in a little
closet, and the man had a pistol that refused its duty when snapped in
the Captain's face. This was little Spencer Catherwood, just home from a
military academy. Spencer was taken through the rain by the chagrined Captain to the
headquarters, where he caused a little embarrassment. No damning
evidence was discovered on his person, for the pistol had long since
ceased to be a firearm. And so after a stiff lecture from the Colonel
he was finally given back into the custody of his father. Despite the
pickets, the young men filtered through daily,--or rather nightly. Presently some of them began to come back, gaunt and worn and tattered,
among the grim cargoes that were landed by the thousands and tens of
thousands on the levee. And they took them (oh, the pity of it!) Lynch's slave pen, turned into a Union prison of
detention, where their fathers and grandfathers had been wont to send
their disorderly and insubordinate <DW65>s. They were packed away, as
the miserable slaves had been, to taste something of the bitterness
of the <DW64>'s lot. So came Bert Russell to welter in a low room whose
walls gave out the stench of years. How you cooked for them, and schemed
for them, and cried for them, you devoted women of the South! You spent
the long hot summer in town, and every day you went with your baskets
to Gratiot Street, where the infected old house stands, until--until one
morning a lady walked out past the guard, and down the street. She was
civilly detained at the corner, because she wore army boots. If you were a young lady of the proper principles
in those days, you climbed a steep pair of stairs in the heat, and stood
in line until it became your turn to be catechised by an indifferent
young officer in blue who sat behind a table and smoked a horrid cigar. He had little time to be courteous. He was not to be dazzled by a bright
gown or a pretty face; he was indifferent to a smile which would have
won a savage. His duty was to look down into your heart, and extract
therefrom the nefarious scheme you had made to set free the man you
loved ere he could be sent north to Alton or Columbus. My dear, you
wish to rescue him, to disguise him, send him south by way of Colonel
Carvel's house at Glencoe. At least, he will
have died for the South. First politics, and then war, and then more politics, in this our
country. Your masterful politician obtains a regiment, and goes to war,
sword in hand. He fights well, but he is still the politician. It
was not a case merely of fighting for the Union, but first of getting
permission to fight. Camp Jackson taken, and the prisoners exchanged
south, Captain Lyon; who moved like a whirlwind, who loved the Union
beyond his own life, was thrust down again. A mutual agreement was
entered into between the Governor and the old Indian fighter in command
of the Western Department, to respect each other. How Lyon chafed, and paced the Arsenal walks while he might have
saved the state. Then two gentlemen went to Washington, and the next
thing that happened was Brigadier General Lyon, Commander of the
Department of the West. Would General Lyon confer with the Governor of Missouri? Yes, the
General would give the Governor a safe-conduct into St. Louis, but
his Excellency must come to the General. His Excellency came, and the
General deigned to go with the Union leader to the Planters House. Conference, five hours; result, a safe-conduct for the Governor back. And this is how General Lyon ended the talk. His words, generously
preserved by a Confederate colonel who accompanied his Excellency,
deserve to be writ in gold on the National Annals. "Rather than concede to the state of Missouri the right to demand that
my Government shall not enlist troops within her limits, or bring troops
into the state whenever it pleases; or move its troops at its own will
into, out of, or through, the state; rather than concede to the state of
Missouri for one single instant the right to dictate to my Government in
any matter, however unimportant, I would" (rising and pointing in turn
to every one in the room) "see you, and you, and you, and you, and every
man, woman, and child in this state, dead and buried." Then, turning
to the Governor, he continued, "This means war. In an hour one of my
officers will call for you and conduct you out of my lines." And thus, without another word, without an inclination of the head, he
turned upon his heel and strode out of the room, rattling his spurs and
clanking his sabre. In less than two months that indomitable leader was
lying dead beside Wilson's Creek, among the oaks on Bloody Hill. What he
would have been to this Union, had God spared him, we shall never know. He saved Missouri, and won respect and love from the brave men who
fought against him. What prayers rose to heaven,
and curses sank to hell, when the news of them came to the city by
the river! Flags were made by loving fingers, and shirts and bandages. Trembling young ladies of Union sympathies presented colors to regiments
on the Arsenal Green, or at Jefferson Barracks, or at Camp Benton to the
northwest near the Fair Grounds. And then the regiments marched through
the streets with bands playing that march to which the words of the
Battle Hymn were set, and those bright ensigns snapping at the front;
bright now, and new, and crimson. But soon to be stained a darker red,
and rent into tatters, and finally brought back and talked over and
cried over, and tenderly laid above an inscription in a glass case, to
be revered by generations of Americans to confer What can stir the
soul more than the sight of those old flags, standing in ranks like
the veterans they are, whose duty has been nobly done? The blood of the
color-sergeant is there, black now with age. But where are the tears of
the sad women who stitched the red and the white and the blue together? The regiments marched through the streets and aboard the boats, and
pushed off before a levee of waving handkerchiefs and nags. Later--much later, black headlines, and grim
lists three columns long,--three columns of a blanket sheet! "The City
of Alton has arrived with the following Union dead and wounded, and
the following Confederate wounded (prisoners)." In a never-ceasing procession they steamed up the river; those calm
boats which had been wont to carry the white cargoes of Commerce now
bearing the red cargoes of war. And they bore away to new battlefields
thousands of fresh-faced boys from Wisconsin and Michigan and Minnesota,
gathered at Camp Benton. Some came back with their color gone and their
red cheeks sallow and bearded and sunken. Stephen Brice, with a pain over his heart and a lump in his throat,
walked on the pavement beside his old company, but his look avoided
their faces. He wrung Richter's hand on the landing-stage. The good German's eyes were filled as he said good-by. "You will come, too, my friend, when the country needs you," he said. "Now" (and he shrugged his shoulders), "now have we many with no cares
to go. I have not even a father--" And he turned to Judge Whipple, who
was standing by, holding out a bony hand. "God bless you, Carl," said the Judge And Carl could scarce believe his
ears. He got aboard the boat, her decks already blue with troops, and as
she backed out with her whistle screaming, the last objects he saw were
the gaunt old man and the broad-shouldered young man side by side on the
edge of the landing. Stephen's chest heaved, and as he walked back to the office with the
Judge, he could not trust himself to speak. Back to the silent office
where the shelves mocked them. The Judge closed the ground-glass door
behind him, and Stephen sat until five o'clock over a book. No, it was
not Whittlesey, but Hardee's "Tactics." He shut it with a slam, and went
to Verandah Hall to drill recruits on a dusty floor,--narrow-chested
citizens in suspenders, who knew not the first motion in right about
face. For Stephen was an adjutant in the Home Guards--what was left of
them. One we know of regarded the going of the troops and the coming of the
wounded with an equanimity truly philosophical. When the regiments
passed Carvel & Company on their way riverward to embark, Mr. Hopper did
not often take the trouble to rise from his chair, nor was he ever known
to go to the door to bid them Godspeed. This was all very well, because
they were Union regiments. Hopper did not contribute a horse,
nor even a saddle-blanket, to the young men who went away secretly in
the night, without fathers or mothers or sisters to wave at them. One scorching afternoon in July Colonel Carvel came into the office,
too hurried to remark the pain in honest Ephum's face as he watched his
master. The sure signs of a harassed man were on the Colonel. Since May
he had neglected his business affairs for others which he deemed public,
and which were so mysterious that even Mr. Hopper could not get wind
of them. These matters had taken the Colonel out of town. But now the
necessity of a pass made that awkward, and he went no farther than
Glencoe, where he spent an occasional Sunday. Hopper rose from
his chair when Mr. Carvel entered,--a most unprecedented action. Sitting down at his desk, he drummed upon it
uneasily. Eliphalet crossed the room quickly, and something that was very near a
smile was on his face. Carvel's chair with
a semi-confidential air,--one wholly new, had the Colonel given it a
thought. He did not, but began to finger some printed slips of paper
which had indorsements on their backs. His fine lips were tightly
closed, as if in pain. Hopper," he said, "these Eastern notes are due this week, are they
not?" "There is no use mincing matters, Hopper. You know as well as I that
there is no money to pay them," said he, with a certain pompous attempt
at severity which characterized his kind nature. You have brought this business up to a modern footing, and made
it as prosperous as any in the town. I am sorry, sir, that those
contemptible Yankees should have forced us to the use of arms, and cut
short many promising business careers such as yours, sir. And the good gentleman looked
out of the window. He was thinking of a day, before the Mexican War,
when his young wife had sat in the very chair filled by Mr. "These notes cannot be met," he repeated, and his voice was near to
breaking. The flies droning in the hot office made the only sound. Outside the
partition, among the bales, was silence. Hopper, with a remarkable ease, "I cal'late these
notes can be met." The Colonel jumped as if he had heard a shot, and one of the notes fell
to the floor. Eliphalet picked it up tenderly, and held it. "There isn't a bank in town
that will lend me money. I--I haven't a friend--a friend I may ask who
can spare it, sir." Suavity was come upon
it like a new glove and changed the man. Now
he had poise, such poise as we in these days are accustomed to see in
leather and mahogany offices. "I will take up those notes myself, sir." cried the Colonel, incredulously, "You?" There was not a deal of hypocrisy in his
nature, and now he did not attempt the part of Samaritan. He did not
beam upon the Colonel and remind him of the day on which, homeless and
friendless, he had been frightened into his store by a drove of mules. But his day,--the day toward which he had striven unknown and
unnoticed for so many years--the day when he would laugh at the pride of
those who had ignored and insulted him, was dawning at last. When we
are thoughtless of our words, we do not reckon with that spark in little
bosoms that may burst into flame and burn us. Not that Colonel Carvel
had ever been aught but courteous and kind to all. His station in life
had been his offence to Eliphalet, who strove now to hide an exultation
that made him tremble. "I cal'late that I can gather together enough to meet the notes,
Colonel. Here followed an interval
of sheer astonishment to Mr. "And you will take my note for the amount?" The Colonel pulled his goatee, and sat back in his chair, trying to face
the new light in which he saw his manager. He knew well enough that the
man was not doing this out of charity, or even gratitude. He reviewed
his whole career, from that first morning when he had carried bales to
the shipping room, to his replacement of Mr. Hood, and there was nothing
with which to accuse him. He remembered the warnings of Captain Lige
and Virginia. He could not in honor ask a cent from the Captain now. He
would not ask his sister-in-law, Mrs. Colfax, to let him touch the money
he had so ably invested for her; that little which Virginia's mother had
left the girl was sacred. Carvel had lain awake with the agony of those
Eastern debts. Not to pay was to tarnish the name of a Southern
gentleman. His house would bring nothing
in these times. He rose and began to pace the floor, tugging at his
chin. Hopper, who sat calmly on, and the
third time stopped abruptly before him. "Where the devil did you get this money, sir?" "I haven't been extravagant, Colonel, since I've worked for you,"
he said. "It don't cost me much to live. The furrows in the Colonel's brow deepened. "You offer to lend me five times more than I have ever paid you, Mr. Tell me how you have made this money before I accept it." Eliphalet had never been able to meet that eye since he had known it. But he went to his desk, and drew a long sheet of
paper from a pigeonhole. "These be some of my investments," he answered, with just a tinge of
surliness. "I cal'late they'll stand inspection. I ain't forcing you to
take the money, sir," he flared up, all at once. "I'd like to save the
business." He went unsteadily to his desk, and none save
God knew the shock that his pride received that day. To rescue a name
which had stood untarnished since he had brought it into the world, he
drew forth some blank notes, and filled them out. But before he signed
them he spoke:

"You are a business man, Mr. Hopper," said he, "And as a business man
you must know that these notes will not legally hold. The courts are abolished, and all transactions here in St. "One moment, sir," cried the Colonel, standing up and towering to his
full height. "Law or no law, you shall have the money and interest, or
your security, which is this business. I need not tell you, sir, that my
word is sacred, and binding forever upon me and mine." "I'm not afraid, Colonel," answered Mr. Hopper, with a feeble attempt at
geniality. He was, in truth, awed at last. "If you
were--this instant you should leave this place." He sat down, and
continued more calmly: "It will not be long before a Southern Army
marches into St. "Do you reckon we can hold the business together until then,
Mr. God forbid that we should smile at the Colonel's simple faith. And if
Eliphalet Hopper had done so, his history would have ended here. "Leave that to me, Colonel," he said soberly. The good Colonel sighed as he signed, away that
business which had been an honor to the city where it was founded, I
thank heaven that we are not concerned with the details of their talk
that day. Why should we wish to know the rate of interest on those
notes, or the time? Hopper filled out his check, and presently departed. It was the
signal for the little force which remained to leave. Outside, in the
store; Ephum paced uneasily, wondering why his master did not come out. Presently he crept to the door of the office, pushed it open, and beheld
Mr. Carvel with his head bowed, down in his hands. "Marse Comyn, you know what I done promise young MISS long time ago,
befo'--befo' she done left us?" He saw the faithful old <DW64> but dimly. Faintly he heard the pleading
voice. "Marse Comyn, won' you give Ephum a pass down, river, ter fotch Cap'n
Lige?" "Ephum," said the Colonel, sadly, "I had a letter from the Captain
yesterday. His boat is a Federal transport, and he is in
Yankee pay." Ephum took a step forward, appealingly, "But de Cap'n's yo' friend,
Marse Comyn. He ain't never fo'get what you done fo' him, Marse Comyn. He ain't in de army, suh." "And I am the Captain's friend, Ephum," answered the Colonel, quietly. "But I will not ask aid from any man employed by the Yankee Government. No--not from my own brother, who is in a Pennsylvania regiments." Ephum shuffled out, and his heart was lead as he closed the store that
night. Hopper has boarded a Fifth Street car, which jangles on with many
halts until it comes to Bremen, a German settlement in the north of the
city. At Bremen great droves of mules fill the street, and crowd the
entrances of the sale stables there. Whips are cracking like pistol
shots, Gentlemen with the yellow cavalry stripe of the United States
Army are pushing to and fro among the drivers and the owners, and
fingering the frightened animals. A herd breaks from the confusion
and is driven like a whirlwind down the street, dividing at the Market
House. They are going to board the Government transport--to die on the
battlefields of Kentucky and Missouri. Hopper alights from the car with complacency. He stands for a
while on a corner, against the hot building, surveying the busy scene,
unnoticed. Was it not a prophecy,--that drove which sent him into
Mr. Presently a man with a gnawed yellow mustache and a shifty eye walks out
of one of the offices, and perceives our friend. Eliphalet extends a hand to be squeezed and returned. "Wal, I jest reckon," is the answer: The fellow was interrupted by the
appearance of a smart young man in a smart uniform, who wore an air of
genteel importance. He could not have been more than two and twenty, and
his face and manners were those of a clerk. The tan of field service was
lacking on his cheek, and he was black under the eyes. "Hullo, Ford," he said, jocularly. "Howdy, Cap," retorted the other. "Wal, suh, that last lot was an extry,
fo' sure. Gov'ment
ain't cheated much on them there at one-eighty a head, I reckon." Ford said this with such an air of conviction and such a sober face
that the Captain smiled. And at the same time he glanced down nervously
at the new line of buttons on his chest. "I guess I know a mule from a Newfoundland dog by this time," said he. "Wal, I jest reckon," asserted Mr. "Cap'n
Wentworth, allow me to make you acquainted with Mr. Hopper,
Cap'n Wentworth." "You interested in
mules, Mr. "I don't cal'late to be," said. Let us hope that our worthy
has not been presented as being wholly without a sense of humor. He
grinned as he looked upon this lamb in the uniform of Mars, and added,
"I'm just naturally patriotic, I guess. Cap'n, 'll you have a drink?" "It's d--d tiresome lookin' at mules all
day in the sun." Davitt that his mission work does not extend to Bremen,
that the good man's charity keeps him at the improvised hospital down
town. Hopper has resigned the superintendency of his Sunday School,
it is true, but he is still a pillar of the church. The young officer leans against the bar, and listens to stories by
Mr. Ford, which it behooves no church members to hear. And Eliphalet understands that
the good Lord put some fools into the world in order to give the smart
people a chance to practise their talents. Hopper neither drinks nor
smokes, but he uses the spittoon with more freedom in this atmosphere. When at length the Captain has marched out, with a conscious but manly
air, Mr. Hopper turns to Ford--"Don't lose no time in presenting them
vouchers at headquarters," says he. And
there's grumbling about this Department in the Eastern papers, If we
have an investigation, we'll whistle. He tosses off a pony of Bourbon, but
his face is not a delight to look upon, "Hopper, you'll be a d--d rich
man some day." And because I ain't got no capital, I only get
four per cent." "Don't one-twenty a day suit you?" And you've got horse contracts, and
blanket contracts besides. What's to prevent my goin' south
when the vouchers is cashed?" "Then your mother'll have
to move out of her little place." NEWS FROM CLARENCE

The epithet aristocrat may become odious and fatal on the banks of the
Mississippi as it was on the banks of the Seine. Thousands of our population, by the
sudden stoppage of business, are thrown out of employment. When gaunt
famine intrudes upon their household, it is but natural that they should
inquire the cause. Virginia did not read this editorial, because it appeared in that
abhorred organ of the Mudsills, the 'Missouri Democrat.' The wheels of
fortune were turning rapidly that first hot summer of the war time. Let
us be thankful that our flesh and blood are incapable of the fury of
the guillotine. But when we think calmly of those days, can we escape
without a little pity for the aristocrats? Do you think that many of
them did not know hunger and want long before that cruel war was over? How bravely they met the grim spectre which crept so insidiously into
their homes! Colfax, peevishly, one morning as they
sat at breakfast, "why do you persist it wearing that old gown? It has
gotten on my nerves, my dear. You really must have something new made,
even if there are no men here to dress for." "Aunt Lillian, you must not say such things. I do not think that I ever
dressed to please men." "Tut, tut; my dear, we all do. We must not go shabby in such times as these, or be out of
fashion, Did you know that Prince Napoleon was actually coming here for
a visit this autumn? I am having a fitting at
Miss Elder's to-day." She did not reply as she poured out her
aunt's coffee. "Jinny," said that lady, "come with me to Elder's, and I will give you
some gowns. If Comyn had been as careful of his own money as of mine,
you could dress decently." "I think I do dress decently, Aunt Lillian," answered the girl. "I do
not need the gowns. Give me the money you intend to pay for them, and I
can use it for a better purpose." "I am sick and tired of this superiority, Jinny." "Hodges goes through the lines to-morrow
night. "But you have no idea where
Clarence is." exclaimed her aunt, "I would not trust him. How do you know
that he will get through the Dutch pickets to Price's army? Wasn't
Souther captured last week, and that rash letter of Puss Russell's
to Jack Brinsmade published in the Democrat?" She laughed at the
recollection, and Virginia was fain to laugh too. "Puss hasn't been
around much since. I hope that will cure her of saying what she thinks
of people." "I'll save my money until Price drives the Yankees from the state, and
Clarence marches into the city at the head of a regiment," Mrs. Colfax
went on, "It won't be long now." "Oh, you can't have read the papers. And don't you remember the letter
Maude had from George? They need the bare necessities of life, Aunt
Lillian. And half of Price's men have no arms at all." "All we know is that Lyon has left
Springfield to meet our troops, and that a great battle is coming,
Perhaps--perhaps it is being fought to-day." Colfax burst into tears, "Oh, Jinny," she cried, "how can you be so
cruel!" That very evening a man, tall and lean, but with the shrewd and kindly
eye of a scout, came into the sitting-room with the Colonel and handed
a letter to Mrs. In the hall he slipped into Virginia's hand
another, in a "Jefferson Davis" envelope, and she thrust it in her
gown--the girl was on fire as he whispered in her ear that he had seen
Clarence, and that he was well. In two days an answer might be left
at Mr. But she must be careful what she wrote, as the
Yankee scouts were active. Clarence, indeed, had proven himself a man. Glory and uniform became
him well, but danger and deprivation better. The words he had written,
careless and frank and boyish, made Virginia's heart leap with pride. Colfax's letter began with the adventure below the Arsenal, when
the frail skiff had sunk near the island, He told how he had heard the
captain of his escort sing out to him in the darkness, and how he had
floated down the current instead, until, chilled and weary, he had
contrived to seize the branches of a huge tree floating by. And how by a
miracle the moon had risen. When the great Memphis packet bore down upon
him, he had, been seen from her guards, and rescued and made much of;
and set ashore at the next landing, for fear her captain would get into
trouble. In the morning he had walked into the country, first providing
himself with butternuts and rawhide boots and a bowie-knife. Virginia
would never have recognized her dashing captain of dragoons in this
guise. The letter was long for Clarence, and written under great difficulties
from date to date. For nearly a month he had tramped over mountains
and across river bottoms, waiting for news of an organized force of
resistance in Missouri. Begging his way from cabin to cabin, and living
on greasy bacon and corn pone, at length he crossed the swift Gasconade
(so named by the French settlers because of its brawling ways) where
the bridge of the Pacific railroad had been blown up by the Governor's
orders. Then he learned that the untiring Lyon had steamed up the
Missouri and had taken possession of Jefferson City without a blow, and
that the ragged rebel force had fought and lost at Booneville. Footsore,
but undaunted, he pushed on to join the army, which he heard was
retreating southward along the western tier of counties of the state. On the banks of the Osage he fell in with two other young amen in as bad
a plight as himself. They travelled together, until one day some rough
farmers with shotguns leaped out of a bunch of willows on the borders
of a creek and arrested all three for Union spies. Clarence tried to explain that he had not long since been the dapper
captain of the State Dragoons. His Excellency, the Governor of Missouri (so acknowledged by all good
Southerners), likewise laughed when Mr. Colfax and the two others were
brought before him. His Excellency sat in a cabin surrounded by a camp
which had caused the dogs of war to howl for very shame. Louis in butternuts and
rawhide boots?" "Give me a razor," demanded Clarence, with indignation, "a razor and a
suit of clothes, and I will prove it." A suit of clothes You know not what you ask." George Catherwood was
brought in,--or rather what had once been George. Now he was a big
frontiersman with a huge blond beard, and a bowie, knife stuck into
his trousers in place of a sword. He recognized his young captain of
dragoons the Governor apologized, and Clarence slept that night in the
cabin. The next day he was given a horse, and a bright new rifle which
the Governor's soldiers had taken from the Dutch at Cole Camp on the way
south, And presently they made a junction with three thousand more who
were their images. This was Price's army, but Price had gone ahead into
Kansas to beg the great McCulloch and his Confederates to come to their
aid and save the state. "Dear mother, I wish that you and Jinny and Uncle Comyn could have
   seen this country rabble. How you would have laughed, and cried,
   because we are just like them. In the combined army two thousand
   have only bowie-knives or clubs. Some have long rifles of Daniel
   Boone's time, not fired for thirty years. And the impedimenta are a
   sight. Open wagons and conestogas and carryalls and buggies, and
   even barouches, weighted down with frying-pans and chairs and
   feather beds. But we've got spirit, and we can whip Lyon's Dutchmen
   and Yankees just as we are. Spirit is what counts, and the Yankees
   haven't got it, I was made to-day a Captain of Cavalry under
   Colonel Rives. I ride a great, raw-boned horse like an elephant. He jolts me until I am sore,--not quite as easy as my thoroughbred,
   Jefferson. Tell Jinny to care for him, and have him ready when we
   march into St. "COWSKIN PRAIRIE, 9th July. "We have whipped Sigel on the prairie by <DW53> Creek and killed--we
   don't know how many. Tell Maude that George distinguished himself
   in the fight. "We have at last met McCulloch and his real soldiers. We cheered
   until we cried when we saw their ranks of gray, with the gold
   buttons and the gold braid and the gold stars. General McCulloch
   has taken me on his staff, and promised me a uniform. But how to
   clothe and feed and arm our men! We have only a few poor cattle,
   and no money. We shall whip the
   Yankees before we starve." Colfax did not cease to bewail the hardship which
her dear boy was forced to endure. He, who was used to linen sheets and
eider down, was without rough blanket or shelter; who was used to the
best table in the state, was reduced to husks. "But, Aunt Lillian," cried Virginia, "he is fighting for the South. If
he were fed and clothed like the Yankees, we should not be half so proud
of him." Why set down for colder gaze the burning words that Clarence wrote to
Virginia. How she pored over that letter, and folded it so that even
the candle-droppings would not be creased and fall away! He was happy,
though wretched because he could not see her. It was the life he had
longed for. he was proving his usefulness
in this world. He was no longer the mere idler whom she had chidden. "Jinny, do you remember saying so many years ago that our ruin would
   come of our not being able to work? How I wish you could see us
   felling trees to make bullet-moulds, and forging slugs for canister,
   and making cartridges at night with our bayonets as candlesticks. Jinny dear, I know that you will keep up your courage. I can see
   you sewing for us, I can hear you praying for us." It was, in truth, how Virginia learned to sew. Her fingers were pricked and sore weeks after she began. Sad
to relate, her bandages, shirts, and havelocks never reached the
front,--those havelocks, to withstand the heat of the tropic sun, which
were made in thousands by devoted Union women that first summer of the
war, to be ridiculed as nightcaps by the soldiers. "Why should not our soldiers have them, too?" They were never so happy as when sewing on them against
the arrival of the Army of Liberation, which never came. The long, long days of heat dragged slowly, with little to cheer those
families separated from their dear ones by a great army. Clarence might
die, and a month--perhaps a year--pass without news, unless he were
brought a prisoner to St. How Virginia envied Maude because the
Union lists of dead and wounded would give her tidings of her brother
Tom, at least! How she coveted the many Union families, whose sons and
brothers were at the front, this privilege! We were speaking of the French Revolution, when, as Balzac remarked, to
be a spy was to be a patriot. Heads are not so cheap in our Anglo-Saxon
countries; passions not so fierce and uncontrollable. Compare, with a
prominent historian, our Boston Massacre and St. Compare Camp Jackson, or Baltimore, where a
few people were shot, with some Paris street scenes after the Bastille. Our own provost marshal was
hissed in the street, and called "Robespierre," and yet he did not fear
the assassin's knife. Our own Southern aristocrats were hemmed in in
a Union city (their own city). No women were thrown into prison, it is
true. Yet one was not permitted to shout for Jeff Davis on the street
corner before the provost's guard. Once in a while a detachment of
the Home Guards, commanded by a lieutenant; would march swiftly into a
street and stop before a house, whose occupants would run to the rear,
only to encounter another detachment in the alley. One day, in great excitement, Eugenie Renault rang the bell of the
Carvel house, and ran past the astounded Jackson up the stairs to
Virginia's room, the door of which she burst open. she cried, "Puss Russell's house is surrounded by Yankees,
and Puss and Emily and all the family are prisoners!" said Virginia, dropping in her excitement her
last year's bonnet, which she was trimming with red, white, and red. "Because," said Eugenie, sputtering with indignation "because they waved
at some of our poor fellows who were being taken to the slave pen. Russell's house under guard--Puss had a
small--"

"Confederate flag," put in Virginia, smiling in spite of herself. "And she waved it between the shutters," Eugenie continued. "And some
one told, the provost marshal. He has had the house surrounded, and the
family have to stay there." "Then," said Miss Renault, in a voice of awe, "then each one of the
family is to have just a common army ration. They are to be treated as
prisoners." "Oh, those Yankees are detestable!" As soon as our army is organized and equipped, they shall
pay for it ten times over." She tried on the bonnet, conspicuous with
its red and white ribbons, before the glass. Then she ran to the closet
and drew forth the white gown with its red trimmings. "Wait for me,
Genie," she said, "and we'll go down to Puss's house together. It may
cheer her to see us." "But not in that dress," said Eugenie, aghast. And her eyes flashed so
that Eugenie was frightened. Miss Renault regarded her friend with something of adoration from
beneath her black lashes. It was about five in the afternoon when they
started out together under Virginia's white parasol, Eugenie's slimmer
courage upheld by her friend's bearing. We must remember that
Virginia was young, and that her feelings were akin to those our
great-grandmothers experienced when the British held New York. It was
as if she had been born to wear the red and white of the South. Elderly
gentlemen of Northern persuasion paused in their homeward walk to smile
in admiration,--some sadly, as Mr. Young gentlemen found an
excuse to retrace their steps a block or two. But Virginia walked on
air, and saw nothing. She was between fierce anger and exaltation. She
did not deign to drop her eyes as low as the citizen sergeant and guard
in front of Puss Russell's house (these men were only human, after all);
she did not so much as glance at the curious people standing on the
corner, who could not resist a murmur of delight. The citizen sergeant
only smiled, and made no move to arrest the young lady in red and white. Nor did Puss fling open the blinds and wave at her. Russell won't let her," said Virginia,
disconsolately, "Genie, let's go to headquarters, and show this Yankee
General Fremont that we are not afraid of him." Eugenie's breath was taken away by the very boldness of this
proposition.. She looked up timidly into Virginia's face, and
hero-worship got the better of prudence. The house which General Fremont appropriated for his use when he came
back from Europe to assume command in the West was not a modest one. It
still stands, a large mansion of brick with a stone front, very tall and
very wide, with an elaborate cornice and plate-glass windows, both tall
and broad, and a high basement. Two stately stone porches capped by
elaborate iron railings adorn it in front and on the side. In short, the house is of that type built
by many wealthy gentlemen in the middle of the century, which has best
stood the test of time,--the only type which, if repeated to-day, would
not clash with the architectural education which we are receiving. A
spacious yard well above the pavement surrounds it, sustained by a wall
of dressed stones, capped by an iron fence. The whole expressed wealth,
security, solidity, conservatism. Alas, that the coal deposits under
the black mud of our Western states should, at length, have driven
the owners of these houses out of them! They are now blackened, almost
buried in soot; empty, or half-tenanted by boarders, Descendants of the
old families pass them on their way to business or to the theatre with
a sigh. The sons of those who owned them have built westward, and
west-ward again, until now they are six miles from the river. On that summer evening forty years ago, when Virginia and Eugenie came
in sight of the house, a scene of great animation was before them. Talk
was rife over the commanding general's pomp and circumstance. He had
just returned from Europe, where pomp and circumstance and the military
were wedded. Foreign officers should come to America to teach our
army dress and manners. A dashing Hungarian commanded the general's
body-guard, which honorable corps was even then drawn up in the street
before the house, surrounded at a respectable distance by a crowd
that feared to jest. They felt like it save when they caught the stern
military eye of the Hungarian captain. Virginia gazed at the glittering
uniforms, resplendent in the sun, and at the sleek and well-fed horses,
and scalding tears came as she thought of the half-starved rabble of
Southern patriots on the burning prairies. Just then a sharp command
escaped in broken English from the Hungarian. The people in the yard of
the mansion parted, and the General himself walked proudly out of the
gate to the curb, where his charger was pawing the gutter. As he put
foot to the stirrup, the eye of the great man (once candidate, and again
to be, for President) caught the glint of red and white on the corner. For an instant he stood transfixed to the spot, with one leg in the air. Then he took it down again and spoke to a young officer of his staff,
who smiled and began to walk toward them. Little Eugenie's knees
trembled. She seized Virginia's arm, and whispered in agony. "Oh, Jinny, you are to be arrested, after all. Oh, I wish you hadn't
been so bold!" "Hush," said Virginia, as she prepared to slay the young officer with
a look. She felt like flying at his throat, and choking him for the
insolence of that smile. How dare he march undaunted to within six paces
of those eyes? The crowd drew back, But did Miss Carvel retreat? "Oh, I hope he will arrest me," she said passionately, to Eugenie. "He will start a conflagration beyond the power of any Yankee to quell." No, those were not
the words, surely. He bowed very
low and said:

"Ladies, the General's compliments, and he begs that this much of the
sidewalk may be kept clear for a few moments." What was left for them, after that, save a retreat? But he was not
precipitate. Miss Virginia crossed the street with a dignity and bearing
which drew even the eyes of the body-guard to one side. And there she
stood haughtily until the guard and the General had thundered away. A
crowd of black-coated civilians, and quartermasters and other officers
in uniform, poured out of the basement of the house into the yards. One
civilian, a youngish man a little inclined to stoutness, stopped at the
gate, stared, then thrust some papers in his pocket and hurried down
the side street. Three blocks thence he appeared abreast of Miss Carvel. More remarkable still, he lifted his hat clear of his head. Hopper, with his newly acquired equanimity and poise,
startled her. "May I have the pleasure," said that gentleman, "of accompanying you
home?" Eugenie giggled, Virginia was more annoyed than she showed. "You must not come out of your way," she said. "I am
sure you must go back to the store. Had Virginia but known, this occasional tartness in her speech gave
Eliphalet an infinite delight, even while it hurt him. His was a nature
which liked to gloat over a goal on the horizon He cared not a whit for
sweet girls; they cloyed. He
had revised his vocabulary for just such an occasion, and thrown out
some of the vernacular. "Business is not so pressing nowadays, Miss Carvel," he answered, with a
shade of meaning. "Then existence must be rather heavy for you," she said. She made
no attempt to introduce him to Eugenie. "If we should have any more
victories like Bull Run, prosperity will come back with a rush," said
the son of Massachusetts. "Southern Confederacy, with Missouri one of
its stars an industrial development of the South--fortunes in cotton." Virginia turned quickly, "Oh, how dare you?" "How dare you
speak flippantly of such things?" His suavity was far from overthrown. "I assure you that I want to see the
South win." What he did not know was that words seldom convince women. But he added something which reduced her incredulity for the time. "Do
you cal'late," said he,--that I could work for your father, and wish
ruin to his country?" "But you are a Yankee born," she exclaimed. "There be a few sane Yankees," replied Mr. A remark
which made Eugenie laugh outright, and Virginia could not refrain from a
smile. But much against her will he walked home with her. She was indignant by
the time she reached Locust Street. He had never dared do such a thing
before, What had got into the man? Was it because he had become
a manager, and governed the business during her father's frequent
absences? Hopper's politics, he would always be to
her a low-born Yankee, a person wholly unworthy of notice. At the corner of Olive Street, a young man walking with long strides
almost bumped into them. He paused looked back, and bowed as if
uncertain of an acknowledgment. He had
been very close to her, and she had had time to notice that his coat was
threadbare. When she looked again, he had covered half the block. Why should she care if Stephen Brice had seen her in company with Mr. Eliphalet, too, had seen Stephen, and this had added zest to his
enjoyment. It was part of the fruits of his reward. He wished in that
short walk that he might meet Mr. Cluyme and Belle, and every man and
woman and child in the city whom he knew. From time to time he glanced
at the severe profile of the aristocrat beside him (he had to look up a
bit, likewise), and that look set him down among the beasts of prey. For she was his rightful prey, and he meant not to lose one tittle of
enjoyment in the progress of the game. Many and many a night in the bare
little back room at Miss Crane's, Eliphalet had gloated over the very
event which was now come to pass. Not a step of the way but what he had
lived through before. The future is laid open to such men as he. Since he had first seen the
black cloud of war rolling up from the South, a hundred times had he
rehearsed the scene with Colonel Carvel which had actually taken place
a week before. A hundred times had he prepared his speech and manner for
this first appearance in public with Virginia after he had forced the
right to walk in her company. The words he had prepared--commonplace, to
be sure, but carefully chosen--flowed from his lips in a continual nasal
stream. The girl answered absently, her feminine instinct groping after
a reason for it all. She brightened when she saw her father at the
doors and, saying good by to Eugenie, tripped up the steps, bowing to
Eliphalet coldly. "Why, bless us, Jinny," said the Colonel, "you haven't been parading the
town in that costume! You'll have us in Lynch's slave pen by to-morrow
night. laughed he, patting her under the chin, "there's no
doubt about your sentiments, anyhow." "I've been over to Puss Russell's house," said she, breathless. "They've
closed it up, you know--" (He nodded.) "And then we went--Eugenie and I,
to headquarters, just to see what the Yankees would do." "You must take care, honey,"
he said, lowering his voice. "They suspect me now of communicating with
the Governor and McCulloch. Jinny, it's all very well to be brave, and
to stand by your colors. But this sort of thing," said he, stroking the
gown, "this sort of thing doesn't help the South, my dear, and only
sets spies upon us. Ned tells me that there was a man in plain clothes
standing in the alley last night for three hours." "Pa," cried the girl, "I'm so sorry." Suddenly searching his face with
a swift instinct, she perceived that these months had made it yellow and
lined. "Pa, dear, you must come to Glencoe to-morrow and rest You must
not go off on any more trips." "It isn't the trips, Jinny There are duties, my dear, pleasant
duties--Jinny--"

"Yes?" The Colonel's eye had suddenly fallen on Mr. Hopper, who was still
standing at the bottom of the steps. He checked himself abruptly as
Eliphalet pulled off his hat,

"Howdy, Colonel?" Virginia was motionless, with her back to the intruder, She was frozen
by a presentiment. As she saw her father start down the steps, she
yearned to throw herself in front of him--to warn him of something; she
knew not what. Then she heard the Colonel's voice, courteous and kindly
as ever. And yet it broke a little as he greeted his visitor. "Won't--won't you come in, Mr. Virginia started

"I don't know but what I will, thank you, Colonel," he answered; easily. "I took the liberty of walking home with your daughter." Virginia fairly flew into the house and up the stairs. Gaining her room,
she shut the door and turned the key, as though he might pursue her
there. The man's face had all at once become a terror. She threw herself
on the lounge and buried her face in her hands, and she saw it still
leering at her with a new confidence. Presently she grew calmer; rising,
she put on the plainest of her scanty wardrobe, and went down the
stairs, all in a strange trepidation new to her. She had never been in
fear of a man before. She hearkened over the banisters for his voice,
heard it, and summoned all her courage. How cowardly she had been to
leave her father alone with him. Colfax
ignored him as completely as if his chair had been vacant He glanced at
that lady once, and smiled, for he was tasting the sweets of victory. It was Virginia who entertained him, and even the Colonel never guessed
what it cost her. Eliphalet himself marvelled at her change of manner,
and gloated over that likewise. Not a turn or a quiver of the victim's
pain is missed by your beast of prey. The Colonel was gravely polite,
but preoccupied. Had he wished it, he could not have been rude to a
guest. Hopper a cigar with the same air that he would
have given it to a governor. "Thank'ee, Colonel, I don't smoke," he said, waving the bog away. It was ten o'clock when Eliphalet reached Miss Crane's, and picked his
way up the front steps where the boarders were gathered. "The war doesn't seem to make any difference in your business, Mr. Hopper," his landlady remarked, "where have you been so late?" "I happened round at Colonel Carvel's this afternoon, and stayed for tea
with 'em," he answered, striving to speak casually. Abner Reed's room later than usual that
night. THE SCOURGE OF WAR

"Virginia," said Mrs. Colfax, the next morning on coming downstairs, "I
am going back to Bellegarde today. I really cannot put up with such a
person as Comyn had here to tea last night." It is safe to say that she had never accurately
gauged the force which Virginia's respect for her elders, and affection
for her aunt through Clarence, held in check. Now there had arisen in front of her a tall
person of authority, before whom she deferred instinctively. It was not
what Virginia said, for she would not stoop to tirade. Colfax sank
into a chair, seeing only the blurred lines of a newspaper the girl had
thrust into her hand. "There has been a battle at Wilson's Creek," said Virginia, in an
emotionless voice. "General Lyon is killed, for which I suppose we
should be thankful. More than seven hundred of the wounded are on their
way here. They are bringing them one hundred and twenty miles, from
Springfield to Rollo, in rough army wagons, with scarcely anything to
eat or drink." "At what time shall I order the carriage
to take you to Bellegarde?" Colfax leaned forward and caught the hem of her niece's gown. "Oh,
let me stay," she cried, "let me stay. "As you please, Aunt Lillian," she answered. "You know that you may
always stay here. I only beg of you one thing, that when you have
anything to complain of, you will bring it to me, and not mention it
before Pa. "Oh, Jinny," sobbed the lady, in tears again, "how can you be so cruel
at such a time, when my nerves are all in pieces?" But she did not lift her voice at dinner, which was very poor indeed for
Colonel Carvel's house. All day long Virginia, assisted by Uncle Ben and
Aunt Easter, toiled in the stifling kitchen, preparing dainties which
she had long denied herself. At evening she went to the station at
Fourteenth Street with her father, and stood amongst the people, pressed
back by the soldiers, until the trains came in. Alas, the heavy basket
which the Colonel carried on his arm was brought home again. The first
hundred to arrive, ten hours in a hot car without food or water, were
laid groaning on the bottom of great furniture vans, and carted to the
new House of Refuge Hospital, two miles to the south of the city. The next day many good women went there, Rebel and Union alike, to have
their hearts wrung. The new and cheap building standing in the hot sun
reeked with white wash and paint. The miserable men lay on the hard
floor, still in the matted clothes they had worn in battle. Those were
the first days of the war, when the wages of our passions first came to
appal us. Many of the wounds had not been tended since they were dressed
on the field weeks before. Colfax went too, with the Colonel and her niece, although she
declared repeatedly that she could not go through with such an
ordeal. Carvel had to assist her to the
waiting-room. Then he went back to the improvised wards to find Virginia
busy over a gaunt Arkansan of Price's army, whose pitiful, fever-glazed
eyes were following her every motion. His frontiersman's clothes,
stained with blackened blood, hung limp over his wasted body. At
Virginia's bidding the Colonel ran downstairs for a bucket of fresh
water, and she washed the caked dust from his face and hands. Brinsmade who got the surgeon to dress the man's wound, and to prescribe
some of the broth from Virginia's basket. For the first time since the
war began something of happiness entered her breast. Brinsmade who was everywhere that day, answering the
questions of distracted mothers and fathers and sisters who thronged
the place; consulting with the surgeons; helping the few who knew how to
work in placing mattresses under the worst cases; or again he might have
been seen seated on the bare floor with a pad on his knee, taking down
the names of dear ones in distant states,--that he might spend his night
writing to them. They put a mattress under the Arkansan. Virginia did not leave him until
he had fallen asleep, and a smile of peace was come upon his sunken
face. Dismayed at the fearful sights about her, awed by the groans that
rose on every side, she was choosing her way swiftly down the room to
join her father and aunt in the carriage below. She felt that another little while
in this heated, horrible place would drive her mad. She was almost at
the door when she came suddenly upon a sight that made her pause. An elderly lady in widow's black was kneeling beside a man groaning in
mortal agony, fanning away the flies already gathering about his face. He wore the uniform of a Union sergeant,--dusty and splotched and torn. A small Testament was clasped convulsively in the fingers of his right
band. Virginia lingered, whelmed in pity,
thrilled by a wonderful womanliness of her who knelt there. Her face the
girl had not even seen, for it was bent over the man. The sweetness of
her voice held Virginia as in a spell, and the sergeant stopped groaning
that he might listen:

"You have a wife?" "A boy, ma'am--born the week--before I came--away." "I shall write to your wife," said the lady, so gently that Virginia
could scarce hear, "and tell her that you are cared for. He gave the address faintly--some little town in Minnesota. Then he
added, "God bless you, lady." Just then the chief surgeon came and stood over them. The lady turned
her face up to him, and tears sparkled in her eyes. Virginia felt them
wet in her own. Nobility, character,
efficiency,-all were written on that face. Nobility spoke in the large
features, in the generous mouth, in the calm, gray eyes. Virginia had
seen her often before, but not until now was the woman revealed to her. "Doctor, could this man's life be saved if I took him to my home?" The surgeon got down beside her and took the man's pulse. For a while the doctor knelt there, shaking his head. "He has
fainted," he said. The surgeon
smiled,--such a smile as a good man gives after eighteen hours of
amputating, of bandaging, of advising,--work which requires a firm hand,
a clear eye and brain, and a good heart. Brice," he said, "I shall be glad to get you permission
to take him, but we must first make him worth the taking. He glanced hurriedly about the busy room, and
then added, "We must have one more to help us." "I am afraid we must go, dear," he said, "your aunt is getting
impatient." "Won't you please go without me, Pa?" "Perhaps I can be of
some use." The Colonel cast a wondering glance at the limp uniform, and went
away. The surgeon, who knew the Carvel family, gave Virginia a look of
astonishment. Brice's searching gaze that brought the color
to the girl's, face. "Thank you, my dear," she said simply. As soon as he could get his sister-in-law off to Locust Street in the
carriage, Colonel Carvel came back. For two reeking hours he stood
against the newly plastered wall. Even he was surprised at the fortitude
and skill Virginia showed from the very first, when she had deftly
cut away the stiffened blue cloth, and helped to take off the rough
bandages. At length the fearful operation was finished, and the weary
surgeon, gathering up his box, expressed with all the energy left to
him, his thanks to the two ladies. The work of her hands had sustained
her while it lasted, but now the ordeal was come. She went down the
stairs on her father's arm, and out into the air. Brice was beside her, and had taken her by the hand. she was saying, "God will reward you for this act. You have
taught many of us to-day a lesson we should have learned in our Bibles." Virginia trembled with many emotions, but she answered nothing. The
mere presence of this woman had a strange effect upon the girl,--she was
filled with a longing unutterable. It was not because Margaret Brice
was the mother of him whose life had been so strangely blended with
hers--whom she saw in her dreams. And yet now some of Stephen's traits
seemed to come to her understanding, as by a revelation. Virginia had
labored through the heat of the day by Margaret Brice's side doing His
work, which levels all feuds and makes all women sisters. One brief
second had been needful for the spell. The Colonel bowed with that courtesy and respect which distinguished
him, and Mrs. Brice left them to go back into the room of torment, and
watch by the sergeant's pallet. Virginia's eyes followed her up the
stairs, and then she and her father walked slowly to the carriage. With
her foot on the step Virginia paused. "Pa," she said, "do you think it would be possible to get them to let us
take that Arkansan into our house?" "Why, honey, I'll ask Brinsmade if you like," said the Colonel. "Here he
comes now, and Anne." It was Virginia who put the question to him. "My dear," replied that gentleman, patting her, "I would do anything
in the world for you. I'll see General Fremont this very afternoon. Virginia," he added, soberly, "it is such acts as yours to-day that give
us courage to live in these times." "Oh, Jinny, I saw what you were doing for one of our men. It was well that Virginia did not see the smile on
the face of the commanding general when Mr. Brinsmade at length got to
him with her request. This was before the days when the wounded arrived
by the thousands, when the zeal of the Southern ladies threatened to
throw out of gear the workings of a great system. But the General, had
had his eye on Mr. Brinsmade, with dignity, "is a gentleman. When he gives his word, it is sacred, sir." "Even to an enemy," the General put in, "By George, Brinsmade, unless I
knew you, I should think that you were half rebel yourself. Well, well,
he may have his Arkansan." Brinsmade, when he conveyed the news to the Carvel house, did not
say that he had wasted a precious afternoon in the attempt to interview
his Excellency, the Commander in-chief. It was like obtaining an
audience with the Sultan or the Czar. Citizens who had been prominent
in affairs for twenty years, philanthropists and patriotic-spirited men
like Mr. Brinsmade, the mayor, and all the ex-mayors mopped their brows
in one of the general's anterooms of the big mansion, and wrangled with
beardless youths in bright uniforms who were part of the chain. The
General might have been a Richelieu, a Marlborough. His European notions
of uniformed inaccessibility he carried out to the letter. He was
a royal personage, seldom seen, who went abroad in the midst of a
glittering guard. It did not seem to weigh with his Excellency that
these simple and democratic gentlemen would not put up with this sort of
thing. That they who had saved the city to the Union were more or less
in communication with a simple and democratic President; that in all
their lives they had never been in the habit of sitting idly for two
hours to mop their brows. On the other hand, once you got beyond the gold lace and the etiquette,
you discovered a good man and a patriot. It was far from being the
General's fault that Mr. Hopper and others made money in mules and
worthless army blankets. Such things always have been, and always will
be unavoidable when this great country of ours rises from the deep sleep
of security into which her sons have lulled her, to demand her sword. We
shall never be able to realize that the maintenance of a standing army
of comfortable size will save millions in the end. So much for Democracy
when it becomes a catchword. The General was a good man, had he done nothing else than encourage the
Western Sanitary Commission, that glorious army of drilled men and women
who gave up all to relieve the suffering which the war was causing. Would that a novel--a great novel--might be written setting forth with
truth its doings. The hero of it could be Calvin Brinsmade, and a nobler
hero than he was never under a man's hand. For the glory of generals
fades beside his glory. Brice home from
her trying day in the hospital. Stephen, just returned from drill
at Verandah hall, met her at the door. She would not listen to his
entreaties to rest, but in the evening, as usual, took her sewing to the
porch behind the house, where there was a little breeze. "Such a singular thing happened to-day, Stephen," she said. "It was
while we were trying to save the life of a poor sergeant who had lost
his arm. I hope we shall be allowed to have him here. "It was soon after I had come upon this poor fellow," she said. "I saw
the--the flies around him. And as I got down beside him to fan them away
I had such a queer sensation. I knew that some one was standing behind
me, looking at me. Allerdyce came, and I asked him about the
man, and he said there was a chance of saving him if we could only get
help. Then some one spoke up,--such a sweet voice. It was that Miss
Carvel my dear, with whom you had such a strange experience when you
bought Hester, and to whose party you once went. Do you remember that
they offered us their house in Glencoe when the Judge was so ill?" "She is a wonderful creature," his mother continued. And wasn't it a remarkable offer for a Southern woman to
make? They feel so bitterly, and--and I do not blame them." The good
lady put down on her lap the night-shirt she was making. And, my dear, her
capability astonished me. One might have thought that she had always
been a nurse. The experience was a dreadful one for me--what must
it have been for her. After the operation was over, I followed her
downstairs to where she was standing with her father in front of the
building, waiting for their carriage. I felt that I must say something
to her, for in all my life I have never seen a nobler thing done. When I
saw her there, I scarcely knew what to say. It was then three o'clock, and she had been working steadily in that
place since morning. I am sure she could not have borne it much longer. Sheer courage carried her through it, I know, for her hand trembled so
when I took it, and she was very pale. Her father, the Colonel, was with her, and he bowed to me with such
politeness. He had stood against the wall all the while we had worked,
and he brought a mattress for us. I have heard that his house is
watched, and that they have him under suspicion for communicating
with the Confederate leaders." I hope they will not get into any trouble." "I hope not, mother," said Stephen. It was two mornings later that Judge Whipple and Stephen drove to the
Iron Mountain depot, where they found a German company of Home Guards
drawn up. On the long wooden platform under the sheds Stephen
caught sight of Herr Korner and Herr Hauptmann amid a group of their
countrymen. Little Korner came forward to clasp his hands. The tears ran
on his cheeks, and he could not speak for emotion. Judge Whipple, grim
and silent, stood apart. But he uncovered his head with the others when
the train rolled in. Reverently they entered a car where the pine boxes
were piled one on another, and they bore out the earthly remains of
Captain Carl Richter. Far from the land of his birth, among those same oaks on Bloody Hill
where brave Lyon fell, he had gladly given up his life for the new
country and the new cause he had made his own. That afternoon in the cemetery, as the smoke of the last salute to a
hero hung in the flickering light and drifted upward through the
great trees, as the still air was yet quivering with the notes of the
bugle-call which is the soldiers requiem, a tall figure, gaunt and bent,
stepped out from behind the blue line of the troops. He carried in his hand a wreath of white roses--the first
of many to be laid on Richter's grave. And yet he had not filled it
with sadness. For many a month, and many a year, Stephen could not look
upon his empty place without a pang. He missed the cheery songs and the
earnest presence even more than he had thought. Carl Richter,--as his
father before him,--had lived for others. Both had sacrificed their
bodies for a cause. One of them might be pictured as he trudged with
Father Jahn from door to door through the Rhine country, or shouldering
at sixteen a heavy musket in the Landwehr's ranks to drive the tyrant
Napoleon from the beloved Fatherland Later, aged before his time,
his wife dead of misery, decrepit and prison-worn in the service of a
thankless country, his hopes lived again in Carl, the swordsman of Jena. Then came the pitiful Revolution, the sundering of all ties, the elder
man left to drag out his few weary days before a shattered altar. In
Carl a new aspiration had sprung up, a new patriotism stirred. His, too,
had been the sacrifice. Happy in death, for he had helped perpetuate
that great Union which should be for all time the refuge of the
oppressed. THE LIST OF SIXTY

One chilling day in November, when an icy rain was falling on the black
mud of the streets, Virginia looked out of the window. Her eye was
caught by two horses which were just skeletons with the skin stretched
over them. One had a bad sore on his flank, and was lame. They were
pulling a rattle-trap farm wagon with a buckled wheel. On the seat a
man, pallid and bent and scantily clad, was holding the reins in his
feeble hands, while beside him cowered a child of ten wrapped in a
ragged blanket. In the body of the wagon, lying on a mattress pressed
down in the midst of broken, cheap furniture and filthy kitchen ware,
lay a gaunt woman in the rain. Her eyes were closed, and a hump on the
surface of the dirty quilt beside her showed that a child must be there. From such a picture the girl fled in tears. But the sight of it, and of
others like it, haunted her for weeks. Through those last dreary days of
November, wretched families, which a year since had been in health and
prosperity, came to the city, beggars, with the wrecks of their homes. The history of that hideous pilgrimage across a state has never been
written. Still they came by the hundred, those families. The father of one, hale and strong when
they started, died of pneumonia in the public lodging-house. The walls
of that house could tell many tales to wring the heart. Brinsmade, did he choose to speak of his own charities. He found
time, between his labors at the big hospital newly founded, and his
correspondence, and his journeys of love,--between early morning and
midnight,--to give some hours a day to the refugees. Throughout December they poured in on the afflicted city, already
overtaxed. All the way to Springfield the road was lined with remains
of articles once dear--a child's doll, a little rocking-chair, a 
print that has hung in the best room, a Bible text. Anne Brinsmade, driven by Nicodemus, went from house to house to solicit
old clothes, and take them to the crowded place of detention. Christmas
was drawing near--a sorry Christmas, in truth. And many of the wanderers
were unclothed and unfed. More battles had been fought; factions had arisen among Union men. Louis to take charge of the Department,
and the other with his wondrous body-guard was gone. The most serious problem confronting the new general--was how to care
for the refugees. A council of citizens was called at headquarters, and
the verdict went forth in the never-to-be-forgotten Orders No. "Inasmuch," said the General, "as the Secession army had driven these
people from their homes, Secession sympathizers should be made to
support them." He added that the city was unquestionably full of these. Indignation was rife the day that order was published. Sixty prominent
"disloyalists" were to be chosen and assessed to make up a sum of ten
thousand dollars. "They may sell my house over my head before I will pay a cent," cried
Mr. Who were
to be on this mysterious list of "Sixty"? That was the all-absorbing
question of the town. It was an easy matter to pick the conspicuous
ones. Colonel Carvel was sure to be there, and Mr. Addison Colfax
lived for days in a fermented state of excitement which she declared
would break her down; and which, despite her many cares and worries,
gave her niece not a little amusement. For Virginia was human, and one
morning she went to her aunt's room to read this editorial from the
newspaper:-- "For the relief of many palpitating hearts it may be well
to state that we understand only two ladies are on the ten thousand
dollar list." "Jinny," she cried, "how can you be so cruel as to read me that, when
you know that I am in a state of frenzy now? It makes it an absolute certainty that Madame Jules and I will have to
pay. We are the only women of importance in the city." That afternoon she made good her much-uttered threat, and drove to
Bellegarde. Only the Colonel and Virginia and Mammy Easter and Ned were
left in the big house. Rosetta and Uncle Ben and Jackson had been
hired out, and the horses sold,--all save old Dick, who was running,
long-haired, in the fields at Glencoe. Christmas eve was a steel-gray day, and the sleet froze as it fell. Since morning Colonel Carvel had sat poking the sitting-room fire, or
pacing the floor restlessly. He was observed
night and day by Federal detectives. Virginia strove to amuse him, to
conceal her anxiety as she watched him. Well she knew that but for her
he would long since have fled southward, and often in the bitterness of
the night-time she blamed herself for not telling him to go. Ten years
had seemed to pass over him since the war had begun. All day long she had been striving to put away from her the memory of
Christmas eves past and gone of her father's early home-coming from the
store, a mysterious smile on his face; of Captain Lige stamping noisily
into the house, exchanging uproarious jests with Ned and Jackson. The
Captain had always carried under his arm a shapeless bundle which he
would confide to Ned with a knowing wink. And then the house would be
lighted from top to bottom, and Mr. Brinsmade came in for a long evening with Mr. Carvel over great bowls of
apple toddy and egg-nog. And Virginia would have her own friends in the
big parlor. That parlor was shut up now, and icy cold. Then there was Judge Whipple, the joyous event of whose year was his
Christmas dinner at Colonel Carvel's house. Brice's little table, and wondered whether he would miss
them as much as they missed him. War may break friendships, but it
cannot take away the sacredness of memories. The sombre daylight was drawing to an early close as the two stood
looking out of the sitting-room window. A man's figure muffled in
a greatcoat slanting carefully across the street caught their eyes. It was the same United States deputy marshal she had
seen the day before at Mr. "Pa," she cried, "do you think he is coming here?" "Pa, you must promise me to take down the mahogany bed in your room. I could not bear to see them take that. Let me put
it in the garret." The Colonel was distressed, but he spoke without a tremor. We must leave this house just as it is." Then he added,
strangely enough for him, "God's will be done." And Ned, who was cook and housemaid, came in with
his apron on. "Does you want to see folks, Marse Comyn?" The Colonel rose, and went to the door himself. He was an imposing
figure as he stood in the windy vestibule, confronting the deputy. Virginia's first impulse was to shrink under the stairs. Then she came
out and stood beside her father. He was a young man with a smooth face, and
a frank brown eye which paid its tribute to Virginia. He did not appear
to relish the duty thrust upon him. He fumbled in his coat and drew from
his inner pocket a paper. "Colonel Carvel," said he, "by order of Major General Halleck, I serve
you with this notice to pay the sum of three hundred and fifty dollars
for the benefit of the destitute families which the Rebels have driven
from their homes. In default of payment within a reasonable time such
personal articles will be seized and sold at public auction as will
satisfy the demand against you." "You may tell the
General that the articles may be seized. That I will not, while in my
right mind, be forced to support persons who have no claim upon me." It was said in the tone in which he might have refused an invitation to
dinner. He had gone into many houses that week;
had seen indignation, hysterics, frenzy. He had even heard men and women
whose sons and brothers were in the army of secession proclaim their
loyalty to the Union. But this dignity, and the quiet scorn of the girl
who had stood silent beside them, were new. He bowed, and casting his
eyes to the vestibule, was glad to escape from the house. Then he turned toward Virginia, thoughtfully
pulled his goatee, and laughed gently. "Lordy, we haven't got three
hundred and fifty dollars to our names," said he. That fierce valley of the
Missouri, which belches fitful blizzards from December to March, is
sometimes quiet. Then the hot winds come up from the Gulf, and sleet
melts, and windows are opened. In those days the streets will be fetlock
deep in soft mud. It is neither summer, nor winter, nor spring, nor
anything. It was such a languorous afternoon in January that a furniture van,
accompanied by certain nondescript persons known as United States
Police, pulled up at the curb in front of Mr. Eugenie,
watching at the window across the street, ran to tell her father, who
came out on his steps and reviled the van with all the fluency of his
French ancestors. Mammy Easter opened the door, and then stood with her arms akimbo, amply
filling its place. Her lips protruded, and an expression of defiance
hard to describe sat on her honest black face. I 'low you knows dat jes as well as me." An embarrassed
silence, and then from Mammy, "Whaffor you laffin at?" "Now I reckon you knows dat he ain't. Ef he was, you ain't come here
'quirin' in dat honey voice." "You tink I
dunno whaffor you come? You done come heah to rifle, an' to loot, an'
to steal, an' to seize what ain't your'n. You come heah when young Marse
ain't to home ter rob him." "Ned, whaffor you hidin'
yonder? Ef yo' ain't man to protect Marse Comyn's prop-ty, jes han' over
Marse Comyn's gun." The marshal and his men had stood, half amused, more than half baffled
by this unexpected resistance. Mammy Easter looked so dangerous that it
was evident she was not to be passed without extreme bodily discomfort. "Who is
you to come heah 'quiring fo' her! I ain't agwine--"

"Mammy!" Mammy backed out of the door and clutched at
her bandanna. "Mammy, what is all this noise about?" "These heah men, Miss Jinny, was gwine f'r t' carry away all yo' pa's
blongin's. I jes' tol' 'em dey ain't comin' in ovah dis heah body." He caught sight of the face of
Miss Carvel within, and stopped abruptly. "I have a warrant here from the Provost Marshal, ma'am, to seize
personal property to satisfy a claim against Colonel Carvel." Virginia took the order, read it, and handed it back. "I do not see how
I am to prevent you," she said. I--I can't tell you how sorry I am. Then he
entered the chill drawing-room, threw open the blinds and glanced around
him. "I expect all that we want is right here," he said. And at the sight of
the great chandelier, with its cut-glass crystals, he whistled. Then he
walked over to the big English Rothfield piano and lifted the lid. Involuntarily he rested himself on the mahogany
stool, and ran his fingers over the keys. They seemed to Virginia,
standing motionless in the ball, to give out the very chords of agony. The piano, too, had been her mother's. It had once stood in the brick
house of her grandfather Colfax at Halcyondale. The songs of Beatrice
lay on the bottom shelf of the what-not near by. No more, of an evening
when they were alone, would Virginia quietly take them out and play
them over to the Colonel, as he sat dreaming in the window with his
cigar,--dreaming of a field on the borders of a wood, of a young girl
who held his hand, and sang them softly to herself as she walked by his
side. And, when they reached the house in the October twilight, she had
played them for him on this piano. Often he had told Virginia of those
days, and walked with her over those paths. The deputy closed the lid, and sent out to the van for a truck. For the first time she heard the words of Mammy Easter. "Come along upstairs wid yo' Mammy, honey. Dis ain't no place for us,
I reckon." Her words were the essence of endearment. And yet, while she
pronounced them, she glared unceasingly at the intruders. "Oh, de good
Lawd'll burn de wicked!" Virginia went back into the room
and stood before the deputy. "Isn't there something else you could take? "I have a necklace--"

"No, miss. And there ain't nothing quite
so salable as pianos." She watched them, dry-eyed, as they carried it away. Only Mammy Easter guessed at the pain in Virginia's breast, and
that was because there was a pain in her own. They took the rosewood
what-not, but Virginia snatched the songs before the men could
touch them, and held them in her arms. They seized the mahogany
velvet-bottomed chairs, her uncle's wedding present to her mother; and,
last of all, they ruthlessly tore up the Brussels carpet, beginning near
the spot where Clarence had spilled ice-cream at one of her children's
parties. She could not bear to look into the dismantled room when they had gone. Ned closed the blinds once
more, and she herself turned the key in the lock, and went slowly up the
stairs. CHAPTER V. THE AUCTION

"Stephen," said the Judge, in his abrupt way, "there isn't a great deal
doing. Let's go over to the Secesh property sales." The seizures and intended sale of
secession property had stirred up immense bitterness and indignation in
the city. There were Unionists (lukewarm) who denounced the measure as
unjust and brutal. The feelings of Southerners, avowed and secret, may
only be surmised. Rigid ostracism was to be the price of bidding on any
goods displayed, and men who bought in handsome furniture on that day
because it was cheap have still, after forty years, cause to remember
it. It was not that Stephen feared ostracism. Anne Brinsmade was almost the
only girl left to him from among his former circle of acquaintances. The Misses Russell showed him very
plainly that they disapproved of his politics. The hospitable days at
that house were over. Miss Catherwood, when they met on the street,
pretended not to see him, and Eugenie Renault gave him but a timid nod. The loyal families to whose houses he now went were mostly Southerners,
in sentiment against forced auctions. However, he put on his coat, and sallied forth into the sharp air, the
Judge leaning on his arm. "Stephen," said he, presently, "I guess I'll do a little bidding." And, if he really wished to bid,
Stephen knew likewise that no consideration would stop him. "You don't approve of this proceeding, sir, I suppose," said the Judge. "Then," said the Judge, tartly, "by bidding, we help to support starving
Union families. You should not be afraid to bid, sir." "I am not afraid to bid, Judge Whipple." He did not see the smile on the
Judge's face. "Then you will bid in certain things for me," said Mr. Here
he hesitated, and shook free the rest of the sentence with a wrench. "Colonel Carvel always had a lot of stuff I wanted. Now I've got the
chance to buy it cheap." There was silence again, for the space of a whole block. Finally,
Stephen managed to say:-- "You'll have to excuse me, sir. cried the Judge, stopping in the middle of a cross-street, so
that a wagon nearly ran over his toes. "I was once a guest in Colonel Carvel's house, sir. Neither the young man nor the old knew all it was costing the other to
say these things. The Judge took a grim pleasure in eating his heart. And as for Stephen, he often went to his office through Locust Street,
which was out of his way, in the hope that he might catch a glimpse of
Virginia. He had guessed much of the privations she had gone through. He knew that the Colonel had hired out most of his slaves, and he had
actually seen the United States Police drive across Eleventh Street with
the piano that she had played on. The Judge was laughing quietly,--not a pleasant laugh to hear,--as they
came to Morgan's great warerooms. A crowd blocked the pavement, and
hustled and shoved at the doors,--roughs, and soldiers off duty, and
ladies and gentlemen whom the Judge and Stephen knew, and some of whom
they spoke to. All of these were come out of curiosity, that they might
see for themselves any who had the temerity to bid on a neighbor's
household goods. The long hall, which ran from street to street, was
packed, the people surging backward and forward, and falling roughly
against the mahogany pieces; and apologizing, and scolding, and swearing
all in a breath. The Judge, holding tightly to Stephen, pushed his way
fiercely to the stand, vowing over and over that the commotion was a
secession trick to spoil the furniture and stampede the sale. In truth,
it was at the Judge's suggestion that a blue provost's guard was called
in later to protect the seized property. How many of those mahogany pieces, so ruthlessly tumbled about before
the public eye, meant a heartache! Wedding presents of long ago, dear to
many a bride with silvered hair, had been torn from the corner where the
children had played--children who now, alas, were grown and gone to war. Yes, that was the Brussels rug that had lain before the fire, and which
the little feet had worn in the corner. Those were the chairs the little
hands had harnessed, four in a row, and fallen on its side was the
armchair--the stage coach itself. There were the books, held up to
common gaze, that a beloved parent had thumbed with affection. Yes, and
here in another part of the hall were the family horses and the family
carriage that had gone so often back and forth from church with the
happy brood of children, now scattered and gone to war. As Stephen reached his place beside the Judge, Mr. And, if glances could have killed, many a bidder would have
dropped dead. The heavy dining-room table which meant so much to the
family went for a song to a young man recently come from Yankeeland,
whose open boast it was--like Eliphalet's secret one--that he would one
day grow rich enough to snap his fingers in the face of the Southern
aristocrats. Catherwood, his face
haggard and drawn, watched the sideboard he had given his wife on her
silver wedding being sold to a pawnbroker. Stephen looked in vain for Colonel Carvel--for Virginia. He did not want
to see them there. He knew by heart the list of things which had been
taken from their house. He understood the feeling which had sent the
Judge here to bid them in. When the auctioneer came to the Carvel list, and the well-known name was
shouted out, the crowd responded with a stir and pressed closer to the
stand. And murmurs were plainly heard in more than one direction. "Now, gentlemen, and ladies," said the seller, "this here is a genuine
English Rothfield piano once belonging to Colonel Carvel, and the
celebrated Judge Colfax of Kaintucky." He lingered fondly over the
names, that the impression might have time to sink deep. "This here
magnificent instrument's worth at the very least" (another pause)
"twelve hundred dollars. He struck a base note of the keys, then a treble, and they vibrated
in the heated air of the big hall. Had he hit the little C of the top
octave, the tinkle of that also might have been heard. "Gentlemen and ladies, we have to begin somewheres. A menacing murmur gave place to the accusing silence. Some there were
who gazed at the Rothfield with longing eyes, but who had no intention
of committing social suicide. Suddenly a voice, the rasp of which
penetrated to St. The owner was
a seedy man with a straw-, drunkard's mustache. He was leaning
against the body of Mrs. Russell's barouche (seized for sale), and those
about him shrank away as from smallpox. His hundred-dollar offer was
followed by a hiss. When Judge Whipple drew himself up to his full six feet, that was a
warning to those that knew him. As he doubled the bid, the words came
out with the aggressive distinctness of a man who through a long life
has been used to opposition. He with the gnawed yellow mustache pushed
himself clear of the barouche, his smouldering cigar butt dropping to
the floor. And this is how Judge Whipple braved public opinion once more. As he
stood there, defiant, many were the conjectures as to what he could wish
to do with the piano of his old friend. Those who knew the Judge (and
there were few who did not) pictured to themselves the dingy little
apartment where he lived, and smiled. Whatever his detractors might have
said of him, no one was ever heard to avow that he had bought or sold
anything for gain. Could it have been of admiration for
the fine old man who towered there glaring defiance at those about him? "Give me a strong and consistent enemy," some great personage has said,
"rather than a lukewarm friend." Three score and five years the Judge
had lived, and now some were beginning to suspect that he had a heart. But it was let out to many more
that day, and they went home praising him who had once pronounced his
name with bitterness. Before he of the yellow mustache could pick up
his cigar from the floor and make another bid, the Judge had cried out
a sum which was the total of Colonel Carvel's assessment. Many recall
to this day how fiercely he frowned when the applause broke forth
of itself; and when he turned to go they made a path for him, in
admiration, the length of the hall, down which he stalked, looking
neither to the right nor left. Stephen followed him, thankful for the
day which had brought him into the service of such a man. And so it came about that the other articles were returned to Colonel
Carvel with the marshal's compliments, and put back into the cold parlor
where they had stood for many years. The men who brought them offered to
put down the carpet, but by Virginia's orders the rolls were stood up in
the corner, and the floor left bare. And days passed into weeks, and no
sign or message came from Judge Whipple in regard to the piano he had
bought. Virginia did not dare mention it to the Colonel. It had been carried by six sweating <DW64>s up the
narrow stairs into the Judge's office. Whipple's orders cleared a corner of his inner office and bedroom of
papers and books and rubbish, and there the bulky instrument was finally
set up. The Judge watched the
proceeding grimly, choking now and again from the dust that was raised,
yet uttering never a word. He locked the lid when the van man handed him
the key, and thrust that in his pocket. Stephen had of late found enough to do in St. He was the kind of
man to whom promotions came unsought, and without noise. In the autumn
he had been made a captain in the Halleck Guards of the State Militia,
as a reward for his indefatigable work in the armories and his knowledge
of tactics. Twice his company had been called out at night, and once
they made a campaign as far as the Merimec and captured a party of
recruits who were destined for Jefferson Davis. Brinsmade heard of his promotion and this exploit, and yet scarcely
a day went by that he did not see the young man at the big hospital. For
Stephen helped in the work of the Sanitary Commission too, and so strove
to make up in zeal for the service in the field which he longed to give. Brinsmade moved out to their place on the
Bellefontaine Road. This was to force Anne to take a rest. For the
girl was worn out with watching at the hospitals, and with tending
the destitute mothers and children from the ranks of the refugees. The
Brinsmade place was not far from the Fair Grounds,--now a receiving
camp for the crude but eager regiments of the Northern states. Brinsmade's, when the day's duty was done, the young Union officers
used to ride, and often there would be half a dozen of them to tea. That
house, and other great houses on the Bellefontaine Road with which this
history has no occasion to deal, were as homes to many a poor fellow who
would never see home again. Sometimes Anne would gather together such
young ladies of her acquaintance from the neighbor hood and the city as
their interests and sympathies permitted to waltz with a Union officer,
and there would be a little dance. To these dances Stephen Brice was
usually invited. One such occasion occurred on a Friday in January, and Mr. Brinsmade
himself called in his buggy and drove Stephen to the country early in
the afternoon. He and Anne went for a walk along the river, the surface
of which was broken by lumps of yellow ice. Gray clouds hung low in the
sky as they picked their way over the frozen furrows of the ploughed
fields. The grass was all a yellow-brown, but the north wind which
swayed the bare trees brought a touch of color to Anne's cheeks. Before
they realized where they were, they had nearly crossed the Bellegarde
estate, and the house itself was come into view, standing high on the
<DW72> above the withered garden. "The shutters are up," said Stephen. Colfax had
come out here not long a--"

"She came out for a day just before Christina," said Anne, smiling, "and
then she ran off to Kentucky. I think she was afraid that she was one of
the two women on the list of Sixty." "It must have been a blow to her pride when she found that she was not,"
said Stephen, who had a keen remembrance of her conduct upon a certain
Sunday not a year gone. Impelled by the same inclination, they walked in silence to the house
and sat down on the edge of the porch. The only motion in the view was
the smoke from the slave quarters twisting in the wind, and the hurrying
ice in the stream. said Anne, with a sigh, "how she loved to romp! What good
times we used to have here together!" But you could not make her show
it. The other morning when she came out to our house I found her sitting
at the piano. I am sure there were tears in her eyes, but she would not
let me see them. She made some joke about Spencer Catherwood running
away. What do you think the Judge will do with that piano, Stephen?" "The day after they put it in his room he came in with a great black
cloth, which he spread over it. And Anne, turning to him timidly, gave him a long,
searching look. "I think that we ought to go back." They went out by the long entrance road, through the naked woods. Only a little while before he had had one of those
vivid dreams of Virginia which left their impression, but not their
substance, to haunt him. On those rare days following the dreams her
spirit had its mastery over his. He pictured her then with a glow on her
face which was neither sadness nor mirth,--a glow that ministered to
him alone. And yet, he did not dare to think that he might have won her,
even if politics and war had not divided them. When the merriment of the dance was at its height that evening, Stephen
stood at the door of the long room, meditatively watching the bright
gowns and the flash of gold on the uniforms as they flitted past. Presently the opposite door opened, and he heard Mr. Brinsmade's voice
mingling with another, the excitable energy of which recalled some
familiar episode. Almost--so it seemed--at one motion, the owner of the
voice had come out of the door and had seized Stephen's hand in a warm
grasp,--a tall and spare figure in the dress of a senior officer. The
military frock, which fitted the man's character rather than the man,
was carelessly open, laying bare a gold-buttoned white waistcoat and an
expanse of shirt bosom which ended in a black stock tie. The ends of the
collar were apart the width of the red clipped beard, and the mustache
was cropped straight along the line of the upper lip. The forehead rose
high, and was brushed carelessly free of the hair. The nose was almost
straight, but combative. "The boy doesn't remember me," said the gentleman, in quick tones,
smiling at Mr. "Yes, sir, I do," Stephen made haste to answer. He glanced at the star
on the shoulder strap, and said. "Now in command at Camp Benton, Stephen," Mr. "Won't
you sit down, General?" "No," said the General, emphatically waving away the chair. Then his keen face suddenly lighted with amusement,--and
mischief, Stephen thought. "So you've heard of me since we met, sir?" Guess you heard I was crazy," said the General, in his downright
way. "He's been reading the lies in the newspapers too, Brinsmade," the
General went on rapidly. "I'll make 'em eat their newspapers for saying
I was crazy. That's the Secretary of War's doings. Ever tell you what
Cameron did, Brinsmade? He and his party were in Louisville last fall,
when I was serving in Kentucky, and came to my room in the Galt House. Well, we locked the door, and Miller sent us up a good lunch and wine,
After lunch, the Secretary lay on my bed, and we talked things over. He
asked me what I thought about things in Kentucky. Secretary, here is the whole Union line from the
Potomac to Kansas. Here's McClellan in the East with one hundred miles
of front. Here's Fremont in the West with one hundred miles. Here we
are in Kentucky, in the centre, with three hundred miles to defend. McClellan has a hundred thousand men, Fremont has sixty thousand. You
give us fellows with over three hundred miles only eighteen thousand.' 'Two hundred
thousand before we get through,' said I. Cameron pitched up his hands
in the air. says he, 'where are they to come from?' 'The
northwest is chuck full of regiments you fellows at Washington won't
accept,' said I. Secretary, you'll need 'em all and
more before we get done with this Rebellion.' Well, sir, he was very
friendly before we finished, and I thought the thing was all thrashed
out. he goes back to Washington and gives it out that I'm
crazy, and want two hundred thousand men in Kentucky. Then I am ordered
to report to Halleck in Missouri here, and he calls me back from Sedalia
because he believes the lies." Stephen, who had in truth read the stories in question a month or two
before, could not conceal his embarrassment He looked at the man in
front of him,--alert, masterful intelligent, frank to any stranger who
took his fancy,--and wondered how any one who had talked to him could
believe them. "They have to print something, General," he said. "I'll give 'em something to print later on," answered the General,
grimly. "Brinsmade, you fellows did have
a session with Fremont, didn't you? Anderson sent me over here last
September, and the first man I ran across at the Planters' House was
Appleton.''To see Fremont,'
I said. 'You don't think
Fremont'll see you, do you?' 'Well,' says Tom, 'go
'round to his palace at six to-morrow morning and bribe that Hungarian
prince who runs his body-guard to get you a good place in the line of
senators and governors and first citizens, and before nightfall you
may get a sight of him, since you come from Anderson. Not one man in
a hundred,' says Appleton, I not one man in a hundred, reaches his
chief-of-staff.' Next morning," the General continued in a staccato
which was often his habit, "had breakfast before daybreak and went
'round there. Place just swarming with Californians--army contracts." More
Californians, and by gad--old Baron Steinberger with his nose hanging
over the register." "Fremont was a little difficult to get at, General," said Mr. "Things were confused and discouraged when those first contracts were
awarded. Fremont was a good man, and it wasn't his fault that the
inexperience of his quartermasters permitted some of those men to get
rich." To be sure
he was--didn't get along with Blair. These court-martials you're having
here now have stirred up the whole country. I guess we'll hear now how
those fortunes were made. To listen to those witnesses lie about each
other on the stand is better than the theatre." Stephen laughed at the comical and vivid manner in which the General set
this matter forth. He himself had been present one day of the sittings
of the court-martial when one of the witnesses on the prices of mules
was that same seedy man with the straw- mustache who had bid for
Virginia's piano against the Judge. "Come, Stephen," said the General, abruptly, "run and snatch one of
those pretty girls from my officers. "They deserve more, sir," answered Stephen. Whereupon the General laid
his hand impulsively on the young man's shoulder, divining what Stephen
did not say. said be; "you are doing the work in this war, not we. We
do the damage--you repair it. Brinsmade and you
gentlemen who help him, where would our Western armies be? Don't you
go to the front yet a while, young man. We need the best we have
in reserve." "You've had military
training of some sort?" "He's a captain in the Halleck Guards, sir," said Mr. Brinsmade,
generously, "and the best drillmaster we've had in this city. He's seen
service, too, General." Stephen reddened furiously and started to protest, when the General
cried:-- "It's more than I have in this war. Come, come, I knew he was a
soldier. Let's see what kind of a strategist he'll make. Brinsmade, have
you got such a thing as a map?" Brinsmade had, and led the way back
into the library. The General shut the door, lighted a cigar with a
single vigorous stroke of a match, and began to smoke with quick puffs. Stephen was puzzled how to receive the confidences the General was
giving out with such freedom. When the map was laid on the table, the General drew a pencil from his
pocket and pointed to the state of Kentucky. Then he drew a line from
Columbus to Bowling Green, through Forts Donelson and Henry. "Now, Stephen," said he, "there's the Rebel line. Show me the proper
place to break it." Stephen hesitated a while, and then pointed at the centre. He drew a heavy line across the
first, and it ran almost in the bed of the Tennessee River. "Very question Halleck asked me the other day, and that's
how I answered it. Now, gentlemen, there's a man named Grant down in
that part of the country. Ever heard of him,
Brinsmade? He used to live here once, and a year ago he was less than I
was. The recollection of the scene in the street by the Arsenal that May
morning not a year gone came to Stephen with a shock. "I saw him," he cried; "he was Captain Grant that lived on the Gravois
Road. But surely this can't be the same man who seized Paducah and was
in that affair at Belmont." They kicked him around Springfield awhile, after
the war broke out, for a military carpet-bagger. Then they gave him for
a regiment the worst lot of ruffians you ever laid eyes on. He made 'em march halfway across the
state instead of taking the cars the Governor offered. I guess
he is the man that chased the Rebs out of Belmont. Then his boys broke
loose when they got into the town. The Rebs
came back and chased 'em out into their boats on the river. Brinsmade,
you remember hearing about that. "Grant did the coolest thing you ever saw. He sat on his horse at the
top of the bluff while the boys fell over each other trying to get on
the boat. Yes, sir, he sat there, disgusted, on his horse, smoking a
cigar, with the Rebs raising pandemonium all around him. And then, sir,"
cried the General, excitedly, "what do you think he did? Hanged if he
didn't force his horse right on to his haunches, slide down the whole
length of the bank and ride him across a teetering plank on to the
steamer. And the Rebs just stood on the bank and stared. They were so
astonished they didn't even shoot the man. "And now, Stephen," he added, "just you run off and take hold
of the prettiest girl you can find. If any of my boys object, say I sent
you." It was little Tiefel, now a first
lieutenant with a bristly beard and tanned face, come to town on a few
days' furlough. He had been with Lyon at Wilson's Creek, and he had
a sad story to tell of how he found poor Richter, lying stark on that
bloody field, with a smile of peace upon his face. Strange that he
should at length have been killed by a sabre! It was a sad meeting for those two, since each reminded the other of
a dear friend they would see no more on earth. They went out to sup
together in the German style; and gradually, over his beer, Tiefel
forgot his sorrow. Stephen listened with an ache to the little man's
tales of the campaigns he had been through. So that presently Tiefel
cried out:

"Why, my friend, you are melancholy as an owl. "He is no more crazy than I am," said Stephen, warmly--

"Is he not?" answered Tiefel, "then I will show you a mistake. You
recall last November he was out to Sedalia to inspect the camp there,
and he sleeps in a little country store where I am quartered. Now up
gets your General Sherman in the middle of the night,--midnight,--and
marches up and down between the counters, and waves his arms. So, says
he, 'land so,' says he, 'Sterling Price will be here, and Steele here,
and this column will take that road, and so-and-so's a damned fool. So he walks up and down for three eternal hours. Says
he, 'Pope has no business to be at Osterville, and Steele here at
Sedalia with his regiments all over the place. They must both go into
camp at La Mine River, and form brigades and divisions, that the troops
may be handled.'" "If that's insanity," cried Stephen so strongly as to surprise the
little man; "then I wish we had more insane generals. It just shows
how a malicious rumor will spread. What Sherman said about Pope's and
Steele's forces is true as Gospel, and if you ever took the trouble to
look into that situation, Tiefel, you would see it." And Stephen brought
down his mug on the table with a crash that made the bystanders jump. It was not a month after that that Sherman's prophecy of the quiet
general who had slid down the bluff at Belmont came true. The whole
country bummed with Grant's praises. Moving with great swiftness and
secrecy up the Tennessee, in company with the gunboats of Commodore
Foote, he had pierced the Confederate line at the very point Sherman
had indicated. Fort Henry had fallen, and Grant was even then moving to
besiege Donelson. Brinsmade prepared to leave at once for the battlefield, taking with
him too Paducah physicians and nurses. All day long the boat was loading
with sanitary stores and boxes of dainties for the wounded. It was muggy
and wet--characteristic of that winter--as Stephen pushed through the
drays on the slippery levee to the landing. He had with him a basket his mother had put up. Brinsmade from the Judge It was while he was picking his way
along the crowded decks that he ran into General Sherman. The General
seized him unceremoniously by the shoulder. "Good-by, Stephen," he said. "Good-by, General," said Stephen, shifting his basket to shake hands. "Ordered to Paducah," said the General. He pulled Stephen off the guards
into an empty cabin. "Brice," said he, earnestly, "I haven't forgotten
how you saved young Brinsmade at Camp Jackson. They tell me that you are
useful here. I say, don't go in unless you have to. I don't mean force,
you understand. But when you feel that you can go in, come to me or
write me a letter. That is," he added, seemingly inspecting Stephen's
white teeth with approbation, "if you're not afraid to serve under a
crazy man." It has been said that the General liked the lack of effusiveness of
Stephen's reply. ELIPHALET PLAYS HIS TRUMPS

Summer was come again. Through interminable days, the sun beat down upon
the city; and at night the tortured bricks flung back angrily the heat
with which he had filled them. Great battles had been fought, and vast
armies were drawing breath for greater ones to come. "Jinny," said the Colonel one day, "as we don't seem to be much use in
town, I reckon we may as well go to Glencoe." Virginia, threw her arms around her father's neck. For many months
she had seen what the Colonel himself was slow to comprehend--that his
usefulness was gone. The days melted into weeks, and Sterling Price and
his army of liberation failed to come. The vigilant Union general and
his aides had long since closed all avenues to the South. For, one fine
morning toward the end of the previous summer, when the Colonel was
contemplating a journey, he had read that none might leave the city
without a pass, whereupon he went hurriedly to the office of the Provost
Marshal. There he had found a number of gentlemen in the same plight,
each waving a pass made out by the Provost Marshal's clerks, and waiting
for that officer's signature. The Colonel also procured one of these,
and fell into line. The Marshal gazed at the crowd, pulled off his coat,
and readily put his name to the passes of several gentlemen going east. Bub Ballington, whom the Colonel knew, but pretended not
to. "Not very profitable to be a minute-man, eh?" Ballington trying not to look indignant
as he makes for the door. A small silver bell rings on the Marshal's
desk, the one word: "Spot!" breaks the intense silence, which is one way
of saying that Mr. Ballington is detained, and will probably be lodged
that night at Government expense. "Well, Colonel Carvel, what can I do for you this morning?" The Colonel pushed back his hat and wiped his brow. "I reckon I'll wait
till next week, Captain," said Mr. "It's pretty hot to travel
just now." There were many in the office who
would have liked to laugh, but it did not pay to laugh at some people. In the proclamation of martial law was much to make life less endurable
than ever. All who were convicted by a court-martial of being rebels
were to have property confiscated, and slaves set free. Then there was
a certain oath to be taken by all citizens who did not wish to have
guardians appointed over their actions. There were many who swallowed
this oath and never felt any ill effects. Jacob Cluyme was one, and
came away feeling very virtuous. Hopper did not have indigestion after taking it, but
Colonel Carvel would sooner have eaten, gooseberry pie, which he had
never tasted but once. That summer had worn away, like a monster which turns and gives hot
gasps when you think it has expired. It took the Arkansan just a month,
under Virginia's care, to become well enough to be sent to a Northern
prison He was not precisely a Southern gentleman, and he went to sleep
over the "Idylls of the King." But he was admiring, and grateful, and
wept when he went off to the boat with the provost's guard, destined
for a Northern prison. He had taken her away from
her aunt (who would have nothing to do with him), and had given her
occupation. She nor her father never tired of hearing his rough tales of
Price's rough army. His departure was about the time when suspicions were growing set. The
favor had caused comment and trouble, hence there was no hope of giving
another sufferer the same comfort. One of
the mysterious gentlemen who had been seen in the vicinity of Colonel
Carvel's house was arrested on the ferry, but he had contrived to be rid
of the carpet-sack in which certain precious letters were carried. Hopper's visits to Locust Street had
continued at intervals of painful regularity. It is not necessary to
dwell upon his brilliant powers of conversation, nor to repeat the
platitudes which he repeated, for there was no significance in Mr. The Colonel had found that out, and was
thankful. His manners were better; his English decidedly better. It was for her father's sake, of course, that Virginia bore with
him. She tried to be just, and it
occurred to her that she had never before been just. Again and again she
repeated to herself that Eliphalet's devotion to the Colonel at this
low ebb of his fortunes had something in it of which she did not suspect
him. Hopper as an uneducated Yankee
and a person of commercial ideals. But now he was showing virtues,--if
virtues they were,--and she tried to give him the benefit of the doubt. With his great shrewdness and business ability, why did he not take
advantage of the many opportunities the war gave to make a fortune? For Virginia had of late been going to the store with the Colonel,--who
spent his mornings turning over piles of dusty papers, and Mr. Hopper
had always been at his desk. After this, Virginia even strove to be kind to him, but it was uphill
work. The front door never closed after one of his visits that suspicion
was not left behind. Could it be that
there was a motive under all this plotting? He struck her inevitably as
the kind who would be content to mine underground to attain an end. The
worst she could think of him was that he wished to ingratiate himself
now, in the hope that, when the war was ended, he might become a partner
in Mr. She had put even this away as unworthy of her. Once she had felt compelled to speak to her father on the subject. "I believe I did him an injustice, Pa," she said. "Not that I like him
any better now. But I do think that if he had been as unscrupulous as I thought, he
would have deserted you long ago for something more profitable. He would
not be sitting in the office day after day making plans for the business
when the war is over." She remembered how sadly he had smiled at her over the top of his paper. "You are a good girl, Jinny," he said. Toward the end of July of that second summer riots broke out in the
city, and simultaneously a bright spot appeared on Virginia's horizon. This took the form, for Northerners, of a guerilla scare, and an order
was promptly issued for the enrollment of all the able-bodied men in the
ten wards as militia, subject to service in the state, to exterminate
the roving bands. Whereupon her Britannic Majesty became extremely
popular,--even with some who claimed for a birthplace the Emerald Isle. Hundreds who heretofore had valued but lightly their British citizenship
made haste to renew their allegiance; and many sought the office of the
English Consul whose claims on her Majesty's protection were vague, to
say the least. For the first time,
when Virginia walked to the store with her father, Eliphalet was not
there. "I don't blame him for not wanting to fight for the Yankees," she said. "Then why doesn't he fight for the South he asked"

"Fight for the South!" "I reckon not, too," said the Colonel, dryly. For the following week curiosity prompted Virginia to take that walk
with the Colonel. Hopper being still absent, she helped him to sort
the papers--those grimy reminders of a more prosperous time gone
by. Carvel would run across one which seemed to bring some
incident to his mind; for he would drop it absently on his desk, his
hand seeking his chin, and remain for half an hour lost in thought. The Colonel answered
them all truthfully--generally with that dangerous suavity for which he
was noted. Twice a seedy man with a gnawed yellow mustache had come in
to ask Eliphalet's whereabouts. On the second occasion this individual
became importunate. "You don't know nothin' about him, you say?" "I 'low I kin 'lighten you a little." "Good day, sir," said the Colonel. "I guess you'll like to hear what I've got to say." Carvel in his natural voice, "show this man out." Ford slunk out without Ephum's assistance. But he half turned at the
door, and shot back a look that frightened Virginia. "Oh, Pa," she cried, in alarm, "what did he mean?" "I couldn't tell you, Jinny," he answered. But she noticed that he was
very thoughtful as they walked home. The next morning Eliphalet had not
returned, but a corporal and guard were waiting to search the store for
him. The Colonel read the order, and invited them in with hospitality. He even showed them the way upstairs, and presently Virginia heard them
all tramping overhead among the bales. Her eye fell upon the paper they
had brought, which lay unfolded on her father's desk. It was signed
Stephen A. Brice, Enrolling Officer. That very afternoon they moved to Glencoe, and Ephum was left in sole
charge of the store. At Glencoe, far from the hot city and the cruel
war, began a routine of peace. Virginia was a child again, romping
in the woods and fields beside her father. The color came back to her
cheeks once more, and the laughter into her voice. The two of them, and
Ned and Mammy, spent a rollicking hour in the pasture the freedom
of which Dick had known so long, before the old horse was caught and
brought back into bondage. After that Virginia took long drives with her
father, and coming home, they would sit in the summer house high above
the Merimec, listening to the crickets' chirp, and watching the day fade
upon the water. The Colonel, who had always detested pipes, learned to
smoke a corncob. He would sit by the hour, with his feet on the rail of
the porch and his hat tilted back, while Virginia read to him. Poe
and Wordsworth and Scott he liked, but Tennyson was his favorite. One afternoon when Virginia was sitting in the summer house alone, her
thoughts wandering back, as they sometimes did, to another afternoon
she had spent there,--it seemed so long ago,--when she saw Mammy Easter
coming toward her. "Honey, dey's comp'ny up to de house. He's
on de porch, talkin' to your Pa. In truth, the solid figure of Eliphalet himself was on the path some
twenty yards behind her. His hat was in his hand; his hair was plastered
down more neatly than ever, and his coat was a faultless and sober
creation of a Franklin Avenue tailor. He carried a cane, which was
unheard of. Virginia sat upright, and patted her skirts with a gesture
of annoyance--what she felt was anger, resentment. Suddenly she rose,
swept past Mammy, and met him ten paces from the summer house. "How-dy-do, Miss Virginia," he cried pleasantly. "Your father had a
notion you might be here." Her greeting would have frozen a man
of ardent temperament. But it was not precisely ardor that Eliphalet
showed. There was something in
the man's air to-day. Her words seemed to relieve some tension in him. "Well, I did, first of all. You're considerable smart, Miss Jinny, but
I'll bet you can't tell me where I was, now." "I cal'lated it might interest you to know
how I dodged the Sovereign State of Missouri. General Halleck made an
order that released a man from enrolling on payment of ten dollars. Then I was drafted into the Abe Lincoln Volunteers; I paid a
substitute. And so here I be, exercising life, and liberty, and the
pursuit of happiness." "If your substitute gets
killed, I suppose you will have cause for congratulation." Eliphalet laughed, and pulled down his cuffs. "That's his lookout,
I cal'late," said he. He glanced at the girl in a way that made her
vaguely uneasy. She turned from him, back toward the summer house. Eliphalet's eyes smouldered as they rested upon her figure. "I've heard considerable about the beauties of this place. Would you
mind showing me 'round a bit?" Not since that first evening in Locust Street had it taken on such
assurance, And yet she could not be impolite to a guest. "Certainly not," she replied, but without looking up. He came to the summer house, glanced around it with apparent
satisfaction, and put his foot on the moss-grown step. She leaped quickly into the doorway before him, and
stood facing him, framed in the climbing roses. He drew back,
staring in astonishment at the crimson in her face. She had been groping
wildly for excuses, and found none. "Because," she said, "because I ask you not to." With dignity: "That
should be sufficient." "Well," replied Eliphalet, with an abortive laugh, "that's funny, now. Womenkind get queer notions, which I cal'late we've got to respect and
put up with all our lives--eh?" Her anger flared at his leer and at his broad way of gratifying her
whim. And she was more incensed than ever at his air of being at
home--it was nothing less. She strove still to hide her
resentment. "There is a walk along the bluff," she said, coldly, "where the view is
just as good." But she purposely drew him into the right-hand path, which led, after
a little, back to the house. Despite her pace he pressed forward to her
side. "Miss Jinny," said he, precipitately, "did I ever strike you as a
marrying man?" Virginia stopped, and put her handkerchief to her face, the impulse
strong upon her to laugh. Eliphalet was suddenly transformed again into
the common commercial Yankee. He was in love, and had come to ask her
advice. "I never thought of you as of the marrying kind, Mr. Hopper," she
answered, her voice quivering. Indeed, he was irresistibly funny as he stood hot and ill at ease. The
Sunday coat bore witness to his increasing portliness by creasing across
from the buttons; his face, fleshy and perspiring, showed purple veins,
and the little eyes receded comically, like a pig's. "Well, I've been thinking serious of late about getting married," he
continued, slashing the rose bushes with his stick. "I don't cal'late
to be a sentimental critter. I'm not much on high-sounding phrases, and
such things, but I'd give you my word I'd make a good husband." "Please be careful of those roses, Mr. "Beg pardon," said Eliphalet. He began to lose track of his tenses--that
was the only sign he gave of perturbation. Louis
without a cent, Miss Jinny, I made up my mind I'd be a rich man before
I left it. If I was to die now, I'd have kept that promise. I'm not
thirty-four, and I cal'late I've got as much money in a safe place as a
good many men you call rich. I'm not saying what I've got, mind you. I've stopped chewing--there was a time when I
done that. "That is all very commendable, Mr. Hopper," Virginia said, stifling a
rebellious titter. "But,--but why did you give up chewing?" "I am informed that the ladies are against it," said Eliphalet,--"dead
against it. You wouldn't like it in a husband, now, would you?" This time the laugh was not to be put down. "I confess I shouldn't," she
said. "Thought so," he replied, as one versed. His tones took on a nasal
twang. "Well, as I was saying, I've about got ready to settle down, and
I've had my eye on the lady this seven years." "The lady," said Eliphalet, bluntly, "is you." He glanced at her
bewildered face and went on rapidly: "You pleased me the first day I set
eyes on you in the store I said to myself, 'Hopper, there's the one for
you to marry.' I'm plain, but my folks was good people. I set to work
right then to make a fortune for you, Miss Jinny. I'm a plain business man with no frills. You're the kind that was raised in the lap of luxury. You'll need a man
with a fortune, and a big one; you're the sort to show it off. I've got
the foundations of that fortune, and the proof of it right here. And I
tell you,"--his jaw was set,--"I tell you that some day Eliphalet Hopper
will be one of the richest men in the West." He had stopped, facing her in the middle of the way, his voice strong,
his confidence supreme. At first she had stared at him in dumb wonder. Then, as she began to grasp the meaning of his harangue, astonishment
was still dominant,--sheer astonishment. But,
as he finished, the thatch of the summer house caught her eye. A vision
arose of a man beside whom Eliphalet was not worthy to crawl. She
thought of Stephen as he had stood that evening in the sunset, and this
proposal seemed a degradation. But she caught the look on Eliphalet's
face, and she knew that he would not understand. This was one who
rose and fell, who lived and loved and hated and died and was buried
by--money. For a second she looked into his face as one who escapes a pit gazes
over the precipice, and shuddered. As for Eliphalet, let it not be
thought that he had no passion. This was the moment for which he had
lived since the day he had first seen her and been scorned in the store. That type of face, that air,--these were the priceless things he would
buy with his money. Crazed with the very violence of his long-pent
desire, he seized her hand. He staggered back, and stood for a moment motionless, as though stunned. Then, slowly, a light crept into his little eyes which haunted her for
many a day. "You--won't--marry me?" exclaimed Virginia, her face burning with
the shame of it. She was standing with her hands behind her, her back
against a great walnut trunk, the crusted branches of which hung over
the bluff. Even as he looked at her, Eliphalet lost his head, and
indiscretion entered his soul. You've got no notion of my
money, I say." If you owned the whole of
California, I would not marry you." He
slipped his hand into a pocket, as one used to such a motion, and drew
out some papers. "I cal'late you ain't got much idea of the situation, Miss Carvel," he
said; "the wheels have been a-turning lately. You're poor, but I guess
you don't know how poor you are,--eh? The Colonel's a man of honor,
ain't he?" For her life she could not have answered,--nor did she even know why she
stayed to listen. "Well," he said, "after all, there ain't much use in your lookin' over
them papers. I'll tell you what they say: they
say that if I choose, I am Carvel & Company." The little eyes receded, and he waited a moment, seemingly to prolong a
physical delight in the excitement and suffering of a splendid creature. "I cal'late you despise me, don't you?" he went on, as if that, too,
gave him pleasure. "But I tell you the Colonel's a beggar but for me. All you've got to do is to say you'll be my
wife, and I tear these notes in two. (He
made the motion with his hands.) "Carvel & Company's an old firm,--a
respected firm. You wouldn't care to see it go out of the family, I
cal'late." But she did none of the things he expected. She said, simply:--"Will you please follow me, Mr. And he followed her,--his shrewdness gone, for once. Save for the rise and fall of her shoulders she seemed calm. The path
wound through a jungle of waving sunflowers and led into the shade in
front of the house. His
pipe lay with its scattered ashes on the boards, and his head was bent
forward, as though listening. When he saw the two, he rose expectantly,
and went forward to meet them. "Pa," she said, "is it true that you have borrowed money from this man?" Carvel angry once, and his soul had quivered. Terror, abject terror, seized him now, so that his knees smote together. As well stare into the sun as into the Colonel's face. In one stride
he had a hand in the collar of Eliphalet's new coat, the other pointing
down the path. "It takes just a minute to walk to that fence, sir," he said sternly. "If you are any longer about it, I reckon you'll never get past it. Hopper's gait down the flagstones was
an invention of his own. It was neither a walk, nor a trot, nor a run,
but a sort of sliding amble, such as is executed in nightmares. Singing
in his head was the famous example of the eviction of Babcock from the
store,--the only time that the Colonel's bullet had gone wide. And down
in the small of his back Eliphalet listened for the crack of a pistol,
and feared that a clean hole might be bored there any minute. Once
outside, he took to the white road, leaving a trail of dust behind him
that a wagon might have raised. Fear lent him wings, but neglected to
lift his feet. The Colonel passed his arm around his daughter, and pulled his goatee
thoughtfully. And Virginia, glancing shyly upward, saw a smile in the
creases about his mouth: She smiled, too, and then the tears hid him
from her. Strange that the face which in anger withered cowards and made men look
grave, was capable of such infinite tenderness,--tenderness and sorrow. The Colonel took Virginia in his arms, and she sobbed against his
shoulder, as of old. "Yes--"

"Lige was right, and--and you, Jinny--I should never have trusted him. The sun was slanting in yellow bars through
the branches of the great trees, and a robin's note rose above the bass
chorus of the frogs. In the pauses, as she listened, it seemed as if she
could hear the silver sound of the river over the pebbles far below. "Honey," said the Colonel,--"I reckon we're just as poor as white
trash." "Honey," he said again, after a pause, "I must keep my word and let him
have the business." "There is a little left, a very little," he continued slowly, painfully. It was left you by Becky--by your mother. It is in a railroad company in New York, and safe, Jinny." "Oh, Pa, you know that I do not care," she cried. "It shall be yours and
mine together. And we shall live out here and be happy." He was in his familiar
posture of thought, his legs slightly apart, his felt hat pushed back,
stroking his goatee. But his clear gray eyes were troubled as they
sought hers, and she put her hand to her breast. "Virginia," he said, "I fought for my country once, and I reckon I'm
some use yet awhile. It isn't right that I should idle here, while
the South needs me, Your Uncle Daniel is fifty-eight, and Colonel of a
Pennsylvania regiment.--Jinny, I have to go." It was in her blood as well as his. The Colonel
had left his young wife, to fight in Mexico; he had come home to lay
flowers on her grave. She knew that he thought of this; and, too, that
his heart was rent at leaving her. She put her hands on his shoulders,
and he stooped to kiss her trembling lips. They walked out together to the summer-house, and stood watching the
glory of the light on the western hills. "Jinn," said the Colonel, "I
reckon you will have to go to your Aunt Lillian. But I know that my girl can take care of herself. In case--in case I do
not come back, or occasion should arise, find Lige. Let him take you to
your Uncle Daniel. He is fond of you, and will be all alone in Calvert
House when the war is over. And I reckon that is all I have to say. I
won't pry into your heart, honey. I
like the boy, and I believe he will quiet down into a good man." Virginia did not answer, but reached out for her father's hand and held
its fingers locked tight in her own. From the kitchen the sound of Ned's
voice rose in the still evening air. "Sposin' I was to go to N' Orleans an' take sick and die,
     Laik a bird into de country ma spirit would fly." And after a while down the path the red and yellow of Mammy Easter's
bandanna was seen. Laws, if I ain't ramshacked de premises fo' you
bof. De co'n bread's gittin' cold." That evening the Colonel and Virginia thrust a few things into her
little leather bag they had chosen together in London. Virginia had
found a cigar, which she hid until they went down to the porch, and
there she gave it to him; when he lighted the match she saw that his
hand shook. Half an hour later he held her in his arms at the gate, and she heard
his firm tread die in the dust of the road. WITH THE ARMIES OF THE WEST

We are at Memphis,--for a while,--and the Christmas season is
approaching once more. And yet we must remember that war recognizes no
Christmas, nor Sunday, nor holiday. The brown river, excited by rains,
whirled seaward between his banks of yellow clay. Now the weather was
crisp and cold, now hazy and depressing, and again a downpour. A spirit possessed the place, a restless
spirit called William T. Sherman. He prodded Memphis and laid violent
hold of her. She groaned, protested, turned over, and woke up, peopled
by a new people. When these walked, they ran, and they wore a blue
uniform. Rain nor heat nor
tempest kept them in. And yet they joked, and Memphis laughed (what was
left of her), and recognized a bond of fellowship. The General joked,
and the Colonels and the Commissary and the doctors, down to the sutlers
and teamsters and the salt tars under Porter, who cursed the dishwater
Mississippi, and also a man named Eads, who had built the new-fangled
iron boxes officially known as gunboats. The like of these had
never before been seen in the waters under the earth. The loyal
citizens--loyal to the South--had been given permission to leave the
city. The General told the assistant quartermaster to hire their houses
and slaves for the benefit of the Federal Government. Likewise he laid
down certain laws to the Memphis papers defining treason. He gave
out his mind freely to that other army of occupation, the army of
speculation, that flocked thither with permits to trade in cotton. The
speculators gave the Confederates gold, which they needed most, for the
bales, which they could not use at all. The forefathers of some of these gentlemen were in old Egypt under
Pharaoh--for whom they could have had no greater respect and fear than
their descendants had in New Egypt for Grant or Sherman. And a certain acquaintance of ours
materially added to his fortune by selling in Boston the cotton which
cost him fourteen cents, at thirty cents. One day the shouting and the swearing and the running to and fro came
to a climax. Those floating freaks which were all top and drew nothing,
were loaded down to the guards with army stores and animals and wood and
men,--men who came from every walk in life. Whistles bellowed, horses neighed. The gunboats chased hither and
thither, and at length the vast processions paddled down the stream with
naval precision, under the watchful eyes of a real admiral. Residents of Memphis from the river's bank watched the pillar of smoke
fade to the southward and ruminated on the fate of Vicksburg. A little later he wrote to the
Commander-in-Chief at Washington, "The valley of the Mississippi is
America." Vicksburg taken, this vast Confederacy would be chopped in two. Night fell to the music of the paddles, to the scent of the officers'
cigars, to the blood-red vomit of the tall stacks and the smoky flame of
the torches. Then Christmas Day dawned, and there was Vicksburg lifted
two hundred feet above the fever swamps, her court-house shining in
the morning sun. Vicksburg, the well-nigh impregnable key to America's
highway. When old Vick made his plantation on the Walnut Hills, he chose
a site for a fortress of the future Confederacy that Vauban would have
delighted in. Yes, there were the Walnut Hills, high bluffs separated from the
Mississippi by tangled streams and bayous, and on their crests the
Parrotts scowled. It was a queer Christmas Day indeed, bright and warm;
no snow, no turkeys nor mince pies, no wine, but just hardtack and bacon
and foaming brown water. On the morrow the ill-assorted fleet struggled up the sluggish Yazoo,
past impenetrable forests where the cypress clutched at the keels, past
long-deserted cotton fields, until it came at last to the black ruins of
a home. It spread out by brigade
and division and regiment and company, the men splashing and paddling
through the Chickasaw and the swamps toward the bluffs. The Parrotts
began to roar. A certain regiment, boldly led, crossed the bayou at a
narrow place and swept resistless across the sodden fields to where the
bank was steepest. The fire from the battery scorched the hair of their
heads. But there they stayed, scooping out the yellow clay with torn
hands, while the Parrotts, with lowered muzzles, ploughed the <DW72> with
shells. There they stayed, while the blue lines quivered and fell back
through the forests on that short winter's afternoon, dragging their
wounded from the stagnant waters. But many were left to die in agony in
the solitude. Like a tall emblem of energy, General Sherman stood watching the attack
and repulse, his eyes ever alert. He paid no heed to the shells which
tore the limbs from the trees about him, or sent the swamp water in
thick spray over his staff. Now and again a sharp word broke from his
lips, a forceful home thrust at one of the leaders of his columns. "Sixth Missouri, General," said an aide, promptly. The General sat late in the Admiral's gunboat that night, but when
he returned to his cabin in the Forest Queen, he called for a list of
officers of the Sixth Missouri. His finger slipping down the roll paused
at a name among the new second lieutenants. "Yes, General, when it fell dark." "Let me see the casualties,--quick." That night a fog rolled up from the swamps, and in the morning
jack-staff was hid from pilot-house. Before the attack could be renewed,
a political general came down the river with a letter in his pocket
from Washington, by virtue of which he took possession of the three army
core, and their chief, subpoenaed the fleet and the Admiral, and went
off to capture Arkansas Post. Three weeks later, when the army was resting at Napoleon, Arkansas, a
self-contained man, with a brown beard arrived from Memphis, and took
command. He smoked incessantly in his
cabin. He had look in his face that
boded ill to any that might oppose him. Time and labor be counted
as nothing, compared with the accomplishment of an object. Back to
Vicksburg paddled the fleet and transports. Across the river from the
city, on the pasty mud behind the levee's bank were dumped Sherman's
regiments, condemned to week of ditch-digging, that the gunboats might
arrive at the bend of the Mississippi below by a canal, out of reach of
the batteries. Day in and day out they labored, officer and men. Sawing
off stumps under the water, knocking poisonous snakes by scores from the
branches, while the river rose and rose and rose, and the rain crept
by inches under their tent flies, and the enemy walked the parapet of
Vicksburg and laughed. Two gunboats accomplished the feat of running the
batteries, that their smiles might be sobered. To the young officers who were soiling their uniform with the grease of
saws, whose only fighting was against fever and water snakes, the news
of an expedition into the Vicksburg side of the river was hailed with
caps in the air. To be sure, the saw and axe, and likewise the levee and
the snakes, were to be there, too. But there was likely to be a little
fighting. The rest of the corps that was to stay watched grimly as the
detachment put off in the little 'Diligence' and 'Silver Wave'. All the night the smoke-pipes were batting against the boughs of oak and
cottonwood, and snapping the trailing vines. Some other regiments
went by another route. The ironclads, followed in hot haste by General
Sherman in a navy tug, had gone ahead, and were even then shoving with
their noses great trunks of trees in their eagerness to get behind the
Rebels. The Missouri regiment spread out along the waters, and were soon
waist deep, hewing a path for the heavier transports to come. Presently
the General came back to a plantation half under water, where Black
Bayou joins Deer Creek, to hurry the work in cleaning out that Bayou. The light transports meanwhile were bringing up more troops from a
second detachment. All through the Friday the navy great guns were
heard booming in the distance, growing quicker and quicker, until
the quivering air shook the hanging things in that vast jungle. Saws
stopped, and axes were poised over shoulders, and many times that day
the General lifted his head anxiously. As he sat down in the evening in
a slave cabin redolent with corn pone and bacon, the sound still hovered
among the trees and rolled along the still waters. It was three o'clock Saturday morning when
the sharp challenge of a sentry broke the silence. A <DW64>, white eyed,
bedraggled, and muddy, stood in the candle light under the charge of a
young lieutenant. The officer saluted, and handed the General a roll of
tobacco. "I found this man in the swamp, sir. He has a message from the
Admiral--"

The General tore open the roll and took from it a piece of tissue paper
which he spread out and held under the candle. He turned to a staff
officer who had jumped from his bed and was hurrying into his coat. "Kilby Smith
and all men here across creek to relief at once. I'll take canoe through
bayou to Hill's and hurry reenforcements." The staff officer paused, his hand on the latch of the door. You're not going through that sewer in a
canoe without an escort!" "I guess they won't look for a needle in that haystack," the General
answered. "Get back to your
regiment, Brice, if you want to go," he said. All through the painful march that
followed, though soaked in swamp water and bruised by cypress knees, he
thought of Sherman in his canoe, winding unprotected through the black
labyrinth, risking his life that more men might be brought to the rescue
of the gunboats. The story of that rescue has been told most graphically by Sherman
himself. How he picked up the men at work on the bayou and marched them
on a coal barge; how he hitched the barge to a navy tug; how he met the
little transport with a fresh load of troops, and Captain Elijah Brent's
reply when the General asked if he would follow him. "As long as the
boat holds together, General." The boughs hammered
at the smoke-pipes until they went by the board, and the pilothouse fell
like a pack of cards on the deck before they had gone three miles and a
half. Then the indomitable Sherman disembarked, a lighted candle in his
hand, and led a stiff march through thicket and swamp and breast-deep
backwater, where the little drummer boys carried their drums on their
heads. At length, when they were come to some Indian mounds, they found
a picket of three, companies of the force which had reached the flat the
day before, and had been sent down to prevent the enemy from obstructing
further the stream below the fleet. "The Admiral's in a bad way, sir," said the Colonel who rode up to meet
the General. Those clumsy ironclads of his can't move
backward or forward, and the Rebs have been peppering him for two days." Just then a fusillade broke from the thickets, nipping the branches from
the cottonwoods about them. The force swept forward, with the three picket companies in the swamp on
the right. And presently they came in sight of the shapeless ironclads
with their funnels belching smoke, a most remarkable spectacle. How
Porter had pushed them there was one of the miracles of the war. Then followed one of a thousand memorable incidents in the life of a
memorable man. General Sherman, jumping on the bare back of a scrawny
horse, cantered through the fields. And the bluejackets, at sight of
that familiar figure, roared out a cheer that might have shaken the
drops from the wet boughs. The Admiral and the General stood together on
the deck, their hands clasped. And the Colonel astutely remarked, as he
rode up in answer to a summons, that if Porter was the only man whose
daring could have pushed a fleet to that position, Sherman was certainly
the only man who could have got him out of it. "Colonel," said the General, "that move was well executed, sir. Admiral,
did the Rebs put a bullet through your rum casks? And now," he added, wheeling on the Colonel when each had a glass
in his hand, "who was in command of that company on the right, in the
swamp? "He's a second lieutenant, General, in the Sixth Missouri. Captain
wounded at Hindman, and first lieutenant fell out down below. His name
is Brice, I believe." Some few days afterward, when the troops were slopping around again at
Young's Point, opposite Vicksburg, a gentleman arrived on a boat
from St. He paused on the levee to survey with concern and
astonishment the flood of waters behind it, and then asked an officer
the way to General Sherman's headquarters. The officer, who was greatly
impressed by the gentleman's looks, led him at once to a trestle bridge
which spanned the distance from the levee bank over the flood to a house
up to its first floor in the backwaters. The officer looked inquiringly at the gentleman, who gave his name. The officer could not repress a smile at the next thing that happened. Out hurried the General himself, with both hands outstretched. he cried, "if it isn't Brinsmade. Come right in, come
right in and take dinner. I'll send
and tell Grant you're here. Brinsmade, if it wasn't for you and your
friends on the Western Sanitary Commission, we'd all have been dead of
fever and bad food long ago." "I guess a
good many of the boys are laid up now," he added. "I've come down to do what I can, General," responded Mr. "I want to go through all the hospitals to see that our nurses
are doing their duty and that the stores are properly distributed." "You shall, sir, this minute," said the General. He dropped instantly
the affairs which he had on hand, and without waiting for dinner the
two gentlemen went together through the wards where the fever raged. The
General surprised his visitor by recognizing private after private in
the cots, and he always had a brief word of cheer to brighten their
faces, to make them follow him with wistful eyes as he passed beyond
them. "That's poor Craig," he would say, "corporal, Third Michigan. They
tell me he can't live," and "That's Olcott, Eleventh Indiana. cried the General, when they were out in the air again, "how I wish
some of these cotton traders could get a taste of this fever. They keep
well--the vultures--And by the way, Brinsmade, the man who gave me no
peace at all at Memphis was from your city. Why, I had to keep a whole
corps on duty to watch him." As long as
I live I shall never forget it. "He has always seemed
inoffensive, and I believe he is a prominent member of one of our
churches." "I guess that's so," answered the General, dryly. "I ever I set eyes on
him again, he's clapped into the guardhouse. Brinsmade, presently, "have
you ever heard of Stephen Brice? You may
remember talking to him one evening at my house." He
paused on the very brink of relating again the incident at Camp Jackson,
when Stephen had saved the life of Mr. "Brinsmade,
for three days I've had it on my mind to send for that boy. I like him," cried General Sherman, with tone
and gesture there was no mistaking. Brinsmade, who liked
Stephen, too, rejoiced at the story he would have to tell the widow. "He
has spirit, Brinsmade. I told him to let me know when he was ready to go
to war. The first thing I hear of
him is that he's digging holes in the clay of Chickasaw Bluff, and his
cap is fanned off by the blast of a Parrott six feet above his head. Next thing he turns up on that little expedition we took to get Porter
to sea again. When we got to the gunboats, there was Brice's company
on the flank. He handled those men surprisingly, sir--surprisingly. I
shouldn't have blamed the boy if one or two Rebs got by him. But no, he
swept the place clean." By this time they had come back to the bridge
leading to headquarters, and the General beckoned quickly to an orderly. "My compliments to Lieutenant Stephen Brice, Sixth Missouri, and ask him
to report here at once. Brice's company were swinging axes when the
orderly arrived, and Mr. Brice had an axe himself, and was up to his
boot tops in yellow mud. The orderly, who had once been an Iowa farmer, was near grinning when he
gave the General's message and saw the lieutenant gazing ruefully at his
clothes. Entering headquarters, Stephen paused at the doorway of the big room
where the officers of the different staffs were scattered about,
smoking, while the <DW64> servants were removing the dishes from the
table. The sunlight, reflected from the rippling water outside, danced
on the ceiling. At the end of the room sat General Sherman, his uniform,
as always, a trifle awry. His soft felt hat with the gold braid was
tilted forward, and his feet, booted and spurred, were crossed. Small
wonder that the Englishman who sought the typical American found him in
Sherman. The sound that had caught Stephen's attention was the General's voice,
somewhat high-pitched, in the key that he used in telling a story. "Sin gives you a pretty square deal, boys, after all. Generally a man
says, 'Well, I can resist, but I'll have my fun just this once.' Stephen made his way to the General, whose bright eyes wandered rapidly
over him as he added:

"This is the condition my officers report in, Brinsmade,--mud from head
to heel." Stephen had sense enough to say nothing, but the staff officers laughed,
and Mr. Brinsmade smiled as he rose and took Stephen's hand. "I am delighted to see that you are well, sir," said he, with that
formal kindliness which endeared him to all. "Your mother will be
rejoiced at my news of you. You will be glad to hear that I left her
well, Stephen." "They are well, sir, and took pleasure in adding to a little box which
your mother sent. Judge Whipple put in a box of fine cigars, although he
deplores the use of tobacco." "He is ailing, sir, it grieves me to say. Your mother desired to have him moved to her house,
but he is difficult to stir from his ways, and he would not leave his
little room. We have got old Nancy, Hester's mother,
to stay with him at night, and Mrs. Brice divides the day with Miss
Jinny Carvel, who comes in from Bellegarde every afternoon." exclaimed Stephen, wondering if he heard aright. And at
the mention of her name he tingled. "She has been much honored
for it. You may remember that the Judge was a close friend of her
father's before the war. And--well, they quarrelled, sir. "When--when was the Judge taken ill, Mr. The
thought of Virginia and his mother caring for him together was strangely
sweet. "Two days before I left, sir, Dr. Polk had warned him not to do so much. But the Doctor tells me that he can see no dangerous symptoms." Brinsmade how long he was to be with them. "I am going on to the other camps this afternoon," said he. "But I
should like a glimpse of your quarters, Stephen, if you will invite
me. Your mother would like a careful account of you, and Mr. Whipple,
and--your many friends in St. "You will find my tent a little wet, air," replied Stephen, touched. Here the General, who had been sitting by watching them with a very
curious expression, spoke up. "That's hospitality for you, Brinsmade!" Brinsmade made their way across plank and bridge to
Stephen's tent, and his mess servant arrived in due time with the
package from home. But presently, while they sat talking of many things,
the canvas of the fly was thrust back with a quick movement, and who
should come stooping in but General Sherman himself. He sat down on a
cracker box. "Well, well, Brice," said the General, winking at Mr. Brinsmade, "I
think you might have invited me to the feast. The General chose one and lighted
it. "Why, yes, sir, when I can." "Then light up, sir," said the General, "and sit down, I've been
thinking lately of court-martialing you, but I decided to come 'round
and talk it over with you first. That isn't strictly according to
the rules of the service. "They began to draft, sir, and I couldn't stand it any longer." You were in the Home Guards, if I
remember right. Brinsmade tells me you were useful in many ways
What was your rank in the Home Guards?" "A second lieutenant in temporary command, General." "Couldn't they do better for you than a second-lieutenancy?" Brinsmade spoke up, "They offered him
a lieutenant-colonelcy." The General was silent a moment: Then he said "Do you remember meeting
me on the boat when I was leaving St. Louis, after the capture of Fort
Henry?" "Very well, General," he replied, General Sherman leaned
forward. "And do you remember I said to you, 'Brice, when you get ready to come
into this war, let me know.' Then he said gravely, but with just a
suspicion of humor about his mouth:-- "General, if I had done that, you
wouldn't be here in my tent to-day." Like lightning the General was on his feet, his hand on Stephen's
shoulder. "By gad, sir," he cried, delighted, "so I wouldn't." A STRANGE MEETING

The story of the capture of Vicksburg is the old, old story of failure
turned into success, by which man is made immortal. It involves the
history of a general who never retraced his steps, who cared neither
for mugwump murmurs nor political cabals, who took both blame and praise
with equanimity. Through month after month of discouragement, and work
gone for naught, and fever and death, his eyes never left his goal. And
by grace of the wisdom of that President who himself knew sorrow and
suffering and defeat and unjust censure, General Grant won. The canal abandoned, one red night fleet and transports
swept around the bend and passed the city's heights, on a red river. The Parrotts and the Dahlgrens roared, and the high bluffs flung out the
sound over the empty swamp land. Then there came the landing below, and the cutting loose from a
base--unheard of. Corps behind cursed corps ahead for sweeping the
country clear of forage. Confederate generals in
Mississippi were bewildered. One night, while crossing with his regiment a pontoon bridge, Stephen
Brice heard a shout raised on the farther shore. Sitting together on
a log under a torch, two men in slouch hats were silhouetted. That one
talking with rapid gestures was General Sherman. The impassive profile
of the other, the close-cropped beard and the firmly held cigar that
seemed to go with it,--Stephen recognized as that of the strange Captain
Grant who had stood beside him in the street by the Arsenal He had not
changed a whit. Motionless, he watched corps after corps splash by,
artillery, cavalry, and infantry, nor gave any sign that he heard their
plaudits. At length the army came up behind the city to a place primeval, where
the face of the earth was sore and tortured, worn into deep gorges by
the rains, and flung up in great mounds. Stripped of the green magnolias
and the cane, the banks of clay stood forth in hideous yellow nakedness,
save for a lonely stunted growth, or a bare trunk that still stood
tottering on the edge of a banks its pitiful withered roots reaching out
below. First of all there was a murderous assault, and a still more murderous
repulse. Three times the besiegers charged, sank their color staffs
into the redoubts, and three times were driven back. Then the blue army
settled into the earth and folded into the ravines. Three days in that
narrow space between the lines lay the dead and wounded suffering untold
agonies in the moist heat. Then came a truce to bury the dead, to bring
back what was left of the living. Like clockwork from the Mississippi's banks
beyond came the boom and shriek of the coehorns on the barges. The big
shells hung for an instant in the air like birds of prey, and then could
be seen swooping down here and there, while now and anon a shaft of
smoke rose straight to the sky, the black monument of a home. Here was work in the trenches, digging the flying sap by night and
deepening it by day, for officers and men alike. From heaven a host of
blue ants could be seen toiling in zigzags forward, ever forward, along
the rude water-cuts and through the hills. A waiting carrion from her
vantage point on high marked one spot then another where the blue ants
disappeared, and again one by one came out of the burrow to hurry down
the trench,--each with his ball of clay. In due time the ring of metal and sepulchred voices rumbled in the
ground beneath the besieged. Counter mines were started, and through the
narrow walls of earth commands and curses came. Above ground the saps
were so near that a strange converse became the rule. Both sides were starving, the one for tobacco and
the other for hardtack and bacon. These necessities were tossed across,
sometimes wrapped in the Vicksburg news-sheet printed on the white
side of a homely green wall paper. At other times other amenities were
indulged in. Hand-grenades were thrown and shells with lighted fuses
rolled down on the heads of acquaintances of the night before, who
replied from wooden coehorns hooped with iron. The Union generals learned (common item in a siege) that the citizens
of Vicksburg were eating mule meat. Not an officer or private in the
Vicksburg armies who does not remember the 25th of June, and the hour
of three in an afternoon of pitiless heat. Silently the long blue files
wound into position behind the earth barriers which hid them from the
enemy, coiled and ready to strike when the towering redoubt on the
Jackson road should rise heavenwards. By common consent the rifle
crack of day and night was hushed, and even the Parrotts were silent. Stillness closed around the white house of Shirley once more, but not
the stillness it had known in its peaceful homestead days. This was
the stillness of the death prayer. Eyes staring at the big redoubt were
dimmed. At last, to those near, a little wisp of blue smoke crept out. The sun was darkened, and a hot
blast fanned the upturned faces. In the sky, through the film of
shattered clay, little black dots scurried, poised, and fell again as
arms and legs and head less trunks and shapeless bits of wood and iron. Scarcely had the dust settled when the sun caught the light of fifty
thousand bayonets, and a hundred shells were shrieking across the
crater's edge. Earth to earth, alas, and dust to dust! Men who ran
across that rim of a summer's after-noon died in torture under tier upon
tier of their comrades,--and so the hole was filled. An upright cannon marks the spot where a scrawny oak once stood on
a scarred and baked hillside, outside of the Confederate lines at
Vicksburg. Under the scanty shade of that tree, on the eve of the
Nation's birthday, stood two men who typified the future and the past. As at Donelson, a trick of Fortune's had delivered one comrade of old
into the hands of another. Now she chose to kiss the one upon whom she
had heaped obscurity and poverty and contumely. He had ceased to think
or care about Fortune. And hence, being born a woman, she favored him. They noted the friendly greeting
of old comrades, and after that they saw the self-contained Northerner
biting his cigar, as one to whom the pleasantries of life were past and
gone. The South saw her General turn on his heel. Both sides honored him for the fight he had made. But war
does not reward a man according to his deserts. The next day--the day our sundered nation was born Vicksburg
surrendered: the obstinate man with the mighty force had conquered. See
the gray regiments marching silently in the tropic heat into the folds
of that blue army whose grip has choked them at last. Silently, too, the
blue coats stand, pity and admiration on the brick-red faces. The arms
are stacked and surrendered, officers and men are to be parolled when
the counting is finished. The formations melt away, and those who for
months have sought each other's lives are grouped in friendly talk. The
coarse army bread is drawn eagerly from the knapsacks of the blue, smoke
quivers above a hundred fires, and the smell of frying bacon brings a
wistful look into the gaunt faces. Tears stand in the eyes of many a man
as he eats the food his Yankee brothers have given him on the birthday
of their country. Stephen Brice, now a captain in General
Lauman's brigade, sees with thanksgiving the stars and stripes flutter
from the dome of that court-house which he had so long watched from
afar. Later on, down a side street, he pauses before a house with its
face blown away. On the verge of one of its jagged floors is an old
four-posted bed, and beside it a child's cot is standing pitifully,--the
tiny pillow still at the head and the little sheets thrown across the
foot. So much for one of the navy's shells. While he was thinking of the sadness of it all, a little scene was
acted: the side door of the house opened, a weeping woman came out, and
with her was a tall Confederate Colonel of cavalry. Gallantly giving her
his arm, he escorted her as far as the little gate, where she bade him
good by with much feeling. With an impulsive movement he drew some money
from his pocket, thrust it upon her, and started hurriedly away that
he might not listen to her thanks. Such was his preoccupation that
he actually brushed into Stephen, who was standing beside a tree. "Excuse me, seh," he said contritely. "Certainly," said Stephen, smiling; "it was my fault for getting in your
way." "Not at all, seh," said the cavalry Colonel; "my clumsiness, seh." He did not pass on, but stood pulling with some violence a very long
mustache. "Damn you Yankees," he continued, in the same amiable tone,
"you've brought us a heap of misfortune. Why, seh, in another week we'd
been fo'ced to eat <DW65>s." The Colonel made such a wry face that Stephen laughed in spite of
himself. He had marked the man's charitable action, and admired his
attempt to cover it. The Colonel seemed to be all breadth, like a card. The face was scant, perchance from lack
of food, the nose large, with a curved rim, and the eyes blue gray. He
wore clay-flecked cavalry boots, and was six feet five if an inch, so
that Stephen's six seemed insignificant beside him. "Captain," he said, taking in Stephen's rank, "so we won't qua'l as to
who's host heah. One thing's suah," he added, with a twinkle, "I've been
heah longest. Seems like ten yeahs since I saw the wife and children
down in the Palmetto State. I can't offer you a dinner, seh. We've
eaten all the mules and rats and sugar cane in town." (His eye seemed to
interpolate that Stephen wouldn't be there otherwise.) "But I can offer
you something choicer than you have in the No'th." Whereupon he drew from his hip a dented silver flask. The Colonel
remarked that Stephen's eyes fell on the coat of arms. "Prope'ty of my grandfather, seh, of Washington's Army. My name is
Jennison,--Catesby Jennison, at your service, seh," he said. "You have
the advantage of me, Captain." "My name is Brice," said Stephen. The big Colonel bowed decorously, held out a great, wide hand, and
thereupon unscrewed the flask. Now Stephen had never learned to like
straight whiskey, but he took down his share without a face. The exploit
seemed to please the Colonel, who, after he likewise had done the liquor
justice, screwed on the lid with ceremony, offered Stephen his arm with
still greater ceremony, and they walked off down the street together. Stephen drew from his pocket several of Judge Whipple's cigars, to which
his new friend gave unqualified praise. On every hand Vicksburg showed signs of hard usage. Houses with gaping
chasms in their sides, others mere heaps of black ruins; great trees
felled, cabins demolished, and here and there the sidewalk ploughed
across from curb to fence. "Lordy I how my ears ache since your
damned coehorns have stopped. The noise got to be silence with us, seh,
and yesterday I reckoned a hundred volcanoes had bust. Tell me," said he
"when the redoubt over the Jackson road was blown up, they said a <DW65>
came down in your lines alive. "Yes," said Stephen, smiling; "he struck near the place where my company
was stationed. "I reckon he fell on it," said Colonel Catesby Jennison, as if it were a
matter of no special note. "And now tell me something," said Stephen. "How did you burn our
sap-rollers?" This time the Colonel stopped, and gave himself up to hearty laughter. "Why, that was a Yankee trick, sure enough," he cried. "Some ingenious
cuss soaked port fire in turpentine, and shot the wad in a large-bore
musket." The Colonel laughed again, still more heartily. "Explosive
bullets!--Good Lord, it was all we could do to get percussion caps. Do you know how we got percussion caps, seh? Three of our
officers--dare-devils, seh--floated down the Mississippi on logs. One
fellow made his way back with two hundred thousand. He's the pride of
our Vicksburg army. A chivalrous man, a forlorn-hope
man. The night you ran the batteries he and some others went across to
your side in skiffs--in skiffs, seh, I say--and set fire to the houses
in De Soto, that we might see to shoot. And then he came back in the
face of our own batteries and your guns. That man was wounded by a trick
of fate, by a cussed bit of shell from your coehorns while eating his
dinner in Vicksburg. He's pretty low, now, poor fellow," added the
Colonel, sadly. demanded Stephen, fired with a desire to see the man. "Well, he ain't a great ways from here," said the Colonel. "Perhaps you
might be able to do something for him," he continued thoughtfully. "I'd
hate to see him die. The doctor says he'll pull through if he can get
care and good air and good food." He seized Stephen's arm in a fierce
grip. "No," said the Colonel, thoughtfully, as to himself, "you don't look
like the man to fool." Whereupon he set out with great strides, in marked contrast to his
former languorous gait, and after a while they came to a sort of gorge,
where the street ran between high banks of clay. There Stephen saw the
magazines which the Confederates had dug out, and of which he had heard. But he saw something, too, of which he had not heard, Colonel Catesby
Jennison stopped before an open doorway in the yellow bank and knocked. A woman's voice called softly to him to enter. They went into a room hewn out of the solid clay. Carpet was stretched
on the floor, paper was on the walls, and even a picture. There was
a little window cut like a port in a prison cell, and under it a bed,
beside which a middle-aged lady was seated. She had a kindly face which
seemed to Stephen a little pinched as she turned to them with a gesture
of restraint. She pointed to the bed, where a sheet lay limply over the
angles of a wasted frame. said the lady,--"it is the first time in two days that he has
slept." But the sleeper stirred wearily, and woke with a start. The face, so yellow and peaked, was of the type that grows even more
handsome in sickness, and in the great fever-stricken eyes a high spirit
burned. For an instant only the man stared at Stephen, and then he
dragged himself to the wall. The eyes of the other two were both fixed on the young Union Captain. cried Jennison, seizing Stephen's rigid arm, "does he look as
bad as that? "I--I know him," answered Stephen. He stepped quickly to the bedside,
and bent over it. "This is too much, Jennison," came from the bed a voice that was
pitifully weak; "why do you bring Yankees in here?" "Captain Brice is a friend of yours, Colfax," said the Colonel, tugging
at his mustache. I have met Captain Colfax--"

"Colonel, sir." "Colonel Colfax, before the war! And if he would like to go to St. Louis, I think I can have it arranged at once." In silence they waited for Clarence's answer Stephen well knew what was
passing in his mind, and guessed at his repugnance to accept a favor
from a Yankee. He wondered whether there was in this case a special
detestation. And so his mind was carried far to the northward to the
memory of that day in the summer-house on the Meramee heights. Virginia
had not loved her cousin then--of that Stephen was sure. But now,--now
that the Vicksburg army was ringing with his praise, now that he was
unfortunate--Stephen sighed. His comfort was that he would be the
instrument. The lady in her uneasiness smoothed the single sheen that covered the
sick man. From afar came the sound of cheering, and it was this that
seemed to rouse him. And then, with
some vehemence, "What is he doing in Vicksburg?" Stephen looked at Jennison, who winced. "The city has surrendered," said that officer. "Then you can afford to be generous," he said, with a bitter laugh. "But you haven't whipped us yet, by a good deal. Jennison," he cried,
"Jennison, why in hell did you give up?" "Colfax," said Stephen, coming forward, "you're too sick a man to talk. It may be that I can have you sent North
to-day." "You can do as you please," said Clarence, coldly, "with a--prisoner." Bowing to the lady, he strode out of
the room. Colonel Jennison, running after him, caught him in the street. "He's sick--and God Almighty,
he's proud--I reckon," he added with a touch of humility that went
straight to Stephen's heart. "I reckon that some of us are too derned
proud--But we ain't cold." And I hope, Colonel, that we may meet
again--as friends." "Hold on, seh," said Colonel Catesby Jennison; "we
may as well drink to that." Fortunately, as Stephen drew near the Court House, he caught sight of
a group of officers seated on its steps, and among them he was quick to
recognize General Sherman. "Brice," said the General, returning his salute, "been celebrating this
glorious Fourth with some of our Rebel friends?" "Yes, sir," answered Stephen, "and I came to ask a favor for one of
them." Seeing that the General's genial, interested expression did not
change, he was emboldened to go on. "This is one of their colonels, sir. He is the man who floated down the river on a
log and brought back two hundred thousand percussion caps--"

"Good Lord," interrupted the General, "I guess we all heard of him after
that. What else has he done to endear himself?" "Well, General, he rowed across the river in a skiff the night we ran
these batteries, and set fire to De Soto to make targets for their
gunners." "I'd like to see that man," said the General, in his eager way. "What I was going to tell you, sir. After he went through all this, he
was hit by a piece of mortar shell, while sitting at his dinner. He's
rather far gone now, General, and they say he can't live unless he can
be sent North. I--I know who he is in St. And I thought that as
long as the officers are to be paroled I might get your permission to
send him up to-day." "I know the breed," said he, "I'll bet he didn't
thank you." "I like his grit," said the General, emphatically, "These young bloods
are the backbone of this rebellion, Brice. They
never did anything except horse-racing and cock-fighting. They ride like
the devil, fight like the devil, but don't care a picayune for anything. And, good Lord, how
they hate a Yankee! He's a cousin of that
fine-looking girl Brinsmade spoke of. Be a
pity to disappoint her--eh?" "Why, Captain, I believe you would like to marry her yourself! Take my
advice, sir, and don't try to tame any wildcats." "I'm glad to do a favor for that young man," said the General, when
Stephen had gone off with the slip of paper he had given him. "I like to
do that kind of a favor for any officer, when I can. Did you notice how
he flared up when I mentioned the girl?" This is why Clarence Colfax found himself that evening on a hospital
steamer of the Sanitary Commission, bound north for St. BELLEGARDE ONCE MORE

Supper at Bellegarde was not the simple meal it had been for a year past
at Colonel Carvel's house in town. Colfax was proud of her table,
proud of her fried chickens and corn fritters and her desserts. How
Virginia chafed at those suppers, and how she despised the guests whom
her aunt was in the habit of inviting to some of them! And when none
was present, she was forced to listen to Mrs. Colfax's prattle about the
fashions, her tirades against the Yankees. "I'm sure he must be dead," said that lady, one sultry evening in July. Her tone, however, was not one of conviction. A lazy wind from the river
stirred the lawn of Virginia's gown. The girl, with her hand on the
wicker back of the chair, was watching a storm gather to the eastward,
across the Illinois prairie. "I don't see why you say that, Aunt Lillian," she replied. "Bad news
travels faster than good." It is cruel of him not to send us a line,
telling us where his regiment is." She had long since learned that the wisdom of
silence was the best for her aunt's unreasonableness. Certainly, if
Clarence's letters could not pass the close lines of the Federal troops,
news of her father's Texas regiment could not come from Red River. "How was Judge Whipple to-day?" Brice,--isn't that her name?--doesn't take him to
her house. Virginia began to rock slowly, and her foot tapped the porch. Brice has begged the Judge to come to her. But he says he has
lived in those rooms, and that he will die there,--when the time comes." You have become quite a Yankee
yourself, I believe, spending whole days with her, nursing that old
man." "The Judge is an old friend of my father's; I think he would wish it,"
replied the girl, in a lifeless voice. Her speech did not reveal all the pain and resentment she felt. She
thought of the old man racked with pain and suffering in the heat, lying
patient on his narrow bed, the only light of life remaining the presence
of the two women. They came day by day, and often Margaret Brice had
taken the place of the old negress who sat with him at night. Yes, it was worship; it had been worship since the
day she and her father had gone to the little whitewashed hospital. Providence had brought them together at the Judge's bedside. The
marvellous quiet power of the older woman had laid hold of the girl in
spite of all barriers. Often when the Judge's pain was eased sufficiently for him to talk, he
would speak of Stephen. The mother never spoke of her son, but a light
would come into her eyes at this praise of him which thrilled Virginia
to see. And when the good lady was gone, and the Judge had fallen into
slumber, it would still haunt her. Was it out of consideration for her that Mrs. Brice would turn the Judge
from this topic which he seemed to love best? Virginia could not admit
to herself that she resented this. She had heard Stephen's letters to
the Judge. Strong and manly they were, with plenty
of praises for the Southern defenders of Vicksburg. Only yesterday
Virginia had read one of these to Mr. Well
that his face was turned to the window, and that Stephen's mother was
not there! "He says very little about himself," Mr. "Had it
not been for Brinsmade, we should never know that Sherman had his eye on
him, and had promoted him. We should never have known of that exploit
at Chickasaw Bluff. But what a glorious victory was Grant's capture of
Vicksburg, on the Fourth of July! I guess we'll make short work of the
Rebels now." No, the Judge had not changed much, even in illness. Virginia laid the letter down, and tears started to her eyes as
she repressed a retort. It was not the first time this had happened. How strange
that, with all his thought of others, he should fall short here! One day, after unusual forbearance, Mrs. Brice had overtaken Virginia
on the stairway. Well she knew the girl's nature, and how difficult she
must have found repression. "My dear," she had said, "you are a wonderful woman." But
Virginia had driven back to Bellegarde with a strange elation in her
heart. Some things the Judge had forborne to mention, and for this Virginia was
thankful. But she had overheard Shadrach telling old
Nancy how Mrs. Brice had pleaded with him to move it, that he might have
more room and air. And Colonel Carvel's name had
never once passed his lips. Many a night the girl had lain awake listening to the steamboats as they
toiled against the river's current, while horror held her. Horror lest
her father at that moment be in mortal agony amongst the heaps left by
the battle's surges; heaps in which, like mounds of ashes, the fire was
not yet dead. Fearful tales she had heard in the prison hospitals of
wounded men lying for days in the Southern sun between the trenches at
Vicksburg, or freezing amidst the snow and sleet at Donelson. What a life had been
Colonel Carvel's! Another, and he had lost his fortune, his home, his friends, all that
was dear to him. And that daughter, whom he loved best in all the world,
he was perchance to see no more. Colfax, yawning, had taken a book and gone to bed. Still Virginia
sat on the porch, while the frogs sang of rain, and the lightning
quivered across the eastern sky. She heard the crunch of wheels in the
gravel. A bar of light, peopled by moths, slanted out of the doorway and fell
on a closed carriage. "Your cousin Clarence has come home, my dear," he said. "He was among
the captured at Vicksburg, and is paroled by General Grant." Brinsmade, tell me--all--"

"No, he is not dead, but he is very low. Russell has been kind
enough to come with me." But they were all there in the light,
in African postures of terror,--Alfred, and <DW71>, and Mammy Easter, and
Ned. They lifted the limp figure in gray, and carried it into the hall
chamber, his eyes closed, his face waxen under a beard brown and shaggy. Heavily, Virginia climbed the stairs to break the news to her aunt. There is little need to dwell on the dark days which followed--Clarence
hanging between life and death. That his life was saved was due to
Virginia and to Mammy Easter, and in no particle to his mother. Colfax flew in the face of all the known laws of nursing, until Virginia
was driven to desperation, and held a council of war with Dr. Then
her aunt grew jealous, talked of a conspiracy, and threatened to send
for Dr. By spells she wept,
when they quietly pushed her from the room and locked the door. She
would creep in to him in the night during Mammy Easter's watches and
talk him into a raging fever. But Virginia slept lightly and took the
alarm. More than one scene these two had in the small hours, while Ned
was riding post haste over the black road to town for the Doctor. By the same trusty messenger did Virginia contrive to send a note to
Mrs. Brice, begging her to explain her absence to Judge Whipple. By day
or night Virginia did not leave Bellegarde. Polk, while
walking in the garden, found the girl fast asleep on a bench, her sewing
on her lap. Would that a master had painted his face as he looked down
at her! 'Twas he who brought Virginia daily news of Judge Whipple. He had become more querulous
and exacting with patient Mrs. But often, when he got into his buggy the Doctor found
the seat filled with roses and fresh fruit. What Virginia's feelings were at this time no one will ever know. God
had mercifully given her occupation, first with the Judge, and later,
when she needed it more, with Clarence. It was she whom he recognized
first of all, whose name was on his lips in his waking moments. With
the petulance of returning reason, he pushed his mother away. Unless
Virginia was at his bedside when he awoke, his fever rose. He put his
hot hand into her cool one, and it rested there sometimes for hours. Then, and only then, did he seem contented. The wonder was that her health did not fail. People who saw her during
that fearful summer, fresh and with color in her cheeks, marvelled. Great-hearted Puss Russell, who came frequently to inquire, was quieted
before her friend, and the frank and jesting tongue was silent in that
presence. Anne Brinsmade came with her father and wondered. Her poise, her gentleness, her dignity, were the
effects which people saw. And this is why
we cannot of ourselves add one cubit to our stature. It is God who
changes,--who cleanses us of our levity with the fire of trial. Happy,
thrice happy, those whom He chasteneth. And yet how many are there who
could not bear the fire--who would cry out at the flame. Little by little Clarence mended, until he came to sit out on the porch
in the cool of the afternoon. Then he would watch for hours the tassels
stirring over the green fields of corn and the river running beyond,
while the two women sat by. Colfax's headaches came
on, and Virginia was alone with him, he would talk of the war; sometimes
of their childhood, of the mad pranks they played here at Bellegarde,
of their friends. Only when Virginia read to him the Northern account of
the battles would he emerge from a calm sadness into excitement; and
he clenched his fists and tried to rise when he heard of the capture of
Jackson and the fall of Port Hudson. Of love he spoke not a word, and
now that he was better he ceased to hold her hand. But often when she
looked up from her book, she would surprise his dark eyes fixed upon
her, and a look in them of but one interpretation. The Doctor came but every other day now, in the afternoon. It was his
custom to sit for a while on the porch chatting cheerily with Virginia,
his stout frame filling the rocking-chair. Polk's indulgence was
gossip--though always of a harmless nature: how Mr. Cluyme always
managed to squirm over to the side which was in favor, and how Maude
Catherwood's love-letter to a certain dashing officer of the Confederate
army had been captured and ruthlessly published in the hateful Democrat. It was the Doctor who gave Virginia news of the Judge, and sometimes he
would mention Mrs. Then Clarence would raise his head; and once
(she saw with trepidation) he had opened his lips to speak. One day the Doctor came, and Virginia looked into his face and divined
that he had something to tell her. He sat but a few moments, and when he
arose to go he took her hand. "I have a favor to beg of you, Jinny," he said, "Judge has lost his
nurse. Do you think Clarence could spare you for a little while every
day? Polk continued, somewhat hurriedly for
him, "but the Judge cannot bear a stranger near him, and I am afraid to
have him excited while in this condition." And Clarence, watching, saw her color
go. Polk, "but her son Stephen has come home from the
army. He was transferred to Lauman's brigade, and then he was wounded." He jangled the keys in his pocket and continued "It seems that he had no
business in the battle. Johnston in his retreat had driven animals into
all the ponds and shot them, and in the hot weather the water was soon
poisoned. Brice was scarcely well enough to stand when they made
the charge, and he is now in a dreadful condition He is a fine fellow,"
added the Doctor, with a sigh, "General Sherman sent a special physician
to the boat with him. He is--" Subconsciously the Doctor's arm sought
Virginia's back, as though he felt her swaying. But he was looking at
Clarence, who had jerked himself forward in his chair, his thin hands
convulsively clutching at the arms of it. In his astonishment the Doctor passed his palm across his brow, and for
a moment he did not answer. Virginia had taken a step from him, and was
standing motionless, almost rigid, her eyes on his face. he said, repeating the word mechanically; "my God, I hope not. The danger is over, and he is resting easily. If he were not," he said
quickly and forcibly, "I should not be here." The Doctor's mare passed more than one fleet--footed trotter on the
road to town that day. And the Doctor's black servant heard his master
utter the word "fool" twice, and with great emphasis. For a long time Virginia stood on the end of the porch, until the
heaving of the buggy harness died on the soft road, She felt Clarence
gaze upon her before she turned to face him. "Virginia, sit here a moment; I have something to tell you." She came and took the chair beside him, her heart beating, her breast
rising and falling. She looked into his eyes, and her own lashes fell
before the hopelessness there But he put out his fingers wasted by
illness, and she took them in her own. He began slowly, as if every word cost him pain. I cannot remember the time
when I did not love you, when I did not think of you as my wife. All I
did when we played together was to try to win your applause. That was my
nature I could not help it. Do you remember the day I climbed out on the
rotten branch of the big pear tree yonder to get you that pear--when
I fell on the roof of Alfred's cabin? It was
because you kissed it and cried over me. You are crying now," he said
tenderly. It isn't to make you sad that I am saying this. "I have had a great deal of time to think lately, Jinny, I was not
brought up seriously,--to be a man. I have been thinking of that day
just before you were eighteen, when you rode out here. The grapes were purple, and a purple
haze was over there across the river. You were
grown a woman then, and I was still nothing but a boy. Do you remember
the doe coming out of the forest, and how she ran screaming when I tried
to kiss you? It was true what you said, that I was wild and utterly useless,
I had never served or pleased any but myself,--and you. I had never
studied or worked, You were right when you told me I must learn
something,--do something,--become of some account in the world. "Clarence, after what you have done for the South?" "Crossed the river and burned
houses. Floated down the river on a log
after a few percussion caps. "And how many had the courage to do that?" "Pooh," he said, "courage! If I did not
have that, I would send <DW71> to my father's room for his ebony box and
blow my brains out. No, Jinny, I am nothing but a soldier of fortune. I never possessed any quality but a wild spirit for adventure, to
shirk work. I wanted to go with Walker, you remember. I wanted to distinguish myself," he added with a gesture. "But
that is all gone now, Jinny. Now
I see how an earnest life might have won you. She raised her head, frightened, and looked at him searchingly. "One day," he said, "one day a good many years ago you and I and Uncle
Comyn were walking along Market Street in front of Judge Whipple's
office, and a slave auction was going on. A girl was being sold on whom
you had set your heart. There was some one in the crowd, a Yankee, who
bid her in and set her free. He saw her profile, her lips parted, her look far away, She inclined her
head. "Yes," said her cousin, "so do I remember him. He has crossed my path
many times since, Virginia. And mark what I say--it was he whom you
had in mind on that birthday when you implored me to make something of
myself, It was Stephen Brice." "I dare anything, Virginia," he answered quietly. And I am sure that you did not realize that he was the ideal which you
had in mind." "The impression of him has never left it. Again, that
night at the Brinsmades', when we were in fancy dress, I felt that I had
lost you when I got back. He had been there when I was away, and gone
again. "It was a horrible mistake, Max," she faltered. "I was waiting for you
down the road, and stopped his horse instead. It--it was nothing--"

"It was fate, Jinny. How I hated that
man," he cried, "how I hated him?" "Yes," he said, "hated! But now--"

"But now?" I have not--I could not tell you before: He
came into the place where I was lying in Vicksburg, and they told
him that my only chance was to come North, I turned my back upon him,
insulted him. Yet he went to Sherman and had me brought home--to you,
Virginia. If he loves you,--and I have long suspected that he does--"

"Oh, no," she cried, hiding her face "No." "I know he loves you, Jinny," her cousin continued calmly, inexorably. It was a brave
thing to do, and a generous. He
thought that he was saving me for you. He was giving up the hope of
marrying you himself." Unless you had seen her then, you had never
known the woman in her glory. "Clarence Colfax, have you known and loved
me all my life that you might accuse me of this? "Jinny, do you mean it?" In answer she bent down with all that gentleness and grace that
was hers, and pressed her lips to his forehead. Long after she had
disappeared in the door he sat staring after her. But later, when Mammy Easter went to call her mistress for supper, she
found her with her face buried in the pillows. CHAPTER X. IN JUDGE WHIPPLE'S OFFICE

After this Virginia went to the Judge's bedside every day, in the
morning, when Clarence took his sleep. She read his newspapers to him
when he was well enough. She read the detested Missouri Democrat, which
I think was the greatest trial Virginia ever had to put up with. To have
her beloved South abused, to have her heroes ridiculed, was more than
she could bear. Once, when the Judge was perceptibly better, she flung
the paper out of the window, and left the room. "My dear," he said, smiling admiration, "forgive an old bear. A selfish
old bear, Jinny; my only excuse is my love for the Union. When you are
not here, I lie in agony, lest she has suffered some mortal blow unknown
to me, Jinny. And if God sees fit to spare our great country, the day
will come when you will go down on your knees and thank Him for the
inheritance which He saved for your children. You are a good woman, my
dear, and a strong one. I have hoped that you will see the right. That you will marry a great citizen, one unwavering in his service and
devotion to our Republic." The Judge's voice trembled with earnestness
as he spoke. And the gray eyes under the shaggy brows were alight with
the sacred fire of his life's purpose. Undaunted as her spirit was, she
could not answer him then. Once, only once, he said to her: "Virginia, I loved your father better
than any man I ever knew. Please God I may see him again before I die." But sometimes at twilight his eyes would
rest on the black cloth that hid it. Virginia herself never touched that cloth to her it seemed the shroud
upon a life of happiness that was dead and gone. Virginia had not been with Judge Whipple during the critical week after
Stephen was brought home. But Anne had told her that his anxiety was
a pitiful thing to see, and that it had left him perceptibly weaker. So fast that on some days
Virginia, watching him, would send Ned or Shadrach in hot haste for Dr. At noon Anne would relieve Virginia,--Anne or her mother,--and
frequently Mr. For it is those who have
the most to do who find the most time for charitable deeds. As the hour
for their coming drew near, the Judge would be seeking the clock, and
scarce did Anne's figure appear in the doorway before the question had
arisen to his lips--"And how is my young Captain to-day?" That is what he called him,--"My young Captain." Virginia's choice of
her cousin, and her devotion to him, while seemingly natural enough,
had drawn many a sigh from Anne. She thought it strange that Virginia
herself had never once asked her about Stephen's condition and she spoke
of this one day to the Judge with as much warmth as she was capable of. "Jinny's heart is like steel where a Yankee is concerned. If her best
friend were a Yankee--"

Judge Whipple checked her, smiling. "She has been very good to one Yankee I know of," he said. Brice, I believe she worships her." "But when I said that Stephen was much better to-day, she swept out of
the room as if she did not care whether he lived or died." "Well, Anne," the Judge had answered, "you women are a puzzle to me. I
guess you don't understand yourselves," he added. That was a strange month in the life of Clarence Colfax,--the last
of his recovery, while he was waiting for the news of his exchange. Bellegarde was never more beautiful, for Mrs. Colfax had no whim of
letting the place run down because a great war was in progress. Though
devoted to the South, she did not consecrate her fortune to it. Clarence
gave as much as he could. Whole afternoons Virginia and he would sit in the shaded arbor seat;
or at the cool of the day descend to the bench on the lower tier of
the summer garden, to steep, as it were, in the blended perfumes of the
roses and the mignonettes and the pinks. Often through the night he pondered on the change in her. But he was troubled to analyze her gravity, her dignity. Was this
merely strength of character, the natural result of the trials through
which she had passed, the habit acquired of being the Helper and
comforter instead of the helped and comforted? Long years afterward the
brightly  portrait of her remained in his eye,--the simple linen
gown of pink or white, the brown hair shining in the sunlight, the
graceful poise of the head. And the background of flowers--flowers
everywhere, far from the field of war. Sometimes, when she brought his breakfast on a tray in the morning,
there was laughter in her eyes. In the days gone by they had been all
laughter. He said it over to himself
many, many times in the day. He would sit for a space, feasting his eyes
upon her until she lifted her look to his, and the rich color flooded
her face. He was not a lover to sit quietly by, was Clarence. And yet,
as the winged days flew on, that is what he did, It was not that she
did not respond to his advances, he did not make them. Was it the chivalry inherited from a long life of Colfaxes who
were gentlemen? Something of awe had crept into his feeling
for her. As the month wore on, and the time drew near for him to go back to the
war, a state that was not quite estrangement, and yet something very
like it, set in. Doubts bothered him, and he dared not
give them voice. By night he would plan his speeches,--impassioned,
imploring. To see her in her marvellous severity was to strike him dumb. Whether she loved him, whether she did not love
him, she would not give him up. Through the long years of their lives
together, he would never know. He was not a weak man now, was Clarence
Colfax. He was merely a man possessed of a devil, enchained by the power
of self-repression come upon her whom he loved. And day by day that power seemed to grow more intense,--invulnerable. Among her friends and in the little household it had raised Virginia to
heights which she herself did not seem to realize. She was become the
mistress of Bellegarde. Colfax was under its sway, and doubly
miserable because Clarence would listen to her tirades no more. Nor had
she taken pains to hide the sarcasm in her voice. His answer, bringing with it her remembrance of her husband at certain
times when it was not safe to question him, had silenced her. Addison
Colfax had not been a quiet man. "Whenever Virginia is ready, mother," he had replied. He knew in his heart that if he were to ask her permission
to send for Dr. Posthelwaite to-morrow that she would say yes. Tomorrow
came,--and with it a great envelope, an official, answer to Clarence's
report that he was fit for duty once more. He
was to proceed to Cairo, there to await the arrival of the transport
Indianapolis, which was to carry five hundred officers and men from
Sandusky Prison, who were going back to fight once more for the
Confederacy. O that they might have seen the North, all those brave men
who made that sacrifice. That they might have realized the numbers and
the resources and the wealth arrayed against them! It was a cool day for September, a perfect day, an auspicious day, and
yet it went the way of the others before it. This was the very fulness
of the year, the earth giving out the sweetness of her maturity, the
corn in martial ranks, with golden plumes nodding. The forest still
in its glory of green. They walked in silence the familiar paths, and
Alfred, clipping the late roses for the supper table, shook his
white head as they passed him. The sun, who had begun to hurry on his
southward journey, went to bed at six. The few clothes Clarence was to
take with him had been packed by Virginia in his bag, and the two were
standing in the twilight on the steps of the house, when Ned came around
the corner. He called his young mistress by name, but she did not hear
him. She started as from a sleep, and paused. He wore that air of mystery so
dear to darkeys. "Gemmen to see you, Miss Jinny." The <DW64> pointed to the lilac shrubbery. said Clarence, sharply: "If a man is
there, bring him here at once." "Reckon he won't come, Marse Clarence." said Ned, "He fearful skeered ob
de light ob day. He got suthin very pertickler fo' Miss Jinny." "No sah--yessah--leastwise I'be seed 'um. The word was hardly out of his mouth before Virginia had leaped down the
four feet from the porch to the flower-bed and was running across the
lawn toward the shrubbery. Parting the bushes after her, Clarence found
his cousin confronting a large man, whom he recognized as the carrier
who brought messages from the South. "Pa has got through the lines," she said breathlessly. "He--he came up
to see me. "He went to Judge Whipple's rooms, ma'am. I
reckoned you knew it, Miss Jinny," Robinson added contritely. "Clarence," she said, "I must go at once." "I will go with you," he said; "you cannot go alone." In a twinkling Ned
and <DW71> had the swift pair of horses harnessed, and the light carriage
was flying over the soft clay road toward the city. Brinsmade's place, the moon hung like a great round lantern under
the spreading trees about the house. Clarence caught a glimpse of his
cousin's face in the light. She was leaning forward, her gaze fixed
intently on the stone posts which stood like monuments between the
bushes at the entrance. Then she drew back again into the dark corner
of the barouche. She was startled by a sharp challenge, and the carriage
stopped. Looking out, she saw the provost's guard like black card
figures on the road, and Ned fumbling for his pass. On they drove into the city streets until the dark bulk of the Court
House loomed in front of them, and Ned drew rein at the little stairway
which led to the Judge's rooms. Virginia, leaping out of the carriage,
flew up the steps and into the outer office, and landed in the Colonel's
arms. "Why do you risk your life in this way? If the
Yankees catch you--"

"They won't catch me, honey," he answered, kissing her. Then he held her
out at arm's length and gazed earnestly into her face. Trembling, she
searched his own. "I'm not precisely young, my dear," he said, smiling. His hair was
nearly white, and his face scared. But he was a fine erect figure of a
man, despite the shabby clothes he wore, and the mud-bespattered boots. "Pa," she whispered, "it was foolhardy to come here. "I came to see you, Jinny, I reckon. And when I got home to-night and
heard Silas was dying, I just couldn't resist. He's the oldest friend
I've got in St. Louis, honey and now--now--"

"Pa, you've been in battle?" "And you weren't hurt; I thank God for that," she whispered. After a
while: "Is Uncle Silas dying?" Polk is in there now, and says that he can't last
through the night. Silas has been asking for you, honey, over and over. He says you were very good to him,--that you and Mrs. Brice gave up
everything to nurse him." "She was here night and day until her son
came home. She is a noble woman--"

"Her son?" Silas has done nothing
the last half-hour but call his name. He says he must see the boy before
he dies. Polk says he is not strong enough to come." "Oh, no, he is not strong enough," cried Virginia. The Colonel looked
down at her queerly. She turned hurriedly, glanced around
the room, and then peered down the dark stairway. I wonder why he did not follow me up?" Then after a long pause, seeing her father said nothing, she added,
"Perhaps he was waiting for you to see me alone. I will go down to see
if he is in the carriage." The Colonel started with her, but she pulled him back in alarm. "You will be seen, Pa," she cried. He stayed at the top of the passage, holding open the door that she
might have light. When she reached the sidewalk, there was Ned standing
beside the horses, and the carriage empty. Fust I seed was a man plump out'n Willums's, Miss Jinny. He was
a-gwine shufflin' up de street when Marse Clarence put out after him,
pos' has'e. She stood for a moment on the pavement in thought, and paused on the
stairs again, wondering whether it were best to tell her father. Perhaps
Clarence had seen--she caught her breath at the thought and pushed open
the door. "Oh, Pa, do you think you are safe here?" "Why, yes, honey, I
reckon so," he answered. "Ned says he ran after a man who was hiding in an entrance. Pa, I am
afraid they are watching the place." "I don't think so, Jinny. I came here with Polk, in his buggy, after
dark." Virginia, listening, heard footsteps on the stairs, and seized her
father's sleeve. "Think of the risk you are running, Pa," she whispered. She would have
dragged him to the closet. Brinsmade entered, and with him a lady veiled. How long
he stared at his old friend Virginia could not say. It seemed to her an
eternity. Brice has often told since how straight the Colonel
stood, his fine head thrown back, as he returned the glance. Brinsmade came forward, with his hand outstretched. "Comyn," said he, his voice breaking a little, "I have known you these
many years as a man of unstained honor. God will judge whether I have done my duty." "I give
you my word of honor as a gentleman that I came into this city for no
other reason than to see my daughter. And hearing that my old friend was
dying, I could not resist the temptation, sir--"

Mr. How many men do you think would risk their
lives so, Mrs. "Thank God he will now
die happy. I know it has been much on his mind." "And in his name, madam,--in the name of my oldest and best friend,--I
thank you for what you have done for him. I trust that you will allow me
to add that I have learned from my daughter to respect and admire you. I
hope that your son is doing well." "He is, thank you, Colonel Carvel. If he but knew that the Judge were
dying, I could not have kept him at home. Polk says that he must not
leave the house, or undergo any excitement." Just then the door of the inner room opened, and Dr. Brinsmade, and he patted Virginia. "The Judge is still asleep," he said gently. "And--he may not wake up in
this world." Silently, sadly, they went together into that little room where so
much of Judge Whipple's life had been spent. And
how completely they filled it,--these five people and the big Rothfield
covered with the black cloth. Virginia pressed her father's arm as they
leaned against it, and brushed her eyes. The Doctor turned the wick of
the night-lamp. What was that upon the sleeper's face from which they drew back? The divine light which is shed upon those
who have lived for others, who have denied themselves the lusts of the
flesh, For a long space, perhaps an hour, they stayed, silent save for
a low word now and again from the Doctor as he felt the Judge's heart. Tableaux from the past floated before Virginia's eyes. Of the old days,
of the happy days in Locust Street, of the Judge quarrelling with her
father, and she and Captain Lige smiling nearby. And she remembered how
sometimes when the controversy was finished the Judge would rub his nose
and say:

"It's my turn now, Lige." Whereupon the Captain would open the piano, and she would play the hymn
that he liked best. What was it in Silas Whipple's nature that courted the pain of memories? What pleasure could it have been all through his illness to look upon
this silent and cruel reminder of days gone by forever? She had heard
that Stephen Brice had been with the Judge when he had bid it in. She
wondered that he had allowed it, for they said that he was the only
one who had ever been known to break the Judge's will. Virginia's
eyes rested on Margaret Brice, who was seated at the head of the bed,
smoothing the pillows The strength of Stephen's features were in hers,
but not the ruggedness. Her features were large, indeed, yet stanch and
softened. The widow, as if feeling Virginia's look upon her, glanced up
from the Judge's face and smiled at her. The girl  with pleasure,
and again at the thought which she had had of the likeness between
mother and son. Still the Judge slept on, while they watched. And at length the thought
of Clarence crossed Virginia's mind. Whispering to her father, she stole out on tiptoe. Descending to the street, she was unable to gain any news of Clarence
from Ned, who was becoming alarmed likewise. Perplexed and troubled, she climbed the stairs again. No sound came from
the Judge's room Perhaps Clarence would be back at any moment. She sat down to think,--her elbows on the desk
in front of her, her chin in her hand, her eyes at the level of a line
of books which stood on end.--Chitty's Pleadings, Blackstone, Greenleaf
on Evidence. Absently; as a person whose mind is in trouble, she reached
out and took one of them down and opened it. Across the flyleaf, in a
high and bold hand, was written the name, Stephen Atterbury Brice. She dropped the book, and, rising abruptly, crossed quickly to the other
side of the room. Then she turned, hesitatingly, and went back. This was
his desk--his chair, in which he had worked so faithfully for the man
who lay dying beyond the door. For him whom they all loved--whose last
hours they were were to soothe. Wars and schisms may part our bodies,
but stronger ties unite our souls. Through Silas Whipple, through his
mother, Virginia knew that she was woven of one piece with Stephen
Brice. In a thousand ways she was reminded, lest she drive it from her
belief. She might marry another, and that would not matter. She sank again into his chair, and gave herself over to the thoughts
crowding in her heart. How the threads of his life ran next to hers, and
crossed and recrossed them. The slave auction, her dance with him, the
Fair, the meeting at Mr. Brinsmade's gate,--she knew them all. Her dreams of him--for she did dream
of him. And now he had saved Clarence's life that she might marry her
cousin. Again she glanced at the
signature in the book, as if fascinated by the very strength of it. She
turned over a few pages of the book, "Supposing the defendant's counsel
essays to prove by means of--" that was his writing again, a marginal,
note. There were marginal notes on every page--even the last was covered
with them, And then at the end, "First reading, February, 1858. Bought with some of money obtained by first article
for M. That capacity for work, incomparable gift, was what she had
always coveted the most. Again she rested her elbows on the desk and her
chin on her hands, and sighed unconsciously. She had not heard the step on the stair. She did not know that any one wage in the room until she heard his
voice, and then she thought that she was dreaming. Slowly she raised her face to his, unbelief and wonder in her
eyes,--unbelief and wonder and fright. But
when she met the quality of his look, the grave tenderness of it, she
trembled, and our rendered her own to the page where his handwriting
quivered and became a blur. He never knew the effort it cost her to rise and confront him. She
herself had not measured or fathomed the power which his very person
exhaled. He needed not to have
spoken for her to have felt that. She
knew alone that it was nigh irresistible, and she grasped the back of
the chair as though material support might sustain her. "Not--not yet, They are waiting for the end." he asked in grave surprise, glancing at the door of the
Judge's room. "I am waiting for my cousin," she said. Even as she spoke she was with this man again at the Brinsmade gate. Intuition told her that he, too, was
thinking of that time. Now he had found her at his desk, and, as if that
were not humiliation enough, with one of his books taken down and laid
open at his signature. Suffused, she groped for words to carry her on. He was here, and is gone
somewhere." He did not seem to take account of the speech. And his silence--goad
to indiscretion--pressed her to add:-- "You saved him, Mr. I--we
all--thank you so much. And that is not all I want to say. It is a poor
enough acknowledgment of what you did,--for we have not always treated
you well." Her voice faltered almost to faintness, as he raised his hand
in pained protest. But she continued: "I shall regard it as a debt I can
never repay. It is not likely that in my life to come I can ever help
you, but I shall pray for that opportunity." "I did nothing, Miss Carvel, nothing that the most unfeeling man in our
army would not do. Nothing that I would not have done for the merest
stranger." "You saved him for me," she said. She turned away from him for
very shame, and yet she heard him saying:-- "Yes, I saved him for you." His voice was in the very note of the sadness which has the strength
to suffer, to put aside the thought of self. A note to which her soul
responded with anguish when she turned to him with the natural cry of
woman. "Oh, you ought not to have come here to-night. "It does not matter much," he answered. "I guessed it,--because my mother had left me." "Oh, you ought not to have come!" "The Judge has been my benefactor," he answered quietly. "I could walk,
and it was my duty to come." He smiled, "I had no carriage," he said. With the instinct of her sex she seized the chair and placed it under
him. "You must sit down at once," she cried. "But I am not tired," he replied. "Oh, you must sit down, you must, Captain Brice." He started at the
title, which came so prettily from her lips, "Won't you please!" And, as the sun peeps out of a troubled sky, she smiled. He glanced at the book, and the bit of sky was crimson. "It is your book," she stammered. "I did not know that it was yours
when I took it down. I--I was looking at it while I was waiting for
Clarence." "It is dry reading," he remarked, which was not what he wished to say. "And yet--"

"Yes?" The confession had slipped to her
lips. She was sitting on the edge of his desk, looking down at him. All the will that was left him averted his head. And the seal of honor was upon his speech. And he wondered if man were
ever more tempted. Then the evil spread its wings, and soared away into the night. Peace seemed to come upon them both, quieting the
tumult in their hearts, and giving them back their reason. Respect like
wise came to the girl,--respect that was akin to awe. "My mother has me how faithfully you nursed the Judge, Miss Carvel. It
was a very noble thing to do." "Not noble at all," she replied hastily, "your mother did the most of
it, And he is an old friend of my father--"

"It was none the less noble," said Stephen, warmly, "And he quarrelled
with Colonel Carvel." "My father quarrelled with him," she corrected. "It was well that I
should make some atonement. And yet mine was no atonement, I love Judge
Whipple. It was a--a privilege to see your mother every day--oh, how
he would talk of you! I think he loves you better than any one on this
earth." "Tell me about him," said Stephen, gently. Virginia told him, and into the narrative she threw the whole of her
pent-up self. How patient the Judge had been, and the joy he had derived
from Stephen's letters. "You were very good to write to him so often,"
she said. It seemed like a dream to Stephen, like one of the many dreams
of her, the mystery of which was of the inner life beyond our ken. He
could not recall a time when she had not been rebellious, antagonistic. And now--as he listened to her voice, with its exquisite low tones and
modulations, as he sat there in this sacred intimacy, perchance to be
the last in his life, he became dazed. His eyes, softened, with supreme
eloquence cried out that she, was his, forever and forever. The magnetic
force which God uses to tie the worlds together was pulling him to her. Then the door swung open, and Clarence Colfax, out of breath, ran into
the room. He stopped short when he saw them, his hand fell to his sides,
and his words died on his lips. It was Stephen who rose to meet him, and with her eyes the girl followed
his motions. The broad and loosely built frame of the Northerner, his
shoulders slightly stooping, contrasted with Clarence's slighter figure,
erect, compact, springy. The Southerner's eye, for that moment, was
flint struck with the spark from the steel. Stephen's face, thinned by
illness, was grave. For an instant
they stood thus regarding each other, neither offering a hand. It was
Stephen who spoke first, and if there was a trace of emotion in his
voice, one who was listening intently failed to mark it. "I am glad to see that you have recovered, Colonel Colfax," he said. "I should indeed be without gratitude if I did not thank Captain Brice
for my life," answered Clarence. She had detected the
undue accent on her cousin's last words, and she glanced apprehensively
at Stephen. "Miss Carvel has already thanked me sufficiently, sir," he said. "I am
happy to have been able to have done you a good turn, and at the same
time to have served her so well. It is
to her your thanks are chiefly due. I believe that I am not going too
far, Colonel Colfax," he added, "when I congratulate you both." Before her cousin could recover, Virginia slid down from the desk and
had come between them. How her eyes shone and her lip trembled as she
gazed at him, Stephen has never forgotten. What a woman she was as she
took her cousin's arm and made him a curtsey. "What you have done may seem a light thing to you, Captain Brice," she
said. "That is apt to be the way with those who have big hearts. You
have put upon Colonel Colfax, and upon me, a life's obligation." When she began to speak, Clarence raised his head. As he glanced,
incredulous, from her to Stephen, his look gradually softened, and
when she had finished, his manner had become again frank, boyish,
impetuous--nay, penitent. "Forgive me, Brice," he cried. I--I did you an injustice, and you, Virginia. I was a fool--a
scoundrel." "No, you were neither," he said. Then upon his face came the smile of
one who has the strength to renounce, all that is dearest to him--that
smile of the unselfish, sweetest of all. She was to see it once again, upon the features of one who bore a
cross,--Abraham Lincoln. Clarence looked, and then he turned away toward
the door to the stairway, as one who walks blindly, in a sorrow. His hand was on the knob when Virginia seemed to awake. She flew after
him:

"Wait!" Then she raised her eyes, slowly, to Stephen, who was standing
motionless beside his chair. "My father is in the Judge's room," she said. "I thought--"

"That he was an officer in the Confederate Army. She took
a step toward him, appealingly. "Oh, he is not a spy," she cried. "He has given Mr Brinsmade his word
that he came here for no other purpose than to see me. Then he heard
that the Judge was dying--"

"He has given his word to Mr. "Then," said Stephen, "what Mr. Brinsmade sanctions is not for me to
question." She gave him yet another look, a fleeting one which he did not see. Then
she softly opened the door and passed into the room of the dying man. As for Clarence, he stood for a space staring
after them. Then he went noiselessly down the stairs into the street. LEAD, KINDLY LIGHT

When the Judge opened his eyes for the last time in this world, they
fell first upon the face of his old friend, Colonel Carvel. Twice he
tried to speak his name, and twice he failed. The third time he said it
faintly. "Comyn, what are you doing here? "I reckon I came to see you, Silas," answered the Colonel. "To see me die," said the Judge, grimly. Colonel Carvel's face twitched, and the silence in that little room
seemed to throb. "Comyn," said the Judge again, "I heard that you had gone South to fight
against your country. Can it be that you have at last
returned in your allegiances to the flag for which your forefathers
died?" Poor Colonel Carvel

"I am still of the same mind, Silas," he said. The Judge turned his face away, his thin lips moving as in prayer. But
they knew that he was not praying, "Silas," said Mr. Carvel, "we were
friends for twenty years. Let us be friends again, before--"

"Before I die," the Judge interrupted, "I am ready to die. I have had a hard life, Comyn, and few friends. I--I did not know how to make them. Yet no man ever valued those few
more than! But," he cried, the stern fire unquenched to the last, "I
would that God had spared me to see this Rebellion stamped out. To those watching, his eyes seemed fixed on a
distant point, and the light of prophecy was in them. "I would that
God had spared me to see this Union supreme once more. A high destiny is reserved for this nation--! I think the
highest of all on this earth." Amid profound silence he leaned back on
the pillows from which he had risen, his breath coming fast. None dared
look at the neighbor beside them. "Would you not like to see a
clergyman, Judge?" The look on his face softened as he turned to her. "No, madam," he answered; "you are clergyman enough for me. You are near
enough to God--there is no one in this room who is not worthy to stand
in the presence of death. Yet I wish that a clergyman were here, that
he might listen to one thing I have to say. When I was a boy I worked my
way down the river to New York, to see the city. He said to me, 'Sit down, my son, I want to talk to you. I said to him, 'No,
sir, I am not Senator Whipple's son. If the
bishop had wished to talk to me after that, Mrs. Brice, he might have
made my life a little easier--a little sweeter. I know that they are not
all like that. But it was by just such things that I was embittered when
I was a boy." He stopped, and when he spoke again, it was more slowly,
more gently, than any of them had heard him speak in all his life
before. "I wish that some of the blessings which I am leaving now had
come to me then--when I was a boy. I might have done my little share in
making the world a brighter place to live in, as all of you have done. Yes, as all of you are now doing for me. I am leaving the world with a
better opinion of it than I ever held in life. God hid the sun from me
when I was a little child. Margaret Brice," he said, "if I had had such
a mother as you, I would have been softened then. I thank God that He
sent you when He did." The widow bowed her head, and a tear fell upon his pillow. "I have done nothing," she murmured, "nothing." "So shall they answer at the last whom He has chosen," said the Judge. "I was sick, and ye visited me. He has promised to remember those who do
that. He has
given you a son whom all men may look in the face, of whom you need
never be ashamed. Stephen," said the Judge, "come here." Stephen made his way to the bedside, but because of the moisture in his
eyes he saw but dimly the gaunt face. And yet he shrank back in awe at
the change in it. So must all of the martyrs have looked when the
fire of the <DW19>s licked their feet. So must John Bunyan have stared
through his prison bars at the sky. "Stephen," he said, "you have been faithful in a few things. So shall
you be made ruler over many things. The little I have I leave to you,
and the chief of this is an untarnished name. I know that you will be
true to it because I have tried your strength. Listen carefully to what
I have to say, for I have thought over it long. In the days gone by our
fathers worked for the good of the people, and they had no thought of
gain. A time is coming when we shall need that blood and that bone in
this Republic. Wealth not yet dreamed of will flow out of this land, and
the waters of it will rot all save the pure, and corrupt all save the
incorruptible. Half-tried men wilt go down before that flood. You and
those like you will remember how your fathers governed,--strongly,
sternly, justly. Serve your city, serve your state, but above all serve
your country." He paused to catch his breath, which was coming painfully now, and
reached out his bony hand to seek Stephen's. "I was harsh with you at
first, my son," he went on. And when I had tried
you I wished your mind to open, to keep pace with the growth of this
nation. I sent you to see Abraham Lincoln that you might be born
again--in the West. I saw it when you came back--I
saw it in your face. O God," he cried, with sudden eloquence. "I would
that his hands--Abraham Lincoln's hands--might be laid upon all who
complain and cavil and criticise, and think of the little things in
life: I would that his spirit might possess their spirit!" They marvelled and were awed, for never in all his
days had such speech broken from this man. "Good-by, Stephen," he said,
when they thought he was not to speak again. "Hold the image of Abraham
Lincoln in front of you. You--you are a man after his
own heart--and--and mine." They started for ward, for his eyes
were closed. But presently he stirred again, and opened them. "Brinsmade," he said, "Brinsmade, take care of my orphan girls. The <DW64> came forth, shuffling and sobbing, from the doorway. "You ain't gwine away, Marse Judge?" "Yes, Shadrach, good-by. You have served me well, I have left you
provided for." Shadrach kissed the hand of whose secret charity he knew so much. Then
the Judge withdrew it, and motioned to him to rise. And Colonel Carvel came from the corner where he had
been listening, with his face drawn. You were my friend when there was none other. You were
true to me when the hand of every man was against me. You--you have
risked your life to come to me here, May God spare it for Virginia." At the sound of her name, the girl started. And when she kissed him on the forehead, he trembled. Weakly he reached up and put his hands on her shoulders. The tears came and lay wet upon her lashes as she undid the
button at his throat. There, on a piece of cotton twine, hung a little key, She took it off,
but still his hands held her. "I have saved it for you, my dear," he said. "God bless you--" why did
his eyes seek Stephen's?--"and make your life happy. Virginia--will you
play my hymn--once more--once more?" They lifted the night lamp from the piano, and the medicine. It was
Stephen who stripped it of the black cloth it had worn, who stood by
Virginia ready to lift the lid when she had turned the lock. The girl's
exaltation gave a trembling touch divine to the well-remembered chords,
and those who heard were lifted, lifted far above and beyond the power
of earthly spell. "Lead, Kindly Light, amid the encircling gloom
        Lead Thou me on
        The night is dark, and I am far from home;
        Lead Thou me on. I do not ask to see
        The distant scene; one step enough for me." A sigh shook Silas Whipple's wasted frame, and he died. Brinsmade and the Doctor were the first to leave the little room
where Silas Whipple had lived and worked and died, Mr. Brinsmade bent
upon one of those errands which claimed him at all times. Virginia sat on, a vague fear haunting her,--a fear
for her father's safety. These questions, at first intruding upon her sorrow,
remained to torture her. Softly she stirred from the chair where she had sat before the piano,
and opened the door of the outer office. A clock in a steeple near by
was striking twelve. Only Stephen
saw her go; she felt his eyes following her, and as she slipped out
lifted hers to meet them for a brief instant through the opening of the
door. First of all she knew that the light in the outer office was burning
dimly, and the discovery gave her a shock. Fearfully searching the room for him, her gaze
was held by a figure in the recess of the window at the back of the
room. A solid, bulky figure it was, and, though uncertainly outlined
in the semi-darkness, she knew it. She took a step nearer, and a cry
escaped her. The man was Eliphalet Hopper. He got down from the sill with a motion
at once sheepish and stealthy. Her breath caught, and instinctively she
gave back toward the door, as if to open it again. "I've got something I want to say to you, Miss
Virginia." But she
shivered and paused, horrified at the thought of what she was about to
do. Her father was in that room--and Stephen. She must keep them there,
and get this man away. She must not show fright before him, and yet she
could not trust her voice to speak just then. She must not let him know
that she was afraid of him--this she kept repeating to herself. Virginia never knew how she gathered the courage to pass him, even
swiftly, and turn up the gas. He started back, blinking as the
jet flared. For a moment she stood beside it, with her head high;
confronting him and striving to steady herself for speech. "Judge Whipple--died--to-night." The dominating note in his answer was a whine, as if, in spite of
himself, he were awed. "I ain't here to see the Judge." She felt her
lips moving, but knew not whether the words had come. The look in his little eyes was the filmy look of
those of an animal feasting. "I came here to see you," he said, "--you." She was staring at him now,
in horror. "And if you don't give me what I want, I cal'late to see some
one else--in there," said Mr. He smiled, for she was swaying, her lids half closed. By a supreme
effort she conquered her terror and looked at him. The look was in his
eyes still, intensified now. "How dare you speak to me after what has happened! If Colonel
Carvel were here, he would--kill you." He flinched at the name and the word, involuntarily. He wiped his
forehead, hot at the very thought. Then,
remembering his advantage, he stepped close to her. "He is here," he said, intense now. "He is here, in that there room." Virginia struggled, and yet she refrained from crying
out. "He never leaves this city without I choose. I can have him hung if
I choose," he whispered, next to her. she cried; "oh, if you choose!" Still his body crept closer, and his face closer. "There's but one price to pay," he said hoarsely, "there's but one price
to pay, and that's you--you. I cal'late you'll marry me now." Delirious at the touch of her, he did not hear the door open. Her senses
were strained for that very sound. She heard it close again, and a
footstep across the room. She knew the step--she knew the voice, and her
heart leaped at the sound of it in anger. An arm in a blue sleeve came
between them, and Eliphalet Hopper staggered and fell across the books
on the table, his hand to his face. Towered was the impression that came to Virginia then, and so she
thought of the scene ever afterward. Small bits, like points of tempered
steel, glittered in Stephen's eyes, and his hands following up the
mastery he had given them clutched Mr. Twice Stephen
shook him so that his head beat upon the table. he cried, but he kept his voice low. And then, as if
he expected Hopper to reply: "Shall I kill you?" He turned slowly, and his hands fell from
Mr. Hopper's cowering form as his eyes met hers. Even he could not
fathom the appeal, the yearning, in their dark blue depths. And yet what
he saw there made him tremble. "He--he won't touch me again while you
are here." Eliphalet Hopper raised himself from the desk, and one of the big books
fell with a crash to the floor. Then they saw him shrink, his eyes fixed
upon some one behind them. Before the Judge's door stood Colonel Carvel,
in calm, familiar posture, his feet apart, and his head bent forward as
he pulled at his goatee. "What is this man doing here, Virginia?" She did not answer
him, nor did speech seem to come easily to Mr. Perhaps the sight of Colonel Carvel had brought before him too, vividly
the memory of that afternoon at Glencoe. All at once Virginia grasped the fulness of the power in this man's
hands. At a word from him her father would be shot as a spy--and Stephen
Brice, perhaps, as a traitor. But if Colonel Carvel should learn that he
had seized her,--here was the terrible danger of the situation. Well she
knew what the Colonel would do. She trusted in
his coolness that he would not. Before a word of reply came from any of the three, a noise was heard
on the stairway. There followed four seconds
of suspense, and then Clarence came in. She saw that his face wore a
worried, dejected look. It changed instantly when he glanced about
him, and an oath broke from his lips as he singled out Eliphalet Hopper
standing in sullen aggressiveness, beside the table. "So you're the spy, are you?" Then he turned his
back and faced his uncle. "I saw, him in Williams's entry as we drove
up. He strode to the open window at the back
of the office, and looked out, There was a roof under it. "The sneak got in here," he said. "He knew I was waiting for him in the
street. Hopper passed a heavy hand across the cheek where Stephen had struck
him. "No, I ain't the spy," he said, with a meaning glance at the Colonel. "I cal'late that he knows," Eliphalet replied, jerking his head toward
Colonel Carvel. What's to prevent my
calling up the provost's guard below?" he continued, with a smile that
was hideous on his swelling face. It was the Colonel who answered him, very quickly and very clearly. Stephen, who was watching him, could not tell
whether it were a grim smile that creased the corners of the Colonel's
mouth as he added. Hopper did not move, but his eyes shifted to Virginia's form. Stephen deliberately thrust himself between them that he might not see
her. said the Colonel, in the mild voice that
should have been an ominous warning. It
was clear that he had not reckoned upon all of this; that he had waited
in the window to deal with Virginia alone. But now the very force of a
desire which had gathered strength in many years made him reckless. His
voice took on the oily quality in which he was wont to bargain. "Let's be calm about this business, Colonel," he said. "We won't say
anything about the past. But I ain't set on having you shot. There's a
consideration that would stop me, and I cal'late you know what it is." But before he had taken a step Virginia
had crossed the room swiftly, and flung herself upon him. The last word came falteringly,
faintly. "Let me go,--honey," whispered the Colonel, gently. His eyes did not
leave Eliphalet. He tried to disengage himself, but her fingers were
clasped about his neck in a passion of fear and love. And then, while
she clung to him, her head was raised to listen. The sound of Stephen
Brice's voice held her as in a spell. His words were coming coldly,
deliberately, and yet so sharply that each seemed to fall like a lash. Hopper, if ever I hear of your repeating what you have seen or
heard in this room, I will make this city and this state too hot for
you to live in. I know how you hide in areas, how you talk
sedition in private, how you have made money out of other men's misery. And, what is more, I can prove that you have had traitorous dealings
with the Confederacy. General Sherman has been good enough to call
himself a friend of mine, and if he prosecutes you for your dealings
in Memphis, you will get a term in a Government prison, You ought to be
hung. FROM THE LETTERS OF MAJOR STEPHEN BRICE

Of the Staff of General Sherman on the March to the Sea, and on the
March from Savannah Northward. HEADQUARTERS MILITARY DIVISION OF THE MISSISSIPPI GOLDSBORO, N.C. MARCH
24, 1865

DEAR MOTHER: The South Carolina Campaign is a thing of the past. I pause
as I write these words--they seem so incredible to me. We have marched
the four hundred and twenty-five miles in fifty days, and the General
himself has said that it is the longest and most important march ever
made by an organized army in a civilized country. I know that you will
not be misled by the words "civilized country." Not until the history of
this campaign is written will the public realize the wide rivers and
all but impassable swamps we have crossed with our baggage trains and
artillery. The roads (by courtesy so called) were a sea of molasses and
every mile of them has had to be corduroyed. For fear of worrying you I
did not write you from Savannah how they laughed at us for starting at
that season of the year. They said we would not go ten miles, and I most
solemnly believe that no one but "Uncle Billy" and an army organized and
equipped by him could have gone ten miles. You have probably remarked in the tone of my letters ever since we left
Kingston for the sea, a growing admiration for "my General." It seems very strange that this wonderful tactician can be the same man
I met that day going to the Arsenal in the streetcar, and again at Camp
Jackson. I am sure that history will give him a high place among the
commanders of the world. Certainly none was ever more tireless than
he. He never fights a battle when it can be avoided, and his march into
Columbia while threatening Charleston and Augusta was certainly a master
stroke of strategy. You should see him as
he rides through the army, an erect figure, with his clothes all angular
and awry, and an expanse of white sock showing above his low shoes. You can hear his name running from file to file; and some times the
new regiments can't resist cheering. He generally says to the
Colonel:--"Stop that noise, sir. On our march to the sea, if the orders were ever given to turn
northward, "the boys" would get very much depressed. One moonlight night
I was walking my horse close to the General's over the pine needles,
when we overheard this conversation between two soldiers:-- "Say, John,"
said one, "I guess Uncle Billy don't know our corps is goin' north." "I wonder if he does,'" said John. "If I could only get a sight of them
white socks, I'd know it was all right." The General rode past without a word, but I heard him telling the story
to Mower the next day. I can find little if any change in his manner since I knew him first. He is brusque, but kindly, and he has the same comradeship with officers
and men--and even the <DW64>s who flock to our army. But few dare to
take advantage of it, and they never do so twice. I have been very near
to him, and have tried not to worry him or ask many foolish questions. Sometimes on the march he will beckon me to close up to him, and we have
a conversation something on this order:-- "There's Kenesaw, Brice." "Went beyond lines there with small party. Next day I thought Rebels would leave in the night. Got up before daylight, fixed telescope on stand, and waited. Saw one blue man creep up, very cautious,
looked around, waved his hat. This gives you but a faint idea of the vividness of his talk. When we
make a halt for any time, the general officers and their staffs flock
to headquarters to listen to his stories. When anything goes wrong, his
perception of it is like a lightning flash,--and he acts as quickly. By the way, I have just found the letter he wrote me, offering this
staff position. Please keep it carefully, as it is something I shall
value all my life. GAYLESVILLE, ALABAMA, October 25, 1864. MAJOR STEPHEN A. BRICE:

   Dear Sir,--The world goes on, and wicked men sound asleep. Davis
   has sworn to destroy my army, and Beauregard has come to do the
   work,--so if you expect to share in our calamity, come down. I
   offer you this last chance for staff duty, and hope you have had
   enough in the field. I do not wish to hurry you, but you can't get
   aboard a ship at sea. So if you want to make the trip, come to
   Chattanooga and take your chances of meeting me. Yours truly,

                  W. T. SHERMAN, Major General. One night--at Cheraw, I think it was--he sent for me to talk to him. I
found him lying on a bed of Spanish moss they had made for him. He asked
me a great many questions about St. Brinsmade,
especially his management of the Sanitary Commission. "Brice," he said, after a while, "you remember when Grant sent me to
beat off Joe Johnston's army from Vicksburg. You were wounded then, by
the way, in that dash Lauman made. Grant thought he ought to warn me
against Johnston. "'He's wily, Sherman,' said he. "'Grant,' said I, 'you give me men enough and time enough to look over
the ground, and I'm not afraid of the devil.'" Nothing could sum up the man better than that. And now what a trick of
fate it is that he has Johnston before him again, in what we hope will
prove the last gasp of the war! He likes Johnston, by the way, and has
the greatest respect for him. I wish you could have peeped into our camp once in a while. In the rare
bursts of sunshine on this march our premises have been decorated with
gay red blankets, and sombre gray ones brought from the quartermasters,
and white Hudson's Bay blankets (not so white now), all being between
forked sticks. It is wonderful how the pitching of a few tents, and the
busy crackle of a few fires, and the sound of voices--sometimes merry,
sometimes sad, depending on the weather, will change the look of a
lonely pine knoll. I should be heartily ashamed
if a word of complaint ever fell from my lips. Whenever I
wake up at night with my feet in a puddle between the blankets, I think
of the men. The corduroy roads which our horses stumble over through the
mud, they make as well as march on. Our flies are carried in wagons,
and our utensils and provisions. They must often bear on their backs the
little dog-tents, under which, put up by their own labor, they crawl
to sleep, wrapped in a blanket they have carried all day, perhaps waist
deep in water. The food they eat has been in their haversacks for many a
weary mile, and is cooked in the little skillet and pot which have
also been a part of their burden. Then they have their musket and
accoutrements, and the "forty rounds" at their backs. Patiently,
cheerily tramping along, going they know not where, nor care much
either, so it be not in retreat. Ready to make roads, throw up works,
tear up railroads, or hew out and build wooden bridges; or, best of all,
to go for the Johnnies under hot sun or heavy rain, through swamp and
mire and quicksand. They marched ten miles to storm Fort McAllister. And
how the cheers broke from them when the pop pop pop of the skirmish line
began after we came in sight of Savannah! No man who has seen but not
shared their life may talk of personal hardship. We arrived at this pretty little town yesterday, so effecting a junction
with Schofield, who got in with the 3d Corps the day before. I am
writing at General Schofield's headquarters. There was a bit of a battle
on Tuesday at Bentonville, and we have come hither in smoke, as usual. But this time we thank Heaven that it is not the smoke of burning
homes,--only some resin the "Johnnies" set on fire before they left. ON BOARD DESPATCH BOAT "MARTIN." DEAR MOTHER: A most curious thing has happened. But I may as well begin
at the beginning. When I stopped writing last evening at the summons
of the General, I was about to tell you something of the battle of
Bentonville on Tuesday last. Mower charged through as bad a piece
of wood and swamp as I ever saw, and got within one hundred yards of
Johnston himself, who was at the bridge across Mill Creek. Of course we
did not know this at the time, and learned it from prisoners. As I have written you, I have been under fire very little since coming
to the staff. When the battle opened, however, I saw that if I stayed
with the General (who was then behind the reserves) I would see little
or nothing; I went ahead "to get information" beyond the line of battle
into the woods. I did not find these favorable to landscape views, and
just as I was turning my horse back again I caught sight of a commotion
some distance to my right. The Rebel skirmish line had fallen back just
that instant, two of our skirmishers were grappling with a third man,
who was fighting desperately. It struck me as singular that the fellow
was not in gray, but had on some sort of dark clothes. I could not reach them in the swamp on horseback, and was in the act of
dismounting when the man fell, and then they set out to carry him to the
rear, still farther to my right, beyond the swamp. I shouted, and one of
the skirmishers came up. "We've got a spy, sir," he said excitedly. He was hid in the thicket yonder, lying flat on his face. He reckoned that our boys would run right over him and that he'd get
into our lines that way. Tim Foley stumbled on him, and he put up as
good a fight with his fists as any man I ever saw." That night I told the General, who
sent over to the headquarters of the 17th Corps to inquire. The word
came back that the man's name was Addison, and he claimed to be a Union
sympathizer who owned a plantation near by. He declared that he had been
conscripted by the Rebels, wounded, sent back home, and was now about to
be pressed in again. He had taken this method of escaping to our lines. It was a common story enough, but General Mower added in his message
that he thought the story fishy. This was because the man's appearance
was very striking, and he seemed the type of Confederate fighter who
would do and dare anything. He had a wound, which had been a bad one,
evidently got from a piece of shell. But they had been able to find
nothing on him. Sherman sent back word to keep the man until he could
see him in person. It was about nine o'clock last night when I reached
the house the General has taken. A prisoner's guard was resting outside,
and the hall was full of officers. They said that the General was
awaiting me, and pointed to the closed door of a room that had been the
dining room. Two candles were burning in pewter sticks on the bare mahogany table. There was the General sitting beside them, with his legs crossed,
holding some crumpled tissue paper very near his eyes, and reading. He
did not look up when I entered. I was aware of a man standing, tall and
straight, just out of range of the candles' rays. He wore the easy dress
of a Southern planter, with the broad felt hat. The head was flung back
so that there was just a patch of light on the chin, and the lids of the
eyes in the shadow were half closed. For the moment I felt precisely as I
had when I was hit by that bullet in Lauman's charge. I was aware of
something very like pain, yet I could not place the cause of it. But
this is what since has made me feel queer: you doubtless remember
staying at Hollingdean, when I was a boy, and hearing the story of Lord
Northwell's daredevil Royalist ancestor,--the one with the lace collar
over the dull-gold velvet, and the pointed chin, and the lazy scorn in
the eyes. Those eyes are painted with drooping lids. The first time I
saw Clarence Colfax I thought of that picture--and now I thought of the
picture first. "Major Brice, do you know this gentleman?" "His name is Colfax, sir--Colonel Colfax, I think"

"Thought so," said the General. I have thought much of that scene since, as I am steaming northward over
green seas and under cloudless skies, and it has seemed very unreal. I
should almost say supernatural when I reflect how I have run across this
man again and again, and always opposing him. I can recall just how he
looked at the slave auction, which seem, so long ago: very handsome,
very boyish, and yet with the air of one to be deferred to. It was
sufficiently remarkable that I should have found him in Vicksburg. But
now--to be brought face to face with him in this old dining room in
Goldsboro! I did not know how he
would act, but I went up to him and held out my hand, and said.--"How do
you do, Colonel Colfax?" I am sure that my voice was not very steady, for I cannot help liking
him And then his face lighted up and he gave me his hand. And he smiled
at me and again at the General, as much as to say that it was all over. "We seem to run into each other, Major Brice," said he. I could see that the General, too,
was moved, from the way he looked at him. And he speaks a little more
abruptly at such times. "Guess that settles it, Colonel," he said. "I reckon it does, General," said Clarence, still smiling. The General
turned from him to the table with a kind of jerk and clapped his hand on
the tissue paper. "These speak for themselves, sir," he said. "It is very plain that they
would have reached the prominent citizens for whom they were intended if
you had succeeded in your enterprise. You were captured out of uniform
You know enough of war to appreciate the risk you ran. "Call Captain Vaughan, Brice, and ask him to conduct the prisoner back." I asked him if I could write home for him or do anything else. Some day I shall tell you what he said. Then Vaughan took him out, and I heard the guard shoulder arms and tramp
away in the night. The General and I were left alone with the mahogany
table between us, and a family portrait of somebody looking down on
us from the shadow on the wall. A moist spring air came in at the open
windows, and the candles flickered. After a silence, I ventured to say:

"I hope he won't be shot, General." "Don't know, Brice," he answered. Hate to shoot him,
but war is war. Magnificent class he belongs to--pity we should have to
fight those fellows." He paused, and drummed on the table. "Brice," said he, "I'm going to
send you to General Grant at City Point with despatches. I'm sorry Dunn
went back yesterday, but it can't be helped. "You'll have to ride to Kinston. The railroad won't be through until
to-morrow: I'll telegraph there, and to General Easton at Morehead City. Tell Grant I expect to run up there in a
day or two myself, when things are arranged here. I turned to go, but Clarence Colfax was on my mind "General?" "General, could you hold Colonel Colfax until I see you again?" It was a bold thing to say, and I quaked. And he looked at me in his
keen way, through and through "You saved his life once before, didn't
you?" "You allowed me to have him sent home from Vicksburg, sir." He answered with one of his jokes--apropos of something he said on the
Court House steps at Vicksburg. "Well, well," he said, "I'll see, I'll see. Thank God this war is pretty
near over. I'll let you know, Brice, before I shoot him." I rode the thirty odd miles to Kinston in--little more than three hours. A locomotive was waiting for me, and I jumped into a cab with a friendly
engineer. Soon we were roaring seaward through the vast pine forests. It was a lonely journey, and you were much in my mind. My greatest
apprehension was that we might be derailed and the despatches captured;
for as fast as our army had advanced, the track of it had closed again,
like the wake of a ship at sea. Guerillas were roving about, tearing up
ties and destroying bridges. There was one five-minute interval of excitement when, far down the
tunnel through the forest, we saw a light gleaming. The engineer said
there was no house there, that it must be a fire. But we did not slacken
our speed, and gradually the leaping flames grew larger and redder until
we were upon them. Not one gaunt figure stood between them and us. Not one shot broke the
stillness of the night. As dawn broke I beheld the flat, gray waters of
the Sound stretching away to the eastward, and there was the boat at the
desolate wharf beside the warehouse, her steam rising white in the chill
morning air. THE SAME, CONTINUED

             HEADQUARTERS ARMIES OF THE UNITED STATES,
              CITY POINT, VIRGINIA, March 28, 1865. DEAR MOTHER: I arrived here safely the day before yesterday, and I hope
that you will soon receive some of the letters I forwarded on that day. It is an extraordinary place, this City Point; a military city sprung up
like a mushroom in a winter. And my breath was quite taken away when I
first caught sight of it on the high table-land. The great bay in front
of it, which the Appomattox helps to make, is a maze of rigging and
smoke-pipes, like the harbor of a prosperous seaport. There are gunboats
and supply boats, schooners and square-riggers and steamers, all huddled
together, and our captain pointed out to me the 'Malvern' flying Admiral
Porter's flag. Barges were tied up at the long wharves, and these were
piled high with wares and flanked by squat warehouses. Although it
was Sunday, a locomotive was puffing and panting along the foot of the
ragged bank. High above, on the flat promontory between the two rivers, is the city
of tents and wooden huts, the great trees in their fresh faint green
towering above the low roofs. At the point of the bluff a large flag
drooped against its staff, and I did not have to be told that this was
General Grant's headquarters. There was a fine steamboat lying at the wharf, and I had hardly stepped
ashore before they told me she was President Lincoln's. I read the name
on her--the 'River Queen'. Yes, the President is here, too, with his
wife and family. There are many fellows here with whom I was brought up in Boston. I am
living with Jack Hancock, whom you will remember well. He is a captain
now, and has a beard. I went straight to General Grant's
headquarters,--just a plain, rough slat house such as a contractor might
build for a temporary residence. Only the high flagstaff and the Stars
and Stripes distinguish it from many others of the same kind. A group of
officers stood chatting outside of it, and they told me that the General
had walked over to get his mail. He is just as unassuming and democratic
as "my general." General Rankin took me into the office, a rude room,
and we sat down at the long table there. Presently the door opened,
and a man came in with a slouch hat on and his coat unbuttoned. We rose to our feet, and I saluted. "General, this is Major Brice of General Sherman's staff. He has brought
despatches from Goldsboro," said Rankin. He nodded, took off his hat and laid it on the table, and reached out
for the despatches. While reading them he did not move, except to light
another cigar. I am getting hardened to unrealities,--perhaps I should
say marvels, now. It did not seem so
strange that this silent General with the baggy trousers was the man who
had risen by leaps and bounds in four years to be general-in-chief of
our armies. His face looks older and more sunken than it did on that
day in the street near the Arsenal, in St. Louis, when he was just a
military carpet-bagger out of a job. But
how different the impressions made by the man in authority and the same
man out of authority! He made a sufficient impression upon me then, as I told you at the time. That was because I overheard his well-merited rebuke to Hopper. But I
little dreamed that I was looking on the man who was to come out of the
West and save this country from disunion. And how quietly and simply he
has done it, without parade or pomp or vainglory. Of all those who, with
every means at their disposal, have tried to conquer Lee, he is the
only one who has in any manner succeeded. He has been able to hold him
fettered while Sherman has swept the Confederacy. And these are the two
men who were unknown when the war began. When the General had finished reading the despatches, he folded them
quickly and put them in his pocket. "Sit down and tell me about this last campaign of yours, Major," he
said. I talked with him for about half an hour. He is a marked contrast to Sherman in this respect. I believe that
he only opened his lips to ask two questions. You may well believe that
they were worth the asking, and they revealed an intimate knowledge of
our march from Savannah. I was interrupted many times by the arrival
of different generals, aides, etc. He sat there smoking, imperturbable. Sometimes he said "yes" or "no," but oftener he merely nodded his head. Once he astounded by a brief question an excitable young lieutenant, who
floundered. The General seemed to know more than he about the matter he
had in hand. When I left him, he asked me where I was quartered, and said he hoped I
would be comfortable. Jack Hancock was waiting for me, and we walked around the city, which
even has barber shops. Everywhere were signs of preparation, for the
roads are getting dry, and the General preparing for a final campaign
against Lee. What a marvellous fight he has made with his
material. I think that he will be reckoned among the greatest generals
of our race. Of course, I was very anxious to get a glimpse of the President, and
so we went down to the wharf, where we heard that he had gone off for
a horseback ride. They say that he rides nearly every day, over the
corduroy roads and through the swamps, and wherever the boys see that
tall hat they cheer. They know it as well as the lookout tower on the
flats of Bermuda Hundred. He lingers at the campfires and swaps stories
with the officers, and entertains the sick and wounded in the hospitals. I believe that the great men don't change. Away with your Napoleons and your Marlboroughs and your Stuarts. These
are the days of simple men who command by force of character, as well as
knowledge. I believe that he will change the
world, and strip it of its vainglory and hypocrisy. In the evening, as we were sitting around Hancock's fire, an officer
came in. "The President sends his compliments, Major, and wants to know if you
would care to pay him a little visit." If I would care to pay him a little visit! That officer had to hurry to
keep up with the as I walked to the wharf. He led me aboard the River
Queen, and stopped at the door of the after-cabin. Lincoln was sitting under the lamp, slouched down in his chair,
in the position I remembered so well. It was as if I had left him but
yesterday. He was whittling, and he had made some little toy for his son
Tad, who ran out as I entered. When he saw me, the President rose to his great height, a sombre,
towering figure in black. But the sad
smile, the kindly eyes in their dark caverns, the voice--all were just
the same. It was sad and lined
when I had known it, but now all the agony endured by the millions,
North and South, seemed written on it. I took his big, bony hand,
which reminded me of Judge Whipple's. Yes, it was just as if I had been
with him always, and he were still the gaunt country lawyer. "Yes, sir," I said, "indeed I do." He looked at me with that queer expression of mirth he sometimes has. I didn't
think that any man could travel so close to Sherman and keep 'em." "They're unfortunate ways, sir," I said, "if they lead you to misjudge
me." He laid his hand on my shoulder, just as he had done at Freeport. "I know you, Steve," he said. "I shuck an ear of corn before I buy it. I've kept tab on you a little the last five years, and when I heard
Sherman had sent a Major Brice up here, I sent for you." "I tried very hard to get a glimpse of you
to-day, Mr. "I'm glad to hear it, Steve," he said. "Then you haven't joined the
ranks of the grumblers? You haven't been one of those who would have
liked to try running this country for a day or two, just to show me how
to do it?" "No, sir," I said, laughing. "I didn't think you were that kind,
Steve. Now sit down and tell me about this General of mine who wears
seven-leagued boots. What was it--four hundred and twenty miles in fifty
days? How many navigable rivers did he step across?" He began to count
on those long fingers of his. "The Edisto, the Broad, the Catawba, the
Pedee, and--?" "Is--is the General a nice man?" "Yes, sir, he is that," I answered heartily. "And not a man in the
army wants anything when he is around. You should see that Army of the
Mississippi, sir. They arrived in Goldsboro' in splendid condition." He got up and gathered his coat-tails under his arms, and began to walk
up and down the cabin. And, thinking the story of the white socks
might amuse him, I told him that. "Well, now," he said, "any man that has a nickname like that is all
right. That's the best recommendation you can give the General--just
say 'Uncle Billy.'" "You've given 'Uncle
Billy' a good recommendation, Steve," he said. "Did you ever hear the
story of Mr. "Well, when Wallace was hiring his gardener he asked him whom he had
been living with. "'A ricommindation is it, sorr? Sure I have nothing agin Misther
Dalton, though he moightn't be knowing just the respict the likes of a
first-class garthener is entitled to.'" He seldom does, it seems, at his own stories. But
I could not help laughing over the "ricommindation" I had given the
General. He knew that I was embarrassed, and said kindly:-- "Now tell
me something about 'Uncle Billy's <DW15>s.' I hear that they have a most
effectual way of tearing up railroads." I told him of Poe's contrivance of the hook and chain, and how the
heaviest rails were easily overturned with it, and how the ties were
piled and fired and the rails twisted out of shape. The President
listened to every word with intense interest. he exclaimed, "we have got a general. Caesar burnt his
bridges behind him, but Sherman burns his rails. Then I began to tell him how
the <DW64>s had flocked into our camps, and how simply and plainly the
General had talked to them, advising them against violence of any kind,
and explaining to them that "Freedom" meant only the liberty to earn
their own living in their own way, and not freedom from work. "We have got a general, sure enough," he cried. "He talks to them
plainly, does he, so that they understand? I say to you, Brice," he went
on earnestly, "the importance of plain talk can't be overestimated. Any
thought, however abstruse, can be put in speech that a boy or a
<DW64> can grasp. Any book, however deep, can be written in terms that
everybody can comprehend, if a man only tries hard enough. When I was a
boy I used to hear the neighbors talking, and it bothered me so because
I could not understand them that I used to sit up half the night
thinking things out for myself. I remember that I did not know what the
word demonstrate meant. So I stopped my studies then and there and got a
volume of Euclid. Before I got through I could demonstrate everything in
it, and I have never been bothered with demonstrate since." I thought of those wonderfully limpid speeches of his: of the Freeport
debates, and of the contrast between his style and Douglas's. And I
understood the reason for it at last. I understood the supreme mind that
had conceived the Freeport Question. And as I stood before him then, at
the close of this fearful war, the words of the Gospel were in my mind. 'So the last shall be first, and the first, last; for many be called,
but few chosen.' How I wished that all those who have maligned and tortured him could
talk with him as I had talked with him. To know his great heart would
disarm them of all antagonism. They would feel, as I feel, that his life
is so much nobler than theirs, and his burdens so much heavier, that
they would go away ashamed of their criticism. He said to me once, "Brice, I hope we are in sight of the end, now. I
hope that we may get through without any more fighting. I don't want to
see any more of our countrymen killed. And then," he said, as if talking
to himself, "and then we must show them mercy--mercy." I thought it a good time to mention Colfax's case. He has been on my
mind ever since. Once he sighed, and
he was winding his long fingers around each other while I talked. Lincoln," I concluded, "And if a
technicality will help him out, he was actually within his own skirmish
line at the time. The Rebel skirmishers had not fallen back on each side
of him." "Brice," he said, with that sorrowful smile, "a technicality might save
Colfax, but it won't save me. And I went on to tell of what he had done at Vicksburg, leaving
out, however, my instrumentality in having him sent north. (That seems to be a favorite expression of
his.) If it wasn't for them, the
South would have quit long ago." Then he looked at me in his funny way,
and said, "See here, Steve, if this Colfax isn't exactly a friend of
yours, there must be some reason why you are pleading for him in this
way." "Well, sir," I said, at length, "I should like to get him off on account
of his cousin, Miss Virginia Carvel. And I told him something about
Miss Carvel, and how she had helped you with the Union sergeant that day
in the hot hospital. And how she had nursed Judge Whipple." "She's a fine woman," he said. "Those women have helped those men to
prolong this war about three years." "And yet we must save them for the nation's sake. They are to be the
mothers of our patriots in days to come. Is she a friend of yours, too,
Steve?" "Not especially, sir," I answered finally. "I have had to offend her
rather often. he cried, jumping up, "she's a daughter of Colonel Carvel. I
always had an admiration for that man. An ideal Southern gentleman of
the old school,--courteous, as honorable and open as the day, and as
brave as a lion. You've heard the story of how he threw a man named
Babcock out of his store, who tried to bribe him?" "I heard you tell it in that tavern, sir. It
did me good to hear the Colonel praised. "I always liked that story," he said. "By the way, what's become of the
Colonel?" "He got away--South, sir," I answered. He hasn't
been heard of since the summer of '63. And so
you want me to pardon this Colfax?" "It would be presumptuous in me to go that far, sir," I replied. "But I
hoped you might speak of it to the General when he comes. And I would be
glad of the opportunity to testify." He took a few strides up and down the room. "Well, well," he said, "that's my vice--pardoning, saying yes. It's
always one more drink with me. It--" he smiled--"it makes me sleep
better. I've pardoned enough Rebels to populate New Orleans. Why," he
continued, with his whimsical look, "just before I left Washington, in
comes one of your Missouri senators with a list of Rebels who are shut
up in McDowell's and Alton. I said:-- "'Senator, you're not going to ask
me to turn loose all those at once?' "He said just what you said when you were speaking of Missouri a while
ago, that he was afraid of guerilla warfare, and that the war was nearly
over. And then what does he do but pull out another batch
longer than the first! you don't want me to turn these loose, too?' I think it will pay to be merciful.' "'Then durned if I don't,' I said, and I signed 'em." STEAMER "RIVER QUEEN." ON THE POTOMAC, April 9, 1865. DEAR MOTHER: I am glad that the telegrams I have been able to send
reached you safely. I have not had time to write, and this will be but a
short letter. I am on the President's boat,
in the President's party, bound with him for Washington. And this is how
it happened: The very afternoon of the day I wrote you, General Sherman
himself arrived at City Point on the steamer 'Russia'. I heard the
salutes, and was on the wharf to meet him. That same afternoon he and
General Grant and Admiral Porter went aboard the River Queen to see
the President. How I should have liked to be present at that interview! After it was over they all came out of the cabin together General Grant
silent, and smoking, as usual; General Sherman talking vivaciously;
and Lincoln and the Admiral smiling and listening. I shall never expect to see such a sight again in all my days. You
can imagine my surprise when the President called me from where I was
standing at some distance with the other officers. He put his hand on my
shoulder then and there, and turned to General Sherman. "Major Brice is a friend of mine, General," he said. "He never told me that," said the General. "I guess he's got a great many important things shut up inside of him,"
said Mr. "But he gave you a good recommendation,
Sherman. He said that you wore white socks, and that the boys liked
you and called you 'Uncle Billy.' And I told him that was the best
recommendation he could give anybody." But the General only looked at me with those eyes that
go through everything, and then he laughed. "Brice," he said, "You'll have my reputation ruined." Lincoln, "you don't want the Major right away, do
you? Let him stay around here for a while with me. He looked at the general-in-chief, who was smiling just
a little bit. "I've got a sneaking notion that Grant's going to do
something." Lincoln," said my General, "you may have Brice. Be
careful he doesn't talk you to death--he's said too much already." I have no time now to tell you all that I have seen and heard. I have
ridden with the President, and have gone with him on errands of mercy
and errands of cheer. I have been almost within sight of what we hope is
the last struggle of this frightful war. I have listened to the guns of
Five Forks, where Sheridan and Warren bore their own colors in the front
of the charge, I was with Mr. Lincoln while the battle of Petersburg was
raging, and there were tears in his eyes. Then came the retreat of Lee and the instant pursuit of Grant,
and--Richmond. The quiet General did not so much as turn aside to enter
the smoking city he had besieged for so long. But I went there, with the
President. And if I had one incident in my life to live over again, I
should choose this. As we were going up the river, a disabled steamer
lay across the passage in the obstruction of piles the Confederates had
built. There were but a few of us in his
party, and we stepped into Admiral Porter's twelve-oared barge and were
rowed to Richmond, the smoke of the fires still darkening the sky. We
landed within a block of Libby Prison. With the little guard of ten sailors he marched the mile and a half
to General Weitzel's headquarters,--the presidential mansion of the
Confederacy. I shall remember him always as
I saw him that day, a tall, black figure of sorrow, with the high silk
hat we have learned to love. Unafraid, his heart rent with pity, he
walked unharmed amid such tumult as I have rarely seen. The windows
filled, the streets ahead of us became choked, as the word that the
President was coming ran on like quick-fire. The <DW64>s wept aloud and cried
hosannas. They pressed upon him that they might touch the hem of his
coat, and one threw himself on his knees and kissed the President's
feet. Still he walked on unharmed, past the ashes and the ruins. Not as a
conqueror was he come, to march in triumph. Though there were many times when we had to fight for a path through the
crowds, he did not seem to feel the danger. Was it because he knew that his hour was not yet come? To-day, on the boat, as we were steaming between the green shores of the
Potomac, I overheard him reading to Mr. Sumner:--

          "Duncan is in his grave;
        After life's fitful fever he sleeps well;
        Treason has done his worst; nor steel, nor poison,
        Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing,
        Can touch him further." WILLARD'S HOTEL, WASHINGTON, April 10, 1865. I have looked up the passage, and have written it in above. MAN OF SORROW

The train was late--very late. It was Virginia who first caught sight
of the new dome of the Capitol through the slanting rain, but she merely
pressed her lips together and said nothing. In the dingy brick station
of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad more than one person paused to look
after them, and a kind-hearted lady who had been in the car kissed the
girl good-by. "You think that you can find your uncle's house, my dear?" she asked,
glancing at Virginia with concern. Through all of that long journey she
had worn a look apart. "Do you think you can find your uncle's house?" And then she smiled as she looked at the honest,
alert, and squarely built gentleman beside her. Whereupon the kind lady gave the Captain her hand. "You look as if you
could, Captain," said she. "Remember, if General Carvel is out of town,
you promised to bring her to me." "Yes, ma'am," said Captain Lige, "and so I shall." No sah, dat ain't de kerridge
you wants. Dat's it, lady, you'se lookin at it. Kerridge, kerridge,
kerridge!" Virginia tried bravely to smile, but she was very near to tears as she
stood on the uneven pavement and looked at the scrawny horses standing
patiently in the steady downpour. All sorts of people were coming
and going, army officers and navy officers and citizens of states and
territories, driving up and driving away. She was thinking then of the multitude who came here with aching
hearts,--with heavier hearts than was hers that day. How many of the
throng hurrying by would not flee, if they could, back to the peaceful
homes they had left? Destroyed,
like her own, by the war. Women with children at their breasts, and
mothers bowed with sorrow, had sought this city in their agony. Young
men and old had come hither, striving to keep back the thoughts of dear
ones left behind, whom they might never see again. And by the thousands
and tens of thousands they had passed from here to the places of blood
beyond. "Do you know where General Daniel Carvel lives?" "Yes, sah, reckon I does. Virginia sank back on the stuffy cushions of the rattle-trap, and then
sat upright again and stared out of the window at the dismal scene. They
were splashing through a sea of mud. Louis,
Captain Lige had done his best to cheer her, and he did not intend to
desist now. "So this is Washington, Why, it don't
compare to St. Louis, except we haven't got the White House and the
Capitol. Jinny, it would take a scow to get across the street, and we
don't have ramshackly stores and <DW65> cabins bang up against fine
Houses like that. We don't
have any dirty pickaninnies dodging among the horses in our residence
streets. I declare, Jinny, if those aren't pigs!" "I hope Uncle Daniel has some breakfast for you. You've had a good deal to put up with on this trip." "Lordy, Jinny," said the Captain, "I'd put up with a good deal more than
this for the sake of going anywhere with you." "Even to such a doleful place as this?" "This is all right, if the sun'll only come out and dry things up and
let us see the green on those trees," he said, "Lordy, how I do love to
see the spring green in the sunlight!" "Lige," she said, "you know you're just trying to keep up my spirits. You've been doing that ever since we left home." "No such thing," he replied with vehemence. "There's nothing for you to
be cast down about." "Suppose I can't make your Black
Republican President pardon Clarence!" said the Captain, squeezing her hand and trying to appear
unconcerned. Just then the rattletrap pulled up at the sidewalk, the wheels of the
near side in four inches of mud, and the Captain leaped out and spread
the umbrella. They were in front of a rather imposing house of brick,
flanked on one side by a house just like it, and on the other by a
series of dreary vacant lots where the rain had collected in pools. They
climbed the steps and rang the bell. In due time the door was opened by
a smiling yellow butler in black. "Yas, miss, But he ain't to home now. "Didn't he get my telegram day before
yesterday? "He's done gone since Saturday, miss." And then, evidently impressed by
the young lady's looks, he added hospitably, "Kin I do anything fo' you,
miss?" "I'm his niece, Miss Virginia Carvel, and this is Captain Brent." The yellow butler's face lighted up. "Come right in, Miss Jinny, Done heerd de General speak of you
often--yas'm. De General'll be to home dis a'ternoon, suah. 'Twill do
him good ter see you, Miss Jinny. Walk right
in, Cap'n, and make yo'selves at home. Done seed her at
Calve't House. "Very well, Lizbeth," said Virginia, listlessly sitting down on the hall
sofa. "Yas'm," said Lizbeth, "jes' reckon we kin." She ushered them into a
walnut dining room, big and high and sombre, with plush-bottomed chairs
placed about--walnut also; for that was the fashion in those days. But the Captain had no sooner seated himself than he shot up again and
started out. "To pay off the carriage driver," he said. "I'm going to the White House in a little
while." "To see your Black Republican President," she replied, with alarming
calmness. "Now, Jinny," he cried, in excited appeal, "don't go doin' any such fool
trick as that. Your Uncle Dan'l will be here this afternoon. And then the thing'll be fixed all right, and no
mistake." Her reply was in the same tone--almost a monotone--which she had used
for three days. It made the Captain very uneasy, for he knew when she
spoke in that way that her will was in it. "And to lose that time," she answered, "may be to have him shot." "But you can't get to the President without credentials," he objected. "What," she flashed, "hasn't any one a right to see the President? You
mean to say that he will not see a woman in trouble? Then all these
pretty stories I hear of him are false. They are made up by the
Yankees." He had some notion of the multitude of calls upon Mr. But he could not, he dared not,
remind her of the principal reason for this,--Lee's surrender and the
approaching end of the war. In the distant valley of the Mississippi he had only heard of
the President very conflicting things. He had heard him criticised and
reviled and praised, just as is every man who goes to the White House,
be he saint or sinner. And, during an administration, no man at a
distance may come at a President's true character and worth. The Captain
had seen Lincoln caricatured vilely. And again he had read and heard the
pleasant anecdotes of which Virginia had spoken, until he did not know
what to believe. As for Virginia, he knew her partisanship to, and undying love for, the
South; he knew the class prejudice which was bound to assert itself, and
he had seen enough in the girl's demeanor to fear that she was going to
demand rather than implore. She did not come of a race that was wont to
bend the knee. "Well, well," he said despairingly, "you must eat some breakfast first,
Jinny." She waited with an ominous calmness until it was brought in, and then
she took a part of a roll and some coffee. "This won't do," exclaimed the Captain. "Why, why, that won't get you
halfway to Mr. "You must eat enough, Lige," she said. He was finished in an incredibly short time, and amid the protestations
of Lizbeth and the yellow butler they got into the carriage again, and
splashed and rattled toward the White House. Once Virginia glanced out,
and catching sight of the bedraggled flags on the houses in honor of
Lee's surrender, a look of pain crossed her face. The Captain could not
repress a note of warning. "Jinny," said he, "I have an idea that you'll find the President a good
deal of a man. Now if you're allowed to see him, don't get him mad,
Jinny, whatever you do." "If he is something of a man, Lige, he will not lose his temper with a
woman." And just then they came in sight of the house of
the Presidents, with its beautiful portico and its broad wings. And they
turned in under the dripping trees of the grounds. A carriage with a
black coachman and footman was ahead of them, and they saw two stately
gentlemen descend from it and pass the guard at the door. The Captain helped her out in his best manner, and gave some
money to the driver. "I reckon he needn't wait for us this time, Jinny," said be. She shook
her head and went in, he following, and they were directed to the
anteroom of the President's office on the second floor. There were
many people in the corridors, and one or two young officers in blue who
stared at her. But her spirits sank when they came to the anteroom. It was full of all
sorts of people. Politicians, both prosperous and seedy, full faced and
keen faced, seeking office; women, officers, and a one-armed soldier
sitting in the corner. He was among the men who offered Virginia their
seats, and the only one whom she thanked. But she walked directly to the
doorkeeper at the end of the room. "Then you'll have to wait your turn, sir," he said, shaking his head and
looking at Virginia. "It's slow work waiting your turn,
there's so many governors and generals and senators, although the
session's over. And added, with an inspiration,
"I must see him. She saw instantly, with a woman's instinct, that these words had had
their effect. The old man glanced at her again, as if demurring. "You're sure, miss, it's life and death?" "Oh, why should I say so if it were not?" "The orders are very strict," he said. "But the President told me to
give precedence to cases when a life is in question. Just you wait a
minute, miss, until Governor Doddridge comes out, and I'll see what I
can do for you. In a little while the heavy door
opened, and a portly, rubicund man came out with a smile on his face. He broke into a laugh, when halfway across the room, as if the memory of
what he had heard were too much for his gravity. The doorkeeper slipped
into the room, and there was a silent, anxious interval. Captain Lige started forward with her, but she restrained him. "Wait for me here, Lige," she said. She swept in alone, and the door closed softly after her. The room was
a big one, and there were maps on the table, with pins sticking in them. Could this fantastically tall, stooping figure before her be that of the
President of the United States? She stopped, as from the shock he gave
her. The lean, yellow face with the mask-like lines all up and down,
the unkempt, tousled hair, the beard--why, he was a hundred times more
ridiculous than his caricatures. He might have stood for many of the
poor white trash farmers she had seen in Kentucky--save for the long
black coat. Somehow that smile changed his face a
little. "I guess I'll have to own up," he answered. "My name is Virginia Carvel," she said. "I have come all the way from
St. "Miss Carvel," said the President, looking at her intently, "I have
rarely been so flattered in my life. I--I hope I have not disappointed
you." "Oh, you haven't," she cried, her eyes flashing, "because I am what you
would call a Rebel." The mirth in the dark corners of his eyes disturbed her more and more. And then she saw that the President was laughing. "And have you a better name for it, Miss Carvel?" "Because I
am searching for a better name--just now." "No, thank you," said Virginia; "I think that I can say what I have come
to say better standing." That reminds me of a story they tell
about General Buck Tanner. One day the
boys asked him over to the square to make a speech. "'I'm all right when I get standing up, Liza,' he said to his wife. Only trouble is they come too cussed fast. How'm I going to stop 'em when I want to?' "'Well, I du declare, Buck,' said she, 'I gave you credit for some
sense. All you've got to do is to set down. "So the General went over to the square and talked for about an hour
and a half, and then a Chicago man shouted to him to dry up. "'Boys,' said he, 'it's jest every bit as bad for me as it is for you. You'll have to hand up a chair, boys, because I'm never going to get
shet of this goldarned speech any anther way.'" Lincoln had told this so comically that Virginia was forced to
laugh, and she immediately hated herself. A man who could joke at such
a time certainly could not feel the cares and responsibilities of his
office. And yet this was the President
who had conducted the war, whose generals had conquered the Confederacy. And she was come to ask him a favor. Lincoln," she began, "I have come to talk to you about my cousin,
Colonel Clarence Colfax." "I shall be happy to talk to you about your cousin, Colonel Colfax, Miss
Carvel. "He is my first cousin," she retorted. "Why didn't he come
with you?" "He is Clarence Colfax, of St. Louis, now a Colonel in the army of the Confederate States." Virginia tossed her head in
exasperation. "In General Joseph Johnston's army," she replied, trying to be patient. "But now," she gulped, "now he has been arrested as a spy by General
Sherman's army." "And--and they are going to shoot him." "Oh, no, he doesn't," she cried. "You don't know how brave he is! He
floated down the Mississippi on a log, out of Vicksburg, and brought
back thousands and thousands of percussion caps. He rowed across the
river when the Yankee fleet was going down, and set fire to De Soto so
that they could see to shoot." "Miss Carvel," said he, "that argument reminds me of a story about a man
I used to know in the old days in Illinois. His name was McNeil, and he
was a lawyer. "One day he was defending a prisoner for assault and battery before
Judge Drake. "'Judge, says McNeil, 'you oughtn't to lock this man up. It was a fair
fight, and he's the best man in the state in a fair fight. And, what's
more, he's never been licked in a fair fight in his life.' "'And if your honor does lock me up,' the prisoner put in, 'I'll give
your honor a thunderin' big lickin' when I get out.' "'Gentlemen,' said he, 'it's a powerful queer argument, but the Court
will admit it on its merits. The prisoner will please to step out on the
grass.'" She was striving against
something, she knew not what. Her breath was coming deeply, and she was
dangerously near to tears. She had come into
this man's presence despising herself for having to ask him a favor. Now she could not look into it
without an odd sensation. Told her a few funny stories--given quizzical
answers to some of her questions. Quizzical, yes; but she could not be
sure then there was not wisdom in them, and that humiliated her. She had
never conceived of such a man. And, be it added gratuitously, Virginia
deemed herself something of an adept in dealing with men. Lincoln, "to continue for the defence, I believe
that Colonel Colfax first distinguished himself at the time of Camp
Jackson, when of all the prisoners he refused to accept a parole." Startled, she looked up at him swiftly, and then down again. "Yes,"
she answered, "yes. Lincoln, please don't hold that against
him." If she could only have seen his face then. "My dear young lady," replied the President, "I honor him for it. I was
merely elaborating the argument which you have begun. On the other hand,
it is a pity that he should have taken off that uniform which he adorned
and attempted to enter General Sherman's lines as a civilian,--as a
spy." He had spoken these last words very gently, but she was too excited to
heed his gentleness. She drew herself up, a gleam in her eyes like the
crest of a blue wave in a storm. she cried; "it takes more courage to be a spy than anything
else in war. You are not content in, the North
with what you have gained. You are not content with depriving us of
our rights, and our fortunes, with forcing us back to an allegiance we
despise. You are not content with humiliating our generals and putting
innocent men in prisons. But now I suppose you will shoot us all. And
all this mercy that I have heard about means nothing--nothing--"

Why did she falter and stop? "Miss Carvel," said the President, "I am afraid from what I have heard
just now, that it means nothing." Oh, the sadness of that voice,--the
ineffable sadness,--the sadness and the woe of a great nation! And the
sorrow in those eyes, the sorrow of a heavy cross borne meekly,--how
heavy none will ever know. The pain of a crown of thorns worn for a
world that did not understand. No wonder Virginia faltered and
was silent. She looked at Abraham Lincoln standing there, bent and
sorrowful, and it was as if a light had fallen upon him. But strangest
of all in that strange moment was that she felt his strength. It was the
same strength she had felt in Stephen Brice. This was the thought that
came to her. Slowly she walked to the window and looked out across the green grounds
where the wind was shaking the wet trees, past the unfinished monument
to the Father of her country, and across the broad Potomac to Alexandria
in the hazy distance. The rain beat upon the panes, and then she knew
that she was crying softly to herself. She had met a force that she
could not conquer, she had looked upon a sorrow that she could not
fathom, albeit she had known sorrow. She turned and looked through her tears
at his face that was all compassion. "Tell me about your cousin," he said; "are you going to marry him?" But in
that moment she could not have spoken anything but the truth to save her
soul. Lincoln," she said; "I was--but I did not love him. I--I think
that was one reason why he was so reckless." "The officer who happened to see Colonel Colfax captured is now in
Washington. When your name was given to me, I sent for him. Perhaps he
is in the anteroom now. I should like to tell you, first of all, that
this officer defended your cousin and asked me to pardon him." He strode to the bell-cord, and spoke a few
words to the usher who answered his ring. Then the door opened, and a young officer, spare,
erect, came quickly into the room, and bowed respectfully to the
President. He saw her lips part and the
color come flooding into her face. The President sighed But the light in her eyes was reflected in his own. It has been truly said that Abraham Lincoln knew the human heart. The officer still stood facing the President, the girl staring at his
profile. Lincoln,
"when you asked me to pardon Colonel Colfax, I believe that you told me
he was inside his own skirmish lines when he was captured." Suddenly Stephen turned, as if impelled by the President's gaze, and so
his eyes met Virginia's. He forgot time and place,--for the while even
this man whom he revered above all men. He saw her hand tighten on the
arm of her chair. He took a step toward her, and stopped. "He put in a plea, a lawyer's plea, wholly unworthy of him, Miss
Virginia. He asked me to let your cousin off on a technicality. Just the exclamation escaped her--nothing more. The
crimson that had betrayed her deepened on her cheeks. Slowly the eyes
she had yielded to Stephen came back again and rested on the President. And now her wonder was that an ugly man could be so beautiful. Lawyer," the President continued, "that I
am not letting off Colonel Colfax on a technicality. I am sparing his
life," he said slowly, "because the time for which we have been waiting
and longing for four years is now at hand--the time to be merciful. She crossed the room, her head lifted, her heart
lifted, to where this man of sorrows stood smiling down at her. Lincoln," she faltered, "I did not know you when I came here. I
should have known you, for I had heard him--I had heard Major Brice
praise you. Oh," she cried, "how I wish that every man and woman and
child in the South might come here and see you as I have seen you
to-day. I think--I think that some of their bitterness might be taken
away." And Stephen, watching,
knew that he was looking upon a benediction. Lincoln, "I have not suffered by the South, I have
suffered with the South. Your sorrow has been my sorrow, and your pain
has been my pain. And what you have
gained," he added sublimely, "I have gained." The clouds were flying before the wind,
and a patch of blue sky shone above the Potomac. With his long arm he
pointed across the river to the southeast, and as if by a miracle a
shaft of sunlight fell on the white houses of Alexandria. "In the first days of the war," he said, "a flag flew there in sight of
the place where George Washington lived and died. I used to watch
that flag, and thank God that Washington had not lived to see it. And
sometimes, sometimes I wondered if God had allowed it to be put in irony
just there." "I should have known that this was our punishment--that the sight of
it was my punishment. Before we could become the great nation He has
destined us to be, our sins must be wiped out in blood. "I say in all sincerity, may you always love it. May the day come when
this Nation, North and South, may look back upon it with reverence. Thousands upon thousands of brave Americans have died under it for what
they believed was right. But may the day come again when you will love
that flag you see there now--Washington's flag--better still." He stopped, and the tears were wet upon Virginia's lashes. Lincoln went over to his desk and sat down before it. Then he began
to write, slouched forward, one knee resting on the floor, his lips
moving at the same time. When he got up again he seemed taller than
ever. he said, "I guess that will fix it. I'll have that sent to
Sherman. I have already spoken to him about the matter." He turned to Stephen
with that quizzical look on his face he had so often seen him wear. "Steve," he said, "I'll tell you a story. The other night Harlan was
here making a speech to a crowd out of the window, and my boy Tad was
sitting behind him. "'No,' says Tad, 'hang on to 'em.' That is what we intend to do,--hang on to 'em. Lincoln, putting his hand again on Virginia's
shoulder, "if you have the sense I think you have, you'll hang on, too." For an instant he stood smiling at their blushes,--he to whom the power
was given to set apart his cares and his troubles and partake of the
happiness of others. he said, "I am ten
minutes behind my appointment at the Department. Miss Virginia, you may
care to thank the Major for the little service he has done you. You can
do so undisturbed here. As he opened the door he paused and looked back at them. The smile
passed from his face, and an ineffable expression of longing--longing
and tenderness--came upon it. For a space, while his spell was upon them, they did not stir. Then
Stephen sought her eyes that had been so long denied him. It was Virginia who first found her voice, and she
called him by his name. "Oh, Stephen," she said, "how sad he looked!" He was close to her, at her side. And he answered her in the earnest
tone which she knew so well. "Virginia, if I could have had what I most wished for in the world, I
should have asked that you should know Abraham Lincoln." Then she dropped her eyes, and her breath came quickly. "I--I might have known," she answered, "I might have known what he was. I had seen him in you, and I did not know. Do you remember that day when we were in the summer-house together at
Glencoe, long ago? "You were changed then," she said bravely. "When I saw him," said Stephen, reverently, "I knew how little and
narrow I was." Then, overcome by the incense of her presence, he drew her to him until
her heart beat against his own. She did not resist, but lifted her face
to him, and he kissed her. "Yes, Stephen," she answered, low, more wonderful in her surrender than
ever before. Then she hid her face against his blue coat. Oh, Stephen, how I have struggled against it! How I have tried to hate you, and couldn't. I tried to
insult you, I did insult you. And when I saw how splendidly you bore it,
I used to cry." "I loved you through it all," he said. She raised her head quickly, and awe was in her eyes. "Because I dreamed of you," he answered. "And those dreams used to linger
with me half the day as I went about my work. I used to think of them as
I sat in the saddle on the march." "I, too, treasured them," she said. Faintly, "I have no one but you--now." Once more he drew her to him, and she gloried in his strength. "God help me to cherish you, dear," he said, "and guard you well." She drew away from him, gently, and turned toward the window. "See, Stephen," she cried, "the sun has come out at last." For a while they were silent, looking out; the drops glistened on blade
and leaf, and the joyous new green of the earth entered into their
hearts. ANNAPOLIS

IT was Virginia's wish, and was therefore sacred. As for Stephen, he
little cared whither they went. And so they found themselves on that
bright afternoon in mid-April under the great trees that arch the
unpaved streets of old Annapolis. They stopped by direction at a gate, and behind it was a green cluster
of lilac bushes, which lined the walk to the big plum- house
which Lionel Carvel had built. Virginia remembered that down this walk
on a certain day in June, a hundred years agone, Richard Carvel had led
Dorothy Manners. They climbed the steps, tottering now with age and disuse, and Virginia
playfully raised the big brass knocker, brown now, that Scipio had been
wont to polish until it shone. Stephen took from his pocket the clumsy
key that General Carvel had given him, and turned it in the rusty lock. The door swung open, and Virginia stood in the hall of her ancestors. It was musty and damp this day as the day when Richard had come back
from England and found it vacant and his grandfather dead. But there,
at the parting of the stairs, was the triple-arched window which he had
described. Through it the yellow afternoon light was flooding now, even
as then, checkered by the branches in their first fringe of green. But
the tall clock which Lionel Carvel used to wind was at Calvert House,
with many another treasure. They went up the stairs, and reverently they walked over the bare
floors, their footfalls echoing through the silent house. A score of
scenes in her great-grandfather's life came to Virginia. Here was the
room--the cornet one at the back of the main building, which looked out
over the deserted garden--that had been Richard's mother's. She recalled
how he had stolen into it on that summer's day after his return, and had
flung open the shutters. They were open now, for their locks were off. The prie-dieu was gone, and the dresser. But the high bed was there,
stripped of its poppy counterpane and white curtains; and the steps by
which she had entered it. And next they went into the great square room that had been Lionel
Carvel's, and there, too, was the roomy bed on which the old gentleman
had lain with the gout, while Richard read to him from the Spectator. One side of it looked out on the trees in Freshwater Lane; and the other
across the roof of the low house opposite to where the sun danced on the
blue and white waters of the Chesapeake. "Honey," said Virginia, as they stood in the deep recess of the window,
"wouldn't it be nice if we could live here always, away from the world? But you would never be content to do that," she said,
smiling reproachfully. "You are the kind of man who must be in the midst
of things. In a little while you will have far more besides me to think
about." He was quick to catch the note of sadness in her voice. "We all have our duty to perform in the world, dear," he answered. "To think that I should have married a
Puritan! What would my great-great-great-great-grandfather say, who was
such a stanch Royalist? Why, I think I can see him frowning at me now,
from the door, in his blue velvet goat and silverlaced waistcoat." "He was well punished," retorted Stephen, "his own grandson was a Whig,
and seems to have married a woman of spirit." "I am sure that she did not allow my
great-grandfather to kiss her--unless she wanted to." And she looked up at him, half smiling, half pouting; altogether
bewitching. "From what I hear of him, he was something of a man," said Stephen. "I am glad that Marlborough Street isn't a crowded thoroughfare," said
Virginia. When they had seen the dining room, with its carved mantel and silver
door-knobs, and the ballroom in the wing, they came out, and Stephen
locked the door again. They walked around the house, and stood looking
down the terraces,--once stately, but crumbled now,--where Dorothy had
danced on the green on Richard's birthday. Beyond and below was the
spring-house, and there was the place where the brook dived under the
ruined wall,--where Dorothy had wound into her hair the lilies of the
valley before she sailed for London. The remains of a wall that had once held a balustrade marked the
outlines of the formal garden. The trim hedges, for seventy years
neglected, had grown incontinent. The garden itself was full of wild
green things coming up through the brown of last season's growth. But
in the grass the blue violets nestled, and Virginia picked some of these
and put them in Stephen's coat. "You must keep them always," she said, "because we got them here." They spied a seat beside a hoary trunk. There on many a spring day
Lionel Carvel had sat reading his Gazette. The sun hung low over the old-world gables in the street beyond the
wall, and in the level rays was an apple tree dazzling white, like a
bride. The sweet fragrance which the day draws from the earth lingered
in the air. "Stephen, do you remember that fearful afternoon of the panic, when you
came over from Anne Brinsmade's to reassure me?" "But what made you think of it now?" But you were so strong, so calm,
so sure of yourself. I think that made me angry when I thought how
ridiculous I must have been." But do
you know what I had under my arm--what I was saving of all the things I
owned?" "No," he answered; "but I have often wondered." "This house--this place made me think of it. It was Dorothy Manners's
gown, and her necklace. They were all the
remembrance I had of that night at Mr. Brinsmade's gate, when we came so
near to each other." "Virginia," he said, "some force that we cannot understand has brought
us together, some force that we could not hinder. It is foolish for me
to say so, but on that day of the slave auction, when I first saw you,
I had a premonition about you that I have never admitted until now, even
to myself." "Why, Stephen," she cried, "I felt the same way!" "And then," he continued quickly, "it was strange that I should have
gone to Judge Whipple, who was an intimate of your father's--such a
singular intimate. And then came your party, and Glencoe, and that
curious incident at the Fair." "When I was talking to the Prince, and looked up and saw you among all
those people." "That was the most uncomfortable of all, for me." "Stephen," she said, stirring the leaves at her feet, "you might have
taken me in your arms the night Judge Whipple died--if you had wanted
to. I love you all the more for
that." Again she said:-- "It was through your mother, dearest, that we were
most strongly drawn together. I worshipped her from the day I saw her in
the hospital. I believe that was the beginning of my charity toward the
North." "My mother would have chosen you above all women, Virginia," he
answered. In the morning came to them the news of Abraham Lincoln's death. And the
same thought was in both their hearts, who had known him as it was given
to few to know him. How he had lived in sorrow; how he had died a martyr
on the very day of Christ's death upon the cross. And they believed that
Abraham Lincoln gave his life for his country even as Christ gave his
for the world. And so must we believe that God has reserved for this Nation a destiny
high upon the earth. Many years afterward Stephen Brice read again to his wife those sublime
closing words of the second inaugural:--

   "With malice toward none, with charity for all, with firmness in the
   right as God gives us to see the right, let us strive on to finish
   the work we are in, to bind up the nation's wounds, to care for him
   who shall have borne the battle, and for his widow and his children
   --to do all which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace
   among ourselves and with all nations." AFTERWORD

The author has chosen St. Louis for the principal scene of this story
for many reasons. Grant and Sherman were living there before the Civil
War, and Abraham Lincoln was an unknown lawyer in the neighboring
state of Illinois. It has been one of the aims of this book to show the
remarkable contrasts in the lives of these great men who came out of the
West. Louis, which was founded by Laclede in 1765,
likewise became the principal meeting-place of two great streams of
emigration which had been separated, more or less, since Cromwell's day. To be sure, they were not all Cavaliers who settled in the tidewater
Colonies. There were Puritan settlements in both Maryland and Virginia. But the life in the Southern states took on the more liberal tinge which
had characterized that of the Royalists, even to the extent of affecting
the Scotch Calvinists, while the asceticism of the Roundheads was the
keynote of the Puritan character in New England. When this great country
of ours began to develop, the streams moved westward; one over what
became the plain states of Ohio and Indiana and Illinois, and the other
across the Blue Ridge Mountains into Kentucky and Tennessee. They mixed
along the line of the Ohio River. Louis, and, farther
west, in Kansas. The part played by
this people in the Civil War is a matter of history. The scope of this
book has not permitted the author to introduce the peasantry and trading
classes which formed the mass in this movement. But Richter, the type
of the university-bred revolutionist which emigrated after '48, is drawn
more or less from life. And the duel described actually took place in
Berlin. Louis is the author's birthplace, and his home, the home of those
friends whom he has known from childhood and who have always treated him
with unfaltering kindness. He begs that they will believe him when he
says that only such characters as he loves are reminiscent of those
he has known there. The city has a large population,--large enough to
include all the types that are to be found in the middle West. This book is written of a time when feeling ran high. It has been necessary to put strong speech into the mouths of the
characters. The breach that threatened our country's existence is healed
now. There is no side but Abraham Lincoln's side. And this side, with
all reverence and patriotism, the author has tried to take. Abraham Lincoln loved the South as well as the North. I was just wondering--what the
other fellow'd do with it." "But it will--if I give it to him. what money does
for folks, sometimes--folks that aren't used to it! Look at Bixby; and
look at that poor little Marston girl, throwing herself away on that
worthless scamp of a Gowing who's only after her money, as everybody
(but herself) knows! And if it doesn't make knaves and martyrs of them,
ten to one it does make fools of 'em. They're worse than a kid with a
dollar on circus day; and they use just about as much sense spending
their pile, too. You should have heard dad tell about his pals in the
eighties that struck it rich in the gold mines. One bought up every
grocery store in town and instituted a huge free grab-bag for the
populace; and another dropped his hundred thousand in the dice box
before it was a week old. I wonder what those cousins of mine back East
are like!" "If you're fearful, better take Case number twenty-three thousand seven
hundred and forty-one," smiled the lawyer. "Hm-m; I suppose so," ejaculated the other grimly, getting to his feet. A moment later the door of the lawyer's sumptuously appointed office
closed behind him. Not twenty-four hours afterward, however, it opened
to admit him again. He was alert, eager-eyed, and smiling. Even the office boy who ushered him in cocked a
curious eye at him. The man at the great flat-topped desk gave a surprised ejaculation. Those biscuits must be agreeing with you," he laughed. "Ned, I've got a scheme. Stanley G.
Fulton strode across the room and dropped himself into the waiting
chair. Well, I'm going to find out
which of 'em I want for my heir." "Another case of investigating before investing, eh?" Going to
get acquainted with them, I suppose, and see how they treat you. Then
you can size them up as to hearts and habits, and drop the golden plum
into the lap of the worthy man, eh?" I'm going to give 'em say fifty
or a hundred thousand apiece, and--"

"GIVE it to them--NOW?" How'm I going to know how they'll spend money till they have it
to spend?" "I know; but--"

"Oh, I've planned all that. Of course you'll have to fix
it up for me. I shall leave instructions with you, and when the time
comes all you have to do is to carry them out." "Oh, I'm going to be there, in Hillerton." "Yes, where the cousins live, you know. Of course I want to see how it
works." I suppose you think you'll find out--with you watching their
every move!" The lawyer had settled back in his chair, an ironical
smile on his lips. "Oh, they won't know me, of course, except as John Smith." I'm going to take that name--for a time." "Really, my dear Ned,
I'm disappointed in you. You don't seem to realize the possibilities of
this thing." "Oh, yes, I do--perhaps better than you, old man," retorted the other
with an expressive glance. I never
saw them, and they never saw me. I'm going to give them a tidy little
sum of money apiece, and then have the fun of watching them spend it. Any harm in that, especially as it's no one's business what I do with
my money?" "N--no, I suppose not--if you can carry such a wild scheme through." "I chose a colorless one on purpose. I'm going to be a colorless
person, you see." Stanley G. Fulton, multi-millionaire,
with his pictured face in half the papers and magazines from the
Atlantic to the Pacific, CAN hide that face behind a colorless John
Smith?" But he can hide it behind a nice little close-cropped
beard." The millionaire stroked his smooth chin reflectively. Nice little New England town, I'm told." And your--er--business in Hillerton, that will enable you to be
the observing fly on your cousins' walls?" "Yes, I've thought that all out, too; and that's another brilliant
stroke. I'm going to be a genealogist. I'm going to be at work tracing
the Blaisdell family--their name is Blaisdell. I'm writing a book which
necessitates the collection of an endless amount of data. Now how about
that fly's chances of observation. "Mighty poor, if he's swatted--and that's what he will be! New England
housewives are death on flies, I understand." There were exasperation and amusement in the
lawyer's eyes, but there was only mock sympathy in his voice. "And to
think I've known you all these years, and never suspected it, Fulton!" The man who owned twenty millions still smiled imperturbably. "Oh, yes, I know what you mean, but I'm not crazy. And really I'm
interested in genealogy, too, and I've been thinking for some time I'd
go digging about the roots of my ancestral tree. I have dug a little,
in years gone. My mother was a Blaisdell, you know. Her grandfather was
brother to some ancestor of these Hillerton Blaisdells; and I really am
interested in collecting Blaisdell data. Besides, I shall try to board with one of them. "Upon my word, a pretty little scheme!" "Yes, I knew you'd appreciate it, the more you thought about it." Stanley G. Fulton's blue eyes twinkled a little. With a disdainful gesture the lawyer brushed this aside. "Do you mind telling me how you happened to think of it, yourself?" 'Twas a little booklet got out by a Trust Company." "Oh, they didn't suggest exactly this, I'll admit; but they did suggest
that, if you were fearful as to the way your heirs would handle their
inheritance, you could create a trust fund for their benefit while you
were living, and then watch the way the beneficiaries spent the income,
as well as the way the trust fund itself was managed. In this way you
could observe the effects of your gifts, and at the same time be able
to change them if you didn't like results. I'm going to make my cousins a little
rich, and see which, if any of them, can stand being very rich." How are you going to drop a hundred thousand
dollars into three men's laps, and expect to get away without an
investigation as to the why and wherefore of such a singular
proceeding?" "That's where your part comes in," smiled the millionaire blandly. "Besides, to be accurate, one of the laps is--er--a petticoat one." But--And so this is where I come
in, is it? Well, and suppose I refuse to come in?" "Regretfully I shall have to employ another attorney." The blue eyes opposite were still twinkling. "In the first place, you're my good friend--my best friend. You
wouldn't be seen letting me start off on a wild-goose chase like this
without your guiding hand at the helm to see that I didn't come a
cropper." "Aren't you getting your metaphors a trifle mixed?" This time the
lawyer's eyes were twinkling. Besides, what
I want you to do is a mere routine of regular business, with you." I'm off for South America, say, on an
exploring tour. In your charge I leave certain papers with instructions
that on the first day of the sixth month of my absence (I being unheard
from), you are to open a certain envelope and act according to
instructions within. "Oh, very simple--as you put it." "Well, meanwhile I'll start for South America--alone, of course; and,
so far as you're concerned, that ends it. If on the way, somewhere, I
determine suddenly on a change of destination, that is none of your
affair. If, say in a month or two, a quiet, inoffensive gentleman by
the name of Smith arrives in Hillerton on the legitimate and perfectly
respectable business of looking up a family pedigree, that also is none
of your concern." With a sudden laugh the lawyer fell back in his chair. "By Jove, Fulton, if I don't believe you'll pull this absurd thing off!" Now you're talking like a sensible man, and we can get
somewhere. In order
best to judge how my esteemed relatives conduct themselves under the
sudden accession of wealth, I must see them first without it, of
course. Hence, I plan to be in Hillerton some months before your letter
and the money arrive. I intend, indeed, to be on the friendliest terms
with every Blaisdell in Hillerton before that times comes." "Oh, I shall have the best of references and introductions. Bob
Chalmers is the president of a bank there. Well, I shall
take John Smith in and introduce him to Bob some day. After that,
Bob'll introduce John Smith? All I need is a letter as to my
integrity and respectability, I reckon, so my kinsmen won't suspect me
of designs on their spoons when I ask to board with them. You see, I'm
a quiet, retiring gentleman, and I don't like noisy hotels." With an explosive chuckle the lawyer clapped his knee. "Fulton, this is
absolutely the richest thing I ever heard of! I'd give a farm to be a
fly on YOUR wall and see you do it. I'm blest if I don't think I'll go
to Hillerton myself--to see Bob. By George, I will go and see Bob!" "Of course," agreed the other serenely. Besides, it will be
the most natural thing in the world--business, you know. In fact, I
should think you really ought to go, in connection with the bequests." "How much are you
going to give them?" "Oh, a hundred thousand apiece, I reckon." "That ought to do--for pin money." "Oh, well, I want them to have enough, you know, for it to be a real
test of what they would do with wealth. And it must be cash--no
securities. "But how are you going to fix it? What excuse are you going to give for
dropping a hundred thousand into their laps like that? You can't tell
your real purpose, naturally! "That part we'll have to fix up in the letter of instructions. But what are
you going to do afterward--when you've found out what you want to know,
I mean? Won't it be something of a shock, when John Smith turns into
Mr. "Y-yes, I've thought of that, and I will confess my ideas are a little
hazy, in spots. There'll be two letters of
instructions: one to open in six months, the other to be opened in,
say, a couple of years, or so. (I want to give myself plenty of time
for my observations, you see.) The second letter will really give you
final instructions as to the settling of my estate--my will. I'll have
to make some sort of one, I suppose." "But, good Heavens, Stanley, you--you--" the lawyer came to a helpless
pause. "Oh, that's just for emergency, of course, in case
anything--er--happened. What I really intend is that long before the
second letter of instructions is due to be opened, Mr. Stanley G.
Fulton will come back from his South American explorations. He'll then
be in a position to settle his affairs to suit himself, and--er--make a
new will. The millionaire smiled musingly, and stroked his chin again. Well, Smith will have finished collecting Blaisdell data,
of course, and will be off to parts unknown. We don't have to trouble
ourselves with Smith any longer." "Fulton, you're a wizard," laughed the lawyer. "But now about the
cousins. You see I've done a little digging already--some years
ago--looking up the Blaisdell family. (By the way, that'll come in fine
now, won't it?) And an occasional letter from Bob has kept me posted as
to deaths and births in the Hillerton Blaisdells. I always meant to
hunt them up some time, they being my nearest kith and kin. Well, with
what I already had, and with what Bob has written me, I know these
facts." He paused, pulled a small notebook from his pocket, and consulted it. "There are two sons and a daughter, children of Rufus Blaisdell. Rufus
died years ago, and his widow married a man by the name of Duff. The elder son is Frank Blaisdell. She's about forty-two or three, I
believe, and does dressmaking. James Blaisdell has a son, Fred,
seventeen, and two younger children. Frank Blaisdell has one daughter,
Mellicent. That's the extent of my knowledge, at present. "Oh, anything's enough--for your purpose! You'll soon be reading in your morning paper that Mr. Stanley G. Fulton, the somewhat eccentric multi-millionaire, is about
to start for South America, and that it is hinted he is planning to
finance a gigantic exploring expedition. The accounts of what he's
going to explore will vary all the way from Inca antiquities to the
source of the Amazon. I've done a lot of talking to-day, and a good
deal of cautioning as to secrecy, etc. It ought to bear fruit by
to-morrow, or the day after, at the latest. I'm going to start next
week, and I'm really going EXPLORING, too--though not exactly as they
think. I came in to-day to make a business appointment for to-morrow,
please. A man starting on such a hazardous journey must be prepared,
you understand. I want to leave my affairs in such shape that you will
know exactly what to do--in emergency. The lawyer hesitated, his face an odd mixture of determination and
irresolution. To-morrow at ten--if
they don't shut you up before." Stanley G. Fulton leaped to his feet. At the door he turned back jauntily. "And, say, Ned, what'll you bet I don't grow fat and young over this
thing? What'll you bet I don't get so I can eat real meat and 'taters
again?" JOHN SMITH


It was on the first warm evening in early June that Miss Flora
Blaisdell crossed the common and turned down the street that led to her
brother James's home. Its spacious green lawns and
elm-shaded walks were the pride of the town. There was a trellised
band-stand for summer concerts, and a tiny pond that accommodated a few
boats in summer and a limited number of skaters in winter. Perhaps,
most important of all, the common divided the plebeian East Side from
the more pretentious West. James Blaisdell lived on the West Side. His
wife said that everybody did who WAS anybody. They had lately moved
there, and were, indeed, barely settled. Her home was a shabby little rented
cottage on the East Side. She was a thin-faced little woman with an
anxious frown and near-sighted, peering eyes that seemed always to be
looking for wrinkles. She peered now at the houses as she passed slowly
down the street. She had been only twice to her brother's new home, and
she was not sure that she would recognize it, in spite of the fact that
the street was still alight with the last rays of the setting sun. Suddenly across her worried face flashed a relieved smile. "Well, if you ain't all here out on the piazza!" she exclaimed,
turning, in at the walk leading up to one of the ornate little houses. "Oh, yes, it's grand, all right," nodded the tired-looking man in the
big chair, removing his feet from the railing. He was in his
shirt-sleeves, and was smoking a pipe. The droop of his thin mustache
matched the droop of his thin shoulders--and both indefinably but
unmistakably spelled disillusion and discouragement. "It's grand, but I
think it's too grand--for us. However, daughter says the best is none
too good--in Hillerton. Bessie, the pretty, sixteen-year-old daughter of the family, only
shrugged her shoulders a little petulantly. It was Harriet, the wife,
who spoke--a large, florid woman with a short upper lip, and a
bewilderment of bepuffed light hair. She was already on her feet,
pushing a chair toward her sister-in-law. "Of course it isn't too grand, Jim, and you know it. There aren't any
really nice houses in Hillerton except the Pennocks' and the old
Gaylord place. The little
dressmaker began to fan herself with the hat she had taken off. "My,
'tis fur over here, ain't it? Not much like 'twas when you lived right
'round the corner from me! And I had to put on a hat and gloves, too. Someway, I thought I ought to--over here." Condescendingly the bepuffed head threw an approving nod in her
direction. The East Side is different from the West Side, and
no mistake. And what will do there won't do here at all, of course." "How about father's shirt-sleeves?" It was a scornful gibe from Bessie
in the hammock. "I don't notice any of the rest of the men around here
sitting out like that." "You know very well I'm not to
blame for what your father wears. I've tried hard enough, I'm sure!" "Well, well, Hattie," sighed the man, with a gesture of abandonment. "I
supposed I still had the rights of a freeborn American citizen in my
own home; but it seems I haven't." Resignedly he got to his feet and
went into the house. When he returned a moment later he was wearing his
coat. Benny, perched precariously on the veranda railing, gave a sudden
indignant snort. Benny was eight, the youngest of the family. "Well, I don't think I like it here, anyhow," he chafed. "I'd rather go
back an' live where we did. It hasn't
been anything but 'Here, Benny, you mustn't do that over here, you
mustn't do that over here!' I'm going home an' live
with Aunt Flora. Of course you can," beamed his aunt. "But you won't
want to, I'm sure. Why, Benny, I think it's perfectly lovely here." "Indeed I do, Benny," corrected his father hastily. "It's very nice
indeed here, of course. But I don't think we can afford it. We had to
squeeze every penny before, and how we're going to meet this rent I
don't know." "You'll earn it, just being here--more business," asserted his wife
firmly. "Anyhow, we've just got to be here, Jim! We owe it to ourselves
and our family. "He's over to Gussie Pennock's, playing tennis," interposed Bessie,
with a pout. "The mean old thing wouldn't ask me!" "But you ain't old enough, my dear," soothed her aunt. "Wait; your turn
will come by and by." "Yes, that's exactly it," triumphed the mother. "Her turn WILL come--if
we live here. Do you suppose Fred would have got an invitation to
Gussie Pennock's if we'd still been living on the East Side? Pennock's worth fifty thousand, if he's worth a
dollar! "But, Hattie, money isn't everything, dear," remonstrated her husband
gently. "We had friends, and good friends, before." "Yes; but you wait and see what kind of friends we have now!" "But we can't keep up with such people, dear, on our income; and--"

"Ma, here's a man. It was a husky whisper
from Benny. Bessie Blaisdell and the little
dressmaker cocked their heads interestedly. Blaisdell rose to her
feet and advanced toward the steps to meet the man coming up the walk. He was a tall, rather slender man, with a close-cropped, sandy beard,
and an air of diffidence and apology. As he took off his hat and came
nearer, it was seen that his eyes were blue and friendly, and that his
hair was reddish-brown, and rather scanty on top of his head. James Blaisdell," he murmured
hesitatingly. Something in the stranger's deferential manner sent a warm glow of
importance to the woman's heart. Blaisdell was suddenly reminded
that she was Mrs. James D. Blaisdell of the West Side. Blaisdell," she replied a bit pompously. "What can we do for
you, my good man?" She had never
called a person "my good man" before. The man on the steps coughed slightly behind his hand--a sudden
spasmodic little cough. Then very gravely he reached into his pocket
and produced a letter. Robert Chalmers--a note to your husband," he bowed,
presenting the letter. A look of gratified surprise came into the woman's face. Her husband, already on his feet, whisked the sheet of paper from the
unsealed envelope, and adjusted his glasses. A moment later he held out
a cordial hand to the stranger. I'm glad to see any friend of Bob
Chalmers'. My wife and children, and my sister,
Miss Blaisdell. (Glancing at the
open note in his hand.) Still with that deference
so delightfully heart-warming, the newcomer bowed low to the ladies,
and made his way to the offered chair. "I will explain at once my
business," he said then. It was an eager question from Benny on the veranda
railing. "Pa isn't anything, but ma's a Congregationalist." protested a duet of feminine voices softly; but the
stranger, apparently ignoring the interruption, continued speaking. "I am gathering material for a book on the Blaisdell family." James Blaisdell, with cordial
interest. "It is my purpose to remain some time in your
town. I am told there are valuable records here, and an old
burying-ground of particular interest in this connection. The
neighboring towns, too, have much Blaisdell data, I understand. As I
said, I am intending to make this place my headquarters, and I am
looking for an attractive boarding-place. Chalmers was good enough
to refer me to you." "To us--for a BOARDING-place!" James D. Blaisdell's countenance as she said the words. "Well, I'm sure
I don't see why he should. "But, Hattie, we could," interposed her husband eagerly. "There's that
big front room that we don't need a bit. And it would help a lot if--"
At the wrathful warning in his wife's eyes he fell back silenced. "I said that we didn't keep boarders," reiterated the lady distinctly. "Furthermore, we do need the room ourselves." "Yes, yes, of course; I understand," broke in Mr. Smith, as if in hasty
conciliation. Chalmers meant that perhaps one of you"--he
glanced uncertainly at the anxious-eyed little woman at his
left--"might--er--accommodate me. Perhaps you, now--" He turned his
eyes full upon Miss Flora Blaisdell, and waited. Why, I live all alone--that is, I mean, I couldn't,
you know," she stammered confusedly. "I dressmake, and I don't get any
sort of meals--not fit for a man, I mean. Just women's things--tea,
toast, and riz biscuit. I'm so fond of riz biscuit! But, of course,
you--" She came to an expressive pause. "Oh, I could stand the biscuit, so long as they're not health biscuit,"
laughed Mr. "You see, I've been living on those and hot
water quite long enough as it is." "Oh, ain't your health good, sir?" The little dressmaker's face wore
the deepest concern. "Well, it's better than it was, thank you. I think I can promise to be
a good boarder, all right." "Why don't you go to a hotel?" James D. Blaisdell still spoke with
a slightly injured air. "Oh, indeed, that would not do at all--for my purpose," he murmured. "I
wish to be very quiet. I fear I should find it quite disturbing--the
noise and confusion of a public place like that. Besides, for my work,
it seemed eminently fitting, as well as remarkably convenient, if I
could make my home with one of the Blaisdell family." With a sudden exclamation the little dressmaker sat erect. "Say, Harriet, how funny we never thought! He's just the one for poor
Maggie! She lives--"

"Your SISTER!" Smith's face had come a look of startled
surprise--a look almost of terror. "But there weren't but three--that
is, I thought--I understood from Mr. Chalmers that there were but three
Blaisdells, two brothers, and one sister--you, yourself." "Oh, poor Maggie ain't a Blaisdell," explained the little dressmaker,
with a smile. "She's just Maggie Duff, father Duff's daughter by his
first wife, you know. He married our mother years ago, when we children
were little, so we were brought up with Maggie, and always called her
sister; though, of course, she really ain't any relation to us at all." He appeared to be settling something in his mind. "She
isn't a Blaisdell, then." "No, but she's so near like one, and she's a splendid cook, and---"

"Well, I shan't send him to Maggie," cut in Mrs. James D. Blaisdell
with emphasis. "Poor Maggie's got quite enough on her hands, as it is,
with that father of hers. Besides, she isn't a Blaisdell at all." "And she couldn't come and cook and take care of us near so much,
either, could she," plunged in Benny, "if she took this man ter feed?" "That will do, Benny," admonished his mother, with nettled dignity. "You forget that children should be seen and not heard." But, please, can't I be heard just a minute for this? Why don't
ye send the man ter Uncle Frank an' Aunt Jane? "I wouldn't wonder a mite
if they did." "Yes, I was thinking of them," nodded her sister-in-law. "And they're
always glad of a little help,--especially Jane." Only the heightened color in his wife's cheeks showed that she had
heard--and understood. "Here, Benny," she directed, "go and show the gentleman where Uncle
Frank lives." With a spring the boy leaped to the lawn and pranced to
the sidewalk, dancing there on his toes. Blaisdell," he said, "and you, ladies. I shall hope
to see you again soon. I am sure you can help me, if you will, in my
work. We shall be glad to see you," promised his
host. "Come any time, and ask all the questions you want to." "And we shall be so interested," fluttered Miss Flora. "I've always
wanted to know about father's folks. And are you a Blaisdell, too?" Smith coughed again twice behind
his hand. "Er--ah--oh, yes, I may say that I am. Through my mother I am descended
from the original immigrant, Ebenezer Blaisdell." James Blaisdell spoke the word as if her tongue
were a pair of tongs that had picked up a noxious viper. "Yes, but not exactly as we commonly regard the term nowadays," smiled
Mr. Ebenezer Blaisdell was a man of means and distinction. He was the founder of the family in this country. murmured the little dressmaker, as the visitor
descended the steps. John Smith to
the assembled group on the veranda. "And now, young man, I'm at your
service," he smiled, as he joined Benny, still prancing on the sidewalk. "Now he's what I call a real nice pleasant-spoken gentleman," avowed
Miss Flora, when she thought speech was safe. "I do hope Jane'll take
him." "Oh, yes, he's well enough," condescended Mrs. Hattie Blaisdell, with a
yawn. "Hattie, why wouldn't you take him in?" "Just
think how the pay would help! And it wouldn't be a bit of work, hardly,
for you. Certainly it would be a lot easier than the way we are doing." Do you suppose I got over here on the West Side to
open a boarding-house? "Perhaps if you'd worry a little more, I wouldn't worry so much,"
sighed the man deeply. "Well, mercy me, I must be going," interposed the little dressmaker,
springing to her feet with a nervous glance at her brother and his
wife. "I'm forgetting it ain't so near as it used to be. Come again," called the three on the veranda. Then the door closed behind them, as they entered the house. Meanwhile, walking across the common, Benny was entertaining Mr. "Yep, they'll take ye, I bet ye--Aunt Jane an' Uncle Frank will!" "Well, that's good, I'm sure." Why, Aunt Jane'll just tumble over
herself ter get ye, if ye just mention first what yer'll PAY. She'll
begin ter reckon up right away then what she'll save. An' in a minute
she'll say, 'Yes, I'll take ye.'" Smith's voice was palpable even to
eight-year-old Benny. "Oh, you don't need ter worry," he hastened to explain. "She won't
starve ye; only she won't let ye waste anythin'. You'll have ter eat
all the crusts to yer pie, and finish 'taters before you can get any
puddin', an' all that, ye know. Ye see, she's great on savin'--Aunt
Jane is. She says waste is a sinful extravagance before the Lord." "But are you sure, my
boy, that you ought to talk--just like this, about your aunt?" "Why, that's all right, Mr. Ev'rybody in town knows Aunt Jane. Why, Ma says folks say she'd save ter-day for ter-morrer, if she could. But she couldn't do that, could she? But you
wait till you see Aunt Jane." "Well, ye won't have ter wait long, Mr. She lives over the groc'ry store, ter save rent, ye know. An' here we are," he finished, banging open a door and
leading the way up a flight of ill-lighted stairs. CHAPTER III

THE SMALL BOY AT THE KEYHOLE


At the top of the stairs Benny tried to open the door, but as it did
not give at his pressure, he knocked lustily, and called "Aunt Jane,
Aunt Jane!" Smith, his finger almost on a small
push-button near him. "Yep, but it don't go now. Uncle Frank wanted it fixed, but Aunt Jane
said no; knockin' was just as good, an' 'twas lots cheaper, 'cause
'twould save mendin', and didn't use any 'lectricity. But Uncle Frank
says---"

The door opened abruptly, and Benny interrupted himself to give eager
greeting. Smith saw a tall, angular woman with graying
dark hair and high cheek bones. Her eyes were keen and just now
somewhat sternly inquiring, as they were bent upon himself. Perceiving that Benny considered his mission as master of ceremonies at
an end, Mr. "I came from your husband's brother, madam. He thought
perhaps you had a room that I could have." Her eyes grew still more coldly disapproving. He thought--that is, THEY thought that perhaps--you
would be so kind." I
never have--but that isn't saying I couldn't, of course. As she finished speaking she stepped to the low-burning gas
jet and turned it carefully to give a little more light down the narrow
hallway. Benny had already reached the door at the end of the hall. The woman
began to tug at her apron strings. "I hope you'll excuse my gingham apron, Mr.--er--Smith. Well, as I was saying, I hope
you'll excuse this apron." Her fingers were fumbling with the knot at
the back. "I take it off, mostly, when the bell rings, evenings or
afternoons; but I heard Benny, and I didn't suppose 't was anybody but
him. With a jerk she switched off the dark blue
apron, hung it over her arm, and smoothed down the spotless white apron
which had been beneath the blue. The next instant she hurried after
Benny with a warning cry. Oh, Benny, you're
always in such a hurry!" Benny, with a cheery "Come on!" had already banged open the door before
him, and was reaching for the gas burner. A moment later the feeble spark above had become a flaring sputter of
flame. "There, child, what did I tell you?" Blaisdell
reduced the flaring light to a moderate flame, and motioned Mr. Before she seated herself, however, she went back into the
hall to lower the gas there. During her momentary absence the man, Smith, looked about him, and as
he looked he pulled at his collar. He felt suddenly a choking,
suffocating sensation. He still had the curious feeling of trying to
catch his breath when the woman came back and took the chair facing
him. In a moment he knew why he felt so suffocated--it was because that
nowhere could he see an object that was not wholly or partially covered
with some other object, or that was not serving as a cover itself. The floor bore innumerable small rugs, one before each chair, each
door, and the fireplace. The chairs themselves, and the sofa, were
covered with gray linen slips, which, in turn, were protected by
numerous squares of lace and worsted of generous size. The green silk
spread on the piano was nearly hidden beneath a linen cover, and the
table showed a succession of layers of silk, worsted, and linen, topped
by crocheted mats, on which rested several books with paper-enveloped
covers. The chandelier, mirror, and picture frames gleamed dully from
behind the mesh of pink mosquito netting. Even through the doorway into
the hall might be seen the long, red-bordered white linen path that
carried protection to the carpet beneath. (With a start the man pulled himself
together to listen to what the woman was saying.) "I think it's a
foolish extravagance, when kerosene is so good and so cheap; but my
husband will have it, and Mellicent, too, in spite of anything I
say--Mellicent's my daughter. I tell 'em if we were rich, it would be
different, of course. But this is neither here nor there, nor what you
came to talk about! Now just what is it that you want, sir?" "I want to board here, if I may." "A year--two years, perhaps, if we are mutually satisfied." Before he could catch his breath to answer
Benny had jumped into the breach. "He sounds something like a Congregationalist, only he ain't that, Aunt
Jane, and he ain't after money for missionaries, either." Jane Blaisdell smiled at Benny indulgently. "You know, Benny, very well, that nothing would suit Aunt Jane better
than to give money to all the missionaries in the world, if she only
had it to give!" "You're
working for some church, then, I take it." "I am a genealogist, madam, in a small way. I am collecting data for a
book on the Blaisdell family." The look of cold disapproval
came back to her eyes. WE couldn't take the book,
I'm sure. "That would not be necessary, madam, I assure you," murmured Mr. "But how do you get money to live on? I mean, how am I to know that
I'll get my pay?" "Excuse me, but that kind of business
doesn't sound very good-paying; and, you see, I don't know you. And in
these days--" An expressive pause finished her sentence. I had a letter of
introduction to your brother from Mr. I think he will
vouch for me. "Oh, that's all right, then. But that isn't saying how MUCH you'll pay. Now, I think--"

There came a sharp knock at the outer door. The eager Benny jumped to
his feet, but his aunt shook her head and went to the door herself. There was a murmur of voices, then a young man entered the hall and sat
down in the chair near the hatrack. Blaisdell returned her
eyes were very bright. "If you'll just excuse me a minute," she apologized to Mr. Smith, as
she swept by him and opened a door across the room, nearly closing it
behind her. Distinctly then, from beyond the imperfectly closed door, came to the
ears of Benny and Mr. Blaisdell's most
excited accents:--"Mellicent, it's Carl Pennock. He wants you to go
auto-riding with him down to the Lake with Katie Moore and that crowd." Smith did not hear, for a nearer, yet more excited,
voice demanded attention. Won't my sister
Bess be mad? She thinks Carl Pennock's the cutest thing going. and an expressive glance toward the hall, Mr. Smith tried to stop further revelations; but Benny was not to be
silenced. "They're rich--awful rich--the Pennocks are," he confided still more
huskily. "An' there's a girl--Gussie. He's seventeen; an' Bess is mad 'cause she isn't
seventeen, too, so she can go an' play tennis same as Fred does. She'll
be madder 'n ever now, if Mell goes auto-riding with Carl, an'--"

"Sh-h!" Smith's voice and gesture this time that
Benny fell back subdued. At once then became distinctly audible again the voices from the other
room. Smith, forced to hear in spite of himself, had the air of one
who finds he has abandoned the frying pan for the fire. "No, dear, it's quite out of the question," came from beyond the door,
in Mrs. "I can't let you wear your pink. You will
wear the blue or stay at home. "But, mother, dear, it's all out of date," wailed a young girl's voice. It's perfectly whole and neat, and you must save
the pink for best." "But I'm always saving things for best, mother, and I never wear my
best. I never wear a thing when it's in style! By the time you let me
wear the pink I shan't want to wear it. Sleeves'll be small then--you
see if they aren't--I shall be wearing big ones. I want to wear big
ones now, when other girls do. "Mellicent, why will you tease me like this, when you know it will do
no good?--when you know I can't let you do it? Don't you think I want
you to be as well-dressed as anybody, if we could afford it? You must wear the blue or stay at home. There was a pause, then there came an inarticulate word and a choking
half-sob. The pink spots in her cheeks had deepened. She shut the door firmly,
then hurried through the room to the hall beyond. Another minute and
she was back in her chair. "I'm ready now to talk business, Mr. She stated plainly what she expected to do for
her boarder, and what she expected her boarder would do for her. She
enlarged upon the advantages and minimized the discomforts, with the
aid of a word now and then from the eager and interested Benny. Smith, on his part, had little to say. That that little was most
satisfactory, however, was very evident; for Mrs. Blaisdell was soon
quite glowing with pride and pleasure. He
was plainly ill at ease, and, at times, slightly abstracted. His eyes
frequently sought the door which Mrs. Blaisdell had closed so firmly a
short time before. They were still turned in that direction when
suddenly the door opened and a young girl appeared. She was a slim little girl with long-lashed, starlike eyes and a
wild-rose flush in her cheeks. Beneath her trim hat her light brown
hair waved softly over her ears, glinting into gold where the light
struck it. She looked excited and pleased, yet not quite happy. She
wore a blue dress, plainly made. Be in before ten, dear," cautioned Mrs. "And Mellicent, just a minute, dear. He's coming here to live--to board, you know. Smith, already on his feet, bowed and murmured a conventional
something. From the starlike eyes he received a fleeting glance that
made him suddenly conscious of his fifty years and the bald spot on the
top of his head. Then the girl was gone, and her mother was speaking
again. "She's going auto-riding--Mellicent is--with a young man, Carl
Pennock--one of the nicest in town. They're going down to the Lake for cake and ice cream, and they're all
nice young people, else I shouldn't let her go, of course. She's
eighteen, for all she's so small. She favors my mother in looks, but
she's got the Blaisdell nose, though. Oh, and 'twas the Blaisdells you
said you were writing a book about, wasn't it? You don't mean OUR
Blaisdells, right here in Hillerton?" "I mean all Blaisdells, wherever I find them," smiled Mr. Now that the matter
of board had been satisfactorily settled, Mrs. Blaisdell apparently
dared to show some interest in the book. My, how pleased Hattie'll be--my sister-in-law, Jim's
wife. She just loves to see her name in print--parties, and club
banquets, and where she pours, you know. But maybe you don't take
women, too." "Oh, yes, if they are Blaisdells, or have married Blaisdells." That's where we'd come in, then, isn't it? And
Frank, my husband, he'll like it, too,--if you tell about the grocery
store. And of course you would, if you told about him. You'd have
to--'cause that's all there is to tell. He thinks that's about all
there is in the world, anyway,--that grocery store. And 'tis a good
store, if I do say it. And there's his sister, Flora; and Maggie--But,
there! She won't be in it, will she, after all? She isn't
a Blaisdell, and she didn't marry one. "She'll just laugh
and say it doesn't matter; and then Grandpa Duff'll ask for his drops
or his glasses, or something, and she'll forget all about it. "Yes, I know; but--Poor Maggie! Blaisdell
sighed and looked thoughtful. "But Maggie KNOWS a lot about the
Blaisdells," she added, brightening; "so she could tell you lots of
things--about when they were little, and all that." But--that isn't--er--" Mr. "And, really, for that matter, she knows about us NOW, too, better than
'most anybody else. Hattie's always sending for her, and Flora, too, if
they're sick, or anything. Sometimes I think they actually
impose upon her. And she's such a good soul, too! I declare, I never
see her but I wish I could do something for her. But, of course, with
my means--But, there! Frank says I
never do know when to stop, when I get started on something; and of
course you didn't come here to talk about poor Maggie. When is it you want to start in--to board, I mean?" "And now we must be going--Benny and I. I'm at the Holland House. Blaisdell, I'll send up my trunks to-morrow
morning. And now good-night--and thank you." The woman, too, came to her feet, but her face
was surprised. "Why, you haven't even seen your room yet! How do you
know you'll like it?" There was a quizzical lift to his
eyebrows. Well--er--perhaps I will just take a look at--the room, though I'm not
worrying any, I assure you. I've no doubt it will be quite right, quite
right," he finished, as he followed Mrs. Blaisdell to a door halfway
down the narrow hall. Five minutes later, once more on the street, he was walking home with
Benny. It was Benny who broke the long silence that had immediately
fallen between them. Smith, I'll bet ye YOU'll never be rich!" I'll never be--What do you mean, boy?" "'Cause you paid Aunt Jane what she asked the very first time. Why,
Aunt Jane never expects ter get what she asks, pa says. She sells him
groceries in the store, sometimes, when Uncle Frank's away, ye know. Pa
says what she asks first is for practice--just ter get her hand in; an'
she expects ter get beat down. But you paid it, right off the bat. Didn't ye see how tickled Aunt Jane was, after she'd got over bein'
surprised?" "Why--er--really, Benny," murmured Mr. "Oh, yes, sir, you could have saved a lot every week, if ye hadn't bit
so quick. An' that's why I say you won't ever get rich. Savin''s what
does it, ye know--gets folks rich. She says a penny
saved's good as two earned, an' better than four spent." "That does look as
if there wasn't much chance for me, doesn't it?" Benny spoke soberly, and with evident sympathy. He spoke
again, after a moment, but Mr. Smith was, indeed, not a little abstracted all the way to Benny's home,
though his good-night was very cheerful at parting. Benny would have
been surprised, indeed, had he known that Mr. Smith was thinking, not
about his foolishly extravagant agreement for board, but about a pair
of starry eyes with wistful lights in them, and a blue dress, plainly
made. John Smith wrote the following letter to
Edward D. Norton, Esq., Chicago:

MY DEAR NED,--Well, I'm here. I've been here exactly six hours, and
already I'm in possession of not a little Blaisdell data for
my--er--book. James, their daughter, Bessie, and
their son, Benny. Benny, by the way, is a gushing geyser of current
Blaisdell data which, I foresee, I shall find interesting, but
embarrassing, perhaps, at times. I've also seen Miss Flora, and Mrs. Jane Blaisdell and her daughter, Mellicent. There's a "Poor Maggie" whom I haven't seen. But she isn't a Blaisdell. She's a Duff, daughter of the man who married Rufus Blaisdell's widow,
some thirty years or more ago. As I said, I haven't seen her yet, but
she, too, according to Mrs. Frank Blaisdell, must be a gushing geyser
of Blaisdell data, so I probably soon shall see her. Why she's "poor" I
don't know. As for the Blaisdell data already in my possession--I've no comment to
make. Really, Ned, to tell the truth, I'm not sure I'm going to relish
this job, after all. In spite of a perfectly clear conscience, and the
virtuous realization that I'm here to bring nothing worse than a
hundred thousand dollars apiece with the possible addition of a few
millions on their devoted heads--in spite of all this, I yet have an
uncomfortable feeling that I'm a small boy listening at the keyhole. However, I'm committed to the thing now, so I'll stuff it out, I
suppose,--though I'm not sure, after all, that I wouldn't chuck the
whole thing if it wasn't that I wanted to see how Mellicent will enjoy
her pink dresses. How many pink dresses will a hundred thousand dollars
buy, anyway,--I mean PRETTY pink dresses, all fixed up with frills and
furbelows? As ever yours,

STAN--er--JOHN SMITH. CHAPTER IV

IN SEARCH OF SOME DATES


Very promptly the next morning Mr. John Smith and his two trunks
appeared at the door of his new boarding-place. Jane Blaisdell
welcomed him cordially. She wore a high-necked, long-sleeved gingham
apron this time, which she neither removed nor apologized for--unless
her cheerful "You see, mornings you'll find me in working trim, Mr. Mellicent, her slender young self enveloped in a similar apron, was
dusting his room as he entered it. She nodded absently, with a casual
"Good-morning, Mr. Even the
placing of the two big trunks, which the shuffling men brought in, won
from her only a listless glance or two. Then, without speaking again,
she left the room, as her mother entered it. Blaisdell looked about her complacently. "With this
couch-bed with its red cover and cushions, and all the dressing things
moved to the little room in there, it looks like a real sitting-room in
here, doesn't it?" "And you had 'em take the trunks in there, too. That's good," she
nodded, crossing to the door of the small dressing-room beyond. Well, I hope you'll be real happy with us, Mr. And you needn't be a mite afraid of
hurting anything. I've covered everything with mats and tidies and
spreads." A keen listener would have noticed an odd something in
Mr. "Yes, I always do--to save wearing and soiling, you know. Of course, if
we had money to buy new all the time, it would be different. And that's what I tell Mellicent when she complains of so many
things to dust and brush. Dinner's at twelve o'clock, and supper is at six--except in the winter. We have it earlier then, so's we can go to bed earlier. I do like the long days, don't you? Well,
I'll be off now, and let you unpack. As I said before, make yourself
perfectly at home, perfectly at home." Smith drew a long breath and looked about him. It was a
pleasant room, in spite of its cluttered appearance. There was an
old-fashioned desk for his papers, and the chairs looked roomy and
comfortable. The little dressing-room carried many conveniences, and
the windows of both rooms looked out upon the green of the common. "Oh, well, I don't know. This might be lots worse--in spite of the
tidies!" John Smith, as he singled out the keys of his
trunks. He was a
portly man with rather thick gray hair and "mutton-chop" gray whiskers. He ate very fast, and a great deal, yet he still found time to talk
interestedly with his new boarder. He was plainly a man of decided opinions--opinions which he did not
hesitate to express, and which he emphasized with resounding thumps of
his fists on the table. Smith, taken
utterly by surprise, was guilty of a visible start. After that he
learned to accept them with the serenity evinced by the rest of the
family. Smith knew (if he could remember them)
the current market prices of beans, corn, potatoes, sugar, and flour;
and he knew (again if he could remember) why some of these commodities
were higher, and some lower, than they had been the week before. That stocks and bonds fluctuated,
he was well aware. That "wheat" could be cornered, he realized. But of
the ups and downs of corn and beans as seen by the retail grocer he
knew very little. That is, he had known very little until after that
dinner with Mr. Smith began systematically to gather
material for his Blaisdell book. He would first visit by turns all the
Hillerton Blaisdells, he decided; then, when he had exhausted their
resources, he would, of course, turn to the town records and cemeteries
of Hillerton and the neighboring villages. Armed with a pencil and a very businesslike looking notebook,
therefore, he started at two o'clock for the home of James Blaisdell. Blaisdell's kind permission to come and ask all the
questions he liked, he deemed it fitting to begin there. He had no trouble in finding the house, but there was no one in sight
this time, as he ascended the steps. The house, indeed, seemed
strangely quiet. He was just about to ring the bell when around the
corner of the veranda came a hurried step and a warning voice. "Oh, please, don't ring the bell! Isn't it something that I
can do for you?" He thought at first, from the trim, slender
figure, and the waving hair above the gracefully poised head, that he
was confronting a young woman. Then he saw the silver threads at the
temples, and the fine lines about the eyes. James Blaisdell," he answered,
lifting his hat. She smiled brightly, then
went on before he could reply. I fancy I should be edified to hear
it--that description." Then, a bit roguishly, she demanded:--"Should you
like to hear it--really?" I've already collected a few samples of Benny's
descriptive powers." She motioned him
to a chair, and dropped easily into one herself. "Benny said you were
tall and not fat; that you had a wreath of light hair 'round a bald
spot, and whiskers that were clipped as even as Mr. Pennock's hedge;
and that your lips, without speaking, said, 'Run away, little boy,' but
that your eyes said, 'Come here.' "So I judge, since you recognized me without any difficulty," rejoined
Mr. You see you have the advantage of
me. "Oh, I'm just here to help out. Blaisdell is ill upstairs--one of
her headaches. That is why I asked you not to ring. She gets so nervous
when the bell rings. She thinks it's callers, and that she won't be
ready to receive them; and she hurries up and begins to dress. So I
asked you not to ring." "Oh, for the book, of course. Oh, yes, I have heard about that, too." Blaisdell will soon
be here. He's coming early so I can go home. "And you are--"

"Miss Duff. "You don't mean--'Poor Maggie'!" (Not until the words were out did Mr. "Er--ah--that is--" He
stumbled miserably, and she came to his rescue. "Oh, yes, I'm--'Poor Maggie.'" There was an odd something in her
expressive face that Mr. He was groping for
something--anything to say, when suddenly there was a sound behind
them, and the little woman at his side sprang to her feet. "Oh, Hattie, you came down!" James Blaisdell
opened the screen door and stepped out on to the veranda. Blaisdell advanced and held out her hand. She looked pale, and her hair
hung a bit untidily about one ear below a somewhat twisted pyramid of
puffs. Her dress, though manifestly an expensive one, showed haste in
its fastenings. "Yes, I heard voices, and I thought some one had
come--a caller. "I'm glad--if you're better," smiled Miss Maggie. "Then I'll go, if you
don't mind. Smith has come to ask you some questions, Hattie. With another cheery smile and a nod to Mr. Smith, she
disappeared into the house. Smith saw her hurrying
down a side path to the street. Blaisdell sank languidly into
a chair. "About the Blaisdell family--yes. But perhaps another day, when you are
feeling better, Mrs. "I can answer to-day as
well as any time--though I'm not sure I can tell you very much, ever. I
think it's fine you are making the book, though. Some way it gives a
family such a standing, to be written up like that. And the Blaisdells are really a very nice family--one of the oldest in
Hillerton, though, of course, they haven't much money." "I ought to find a good deal of material here, then, if they have lived
here so long." Of course I can tell you
about my own family. You
knew that, didn't you? His
picture was in it a year ago last June. There was a write-up on
Hillerton. I was in it, too, though there wasn't much about me. But
I've got other clippings with more, if you'd like to see them--where
I've poured, and been hostess, and all that, you know." Blaisdell, your husband's father's name was Rufus, I
believe. What was his mother's maiden name, please?" Our little girl is named
for her--Bessie, you know--you saw her last night. Jim wanted to, so I
let him. It's a pretty name--Elizabeth--still, it sounds a little
old-fashioned now, don't you think? Of course we are anxious to have
everything just right for our daughter. A young lady soon coming out,
so,--you can't be too particular. That's one reason why I wanted to get
over here--on the West Side, I mean. Everybody who is anybody lives on
the West Side in Hillerton. And your mother Blaisdell's surname?" Smith's
pencil was poised over the open notebook. But,
dear me, I don't know. I suppose Jim will, or Flora, or maybe
Frank--though I don't believe HE will, unless her folks kept groceries. Did you ever see anybody that didn't know anything but groceries like
Frank Blaisdell?" The lady sighed and shrugged her somewhat heavy
shoulders with an expressive glance. "Oh, well, it's good--to be interested in one's business, you know." Rufus Blaisdell's surname?" But Jim--Oh, I'll tell you who will know," she broke off
interestedly; "and that's Maggie Duff. You saw her here a few minutes
ago, you know. Father Duff's got all of Mother Blaisdell's papers and
diaries. Oh, Maggie can tell you a lot of things. Benny
says if we want ANYTHING we ask Aunt Maggie, and I don't know but he's
right. And here I am, sending you to her, so soon!" "I don't see but what I shall have
to interview Miss Maggie, and Miss Flora. Is there nothing more, then,
that you can tell me?" "Well, there's Fred, my son. He's at the head of his class, and he's going to college and
be a lawyer. And that's another reason why I wanted to come over to
this side--on Fred's account. I want him to meet the right sort of
people. We think we're going to have Fred a
big man some day." Smith's pencil still poised above an
almost entirely blank page. He'll be eighteen the tenth of next month." "And Miss Bessie, and Benny?" She wants to come
out then, but I think I shall wait--a little, she's so very young;
though Gussie Pennock's out, and she's only seventeen, and the Pennocks
are some of our very best people. They're the richest folks in town,
you know." "He's eight--or rather nine, next Tuesday. Smith, don't
you want ANYTHING but dates? They're tiresome things, I think,--make
one feel so old, you know, and it shows up how many years you've been
married. Well, you miss a lot, of course,--home and wife and
children. You aren't tied down, and you
don't have so much to worry about. Is your mother living, or your
father?" Smith stirred a little uneasily,
and adjusted his book. Blaisdell, you can give me
your own maiden name." "Oh, yes, I can give you that!" She laughed and bridled
self-consciously. "But you needn't ask when I was born, for I shan't
tell you, if you do. And the Snows were just as good as the Blaisdells,
if I do say it. There were a lot that wanted me--oh, I was pretty THEN,
Mr. She laughed, and bridled again self-consciously. He was handsome then, very--big dark eyes and dark hair, and
so dreamy and poetical-looking; and there wasn't a girl that hadn't set
her cap for him. And he's been a good husband to me. To be sure, he
isn't quite so ambitious as he might be, perhaps. _I_ always did
believe in being somebody, and getting somewhere. But
Jim--he's always for hanging back and saying how much it'll cost. Ten
to one he doesn't end up by saying we can't afford it. He's like
Jane,--Frank's wife, where you board, you know,--only Jane's worse than
Jim ever thought of being. She won't spend even what she's got. If
she's got ten dollars, she won't spend but five cents, if she can help
it. Now, I believe in taking some comfort as you go along. But
Jane--greatest saver I ever did see. Smith, that
she doesn't try to save feeding you at all!" Smith smiled cheerily, snapped his book shut
and got to his feet. "Oh, won't you wait for Mr. He can tell you more, I'm sure." At his office, some time, I'll see Mr. "But I thank you
very much, Mrs. Blaisdell," he bowed in farewell. CHAPTER V

IN MISS FLORA'S ALBUM


It was the next afternoon that Mr. Smith inquired his way to the home
of Miss Flora Blaisdell. He found it to be a shabby little cottage on a
side street. Miss Flora herself answered his knock, peering at him
anxiously with her near-sighted eyes. "Good-afternoon, Miss Blaisdell," he began with a deferential bow. "I
am wondering if you could tell me something of your father's family." Miss Flora, plainly pleased, but flustered, stepped back for him to
enter. I'm sure I'm glad to tell you
anything I know," she beamed, ushering him into the unmistakably
little-used "front room." "But you really ought to go to Maggie. I can
tell you some things, but Maggie's got the Bible. Mother had it, you
know, and it's all among her things. And of course we had to let it
stay, as long as Father Duff lives. Poor Maggie--she tried to get 'em for us; but, mercy! I've got pictures of a lot of them,
and most of them I know quite a lot about." As she spoke she nicked up from the table a big red plush photograph
album. Seating herself at his side she opened it, and began to tell him
of the pictures, one by one. She did, indeed, know "quite a lot" of most of them. Tintypes,
portraying stiffly held hands and staring eyes, ghostly reproductions
of daguerreotypes of stern-lipped men and women, in old-time stock and
kerchief; photographs of stilted family groups after the
"he-is-mine-and-I-am-his" variety; snap-shots of adorable babies with
blurred thumbs and noses--never had Mr. Busily, from time to time, he jotted down a name
or date. Then, suddenly, as she turned a page, he gave an involuntary
start. He was looking at a pictured face, evidently cut from a magazine. "Why, what--who--" he stammered. Miss Flora's
hands fluttered over the page a little importantly, adjusting a corner
of the print. I can't tell you just how, only I know he
is. That's why I've always been so
interested in him, and read everything I could--in the papers and
magazines, you know." John Smith's voice had become a little uncertain. Miss Flora's eyes were musingly
fixed on the picture before her--which was well, perhaps: Mr. John
Smith's face was a study just then. "Er--n-no, he isn't." "But he's turribly rich, I s'pose. I wonder how it feels to have so
much money." There being no reply to this, Miss Flora went on after a moment. "It must be awful nice--to buy what you want, I mean, without fretting
about how much it costs. "What would you do--if you could--if you had the money, I mean?" "Well, there's three things I know I'd do. They're silly, of course,
but they're what I WANT. It's a phonygraph, and to see Niagara Falls,
and to go into Noell's restaurant and order what I want without even
looking at the prices after 'em. "What's more, I hope you'll get them--some time." Why, if I had the money, I shouldn't
spend it--not for them things. I'd be needing shoes or a new dress. And
I COULDN'T be so rich I wouldn't notice what the prices was--of what I
ate. But, then, I don't believe anybody's that, not even him." She
pointed to the picture still open before them. Smith, his eyes bent upon the picture, was looking
thoughtful. He had the air of a man to whom has come a brand-new,
somewhat disconcerting idea. Miss Flora, glancing from the man to the picture, and back again, gave
a sudden exclamation. "There, now I know who it is that you remind me of, Mr. Miss Flora was still interestedly
comparing the man and the picture, "But, then, that ain't so strange. Didn't you say you was a Blaisdell?" "Er--y-yes, oh, yes. I'm a Blaisdell," nodded Mr. "Very
likely I've got the--er--Blaisdell nose. Then he turned a leaf of
the album abruptly, decidedly. he demanded,
pointing to the tintype of a bright-faced young girl. Oh, that's my cousin Grace when she was sixteen. She died; but
she was a wonderful girl. Smith; and even the closest observer, watching his
face, could not have said that he was not absorbedly interested in Miss
Flora's story of "my cousin Grace." It was not until the last leaf of the album was reached that they came
upon the picture of a small girl, with big, hungry eyes looking out
from beneath long lashes. "That's Mellicent--where you're boarding, you know--when she was
little." "But it's horrid, poor
child!" "But she looks so--so sad," murmured Mr. She
hesitated, then burst out, as if irresistibly impelled from within. "It's only just another case of never having what you want WHEN you
want it, Mr. And it ain't 'cause they're poor, either. They
AIN'T poor--not like me, I mean. Frank's always done well, and he's
been a good provider; but it's my sister-in-law--her way, I mean. Not
that I'm saying anything against Jane. She's a good woman, and
she's very kind to me. She's always saying what she'd do for me if she
only had the money. She's a good housekeeper, too, and her house is as
neat as wax. But it's just that she never thinks she can USE anything
she's got till it's so out of date she don't want it. I dressmake for
her, you see, so I know--about her sleeves and skirts, you know. And if
she ever does wear a decent thing she's so afraid it will rain she
never takes any comfort in it!" "Well, that is--unfortunate." And she's brought up that poor child the same way. Why,
from babyhood, Mellicent never had her rattles till she wanted blocks,
nor her blocks till she wanted dolls, nor her dolls till she was big
enough for beaus! And that's what made the poor child always look so
wall-eyed and hungry. She was hungry--even if she did get enough to
eat." Blaisdell probably believed in--er--economy," hazarded Mr. But, there, I ought not to
have said anything, of course. I only wish some
other folks I could mention had more of it. There's Jim's wife, for
instance. Now, if she's got ten cents, she'll spend fifteen--and five
more to show HOW she spent it. She and Jane ought to be shaken up in a
bag together. Smith, Jane doesn't let herself enjoy anything. She's always keeping it for a better time. Though sometimes I think she
DOES enjoy just seeing how far she can make a dollar go. But Mellicent
don't, nor Frank; and it's hard on them." Smith was looking at the wistful eyes
under the long lashes. "'T is; and 't ain't right, I believe. There IS such a thing as being
too economical. I tell Jane she'll be like a story I read once about a
man who pinched and saved all his life, not even buying peanuts, though
he just doted on 'em. And when he did get rich, so he could buy the
peanuts, he bought a big bag the first thing. He
hadn't got any teeth left to chew 'em with." Smith, as he pocketed his
notebook and rose to his feet. "And now I thank you very much, Miss
Blaisdell, for the help you've been to me." "Oh, you're quite welcome, indeed you are, Mr. Smith," beamed Miss
Blaisdell. "It's done me good, just to talk to you about all these
folks and pictures. I do get lonesome sometimes, all
alone, so! and I ain't so busy as I wish I was, always. But I'm afraid
I haven't helped you much--just this." "Oh, yes, you have--perhaps more than think," smiled the man, with an
odd look in his eyes. Well, I'm glad, I'm sure. And don't forget to go to Maggie's,
now. And she'll be so glad
to show you!" "All right, thank you; I'll surely interview--Miss Maggie," smiled the
man in good-bye. He had almost said "poor" Maggie himself, though why she should be POOR
Maggie had come to be an all-absorbing question with him. He had been
tempted once to ask Miss Flora, but something had held him back. That
evening at the supper table, however, in talking with Mrs. Jane
Blaisdell, the question came again to his lips; and this time it found
utterance. Jane herself had introduced Miss Maggie's name, and had said an
inconsequential something about her when Mr. Blaisdell, please,--may I ask? I must confess to a great
curiosity as to why Miss Duff is always 'poor Maggie.'" "Why, really, I don't know," she answered, "only it just comes natural,
that's all. I did it again,
didn't I? That only goes to show how we all do it, unconsciously." Frank Blaisdell, across the table, gave a sudden emphatic sniff. Well, I guess if you had to live with Father Duff, Jane, it
would be 'poor Jane' with you, all right!" "Father Duff's a trial, and no mistake. Aunt Maggie's a saint--that's what she is!" It was Mellicent who
spoke, her young voice vibrant with suppressed feeling. "She's the
dearest thing ever! There COULDN'T be anybody better than Aunt Maggie!" Nothing more was said just then, but in the evening, later, after
Mellicent had gone to walk with young Pennock, and her father had gone
back down to the store, Mrs. Blaisdell took up the matter of "Poor
Maggie" again. "I've been thinking what you said," she began, "about our calling her
'poor Maggie,' and I've made up my mind it's because we're all so sorry
for her. You see, she's been so unfortunate, as I said. I've so often wished there was something I could do for her. Of course,
if we only had money--but we haven't; so I can't. And even money
wouldn't take away her father, either. I didn't mean that,
really,--not the way it sounded," broke off Mrs. Blaisdell, in shocked
apology. "I only meant that she'd have her father to care for, just the
same." "He's something of a trial, I take it, eh?" How ever she endures it, I
can't imagine. Of course, we call him Father Duff, but he's really not
any relation to us--I mean to Frank and the rest. But their mother
married him when they were children, and they never knew their own
father much, so he's the father they know. When their mother died,
Maggie had just entered college. She was eighteen, and such a pretty
girl! "Well, of course Maggie had to come home right away. None of the rest
wanted to take care of him and Maggie had to. There was another Duff
sister then--a married sister (she's died since), but SHE wouldn't take
him, so Maggie had to. Of course, none of the Blaisdells wanted the
care of him--and he wasn't their father, anyway. Frank was wanting to
marry me, and Jim and Flora were in school and wanted to stay there, of
course. She was so
ambitious, and so fond of books. But she came, and went right into the
home and kept it so Frank and Jim and Flora could live there just the
same as when their mother was alive. And she had to do all the work,
too. Kind of hard, wasn't it?--and
Maggie only eighteen!" Smith's lips came together a bit grimly. "Well, after a time Frank and Jim married, and there was only Flora and
Father Duff at home. Poor Maggie tried then to go to college again. She
was over twenty-one, and supposed to be her own mistress, of course. She found a place where she could work and pay her way through college,
and Flora said she'd keep the house and take care of Father Duff. But,
dear me; it wasn't a month before that ended, and Maggie had to come
home again. Flora wasn't strong, and the work fretted her. Besides, she
never could get along with Father Duff, and she was trying to learn
dressmaking, too. She stuck it out till she got sick, though, then of
course Maggie had to come back." She
persuaded her father to get a girl. The
first girl and her father fought like cats and dogs, and the last time
she got one her father was taken sick, and again she had to come home. Some way, it's always been that way with poor Maggie. No sooner does
she reach out to take something than it's snatched away, just as she
thinks she's got it. Why, there was her father's cousin George--he was
going to help her once. But a streak of bad luck hit him at just that
minute, and he gave out." He's done
well, too, they say, and I always thought he'd send back something; but
he never has. There was some trouble, I believe, between him and Father
Duff at the time he went to Alaska, so that explains it, probably. Anyway, he's never done anything for them. Well, when he gave out,
Maggie just gave up college then, and settled down to take care of her
father, though I guess she's always studied some at home; and I know
that for years she didn't give up hope but that she could go some time. "Why, let me see--forty-three, forty-four--yes, she's forty-five. She
had her forty-third birthday here--I remember I gave her a handkerchief
for a birthday present--when she was helping me take care of Mellicent
through the pneumonia; and that was two years ago. She used to come
here and to Jim's and Flora's days at a time; but she isn't quite so
free as she was--Father Duff's worse now, and she don't like to leave
him nights, much, so she can't come to us so often. "And
just what is the matter with Mr. Jane Blaisdell gave a short laugh and shrugged her
shoulders. "Everything's the matter--with Father Duff! Oh, it's nerves,
mostly, the doctor says, and there are some other things--long names
that I can't remember. But, as I said, everything's the matter with
Father Duff. He's one of those men where there isn't anything quite
right. Frank says he's got so he just objects to everything--on general
principles. If it's blue, he says it ought to be black, you know. And,
really, I don't know but Frank's right. How Maggie stands him I don't
see; but she's devotion itself. Why, she even gave up her lover years
ago, for him. She wouldn't leave her father, and, of course, nobody
would think of taking HIM into the family, when he wasn't BORN into it,
so the affair was broken off. I don't know, really, as Maggie cared
much. She never was one to carry her heart on
her sleeve. I've always so wished I could do something for
her! But, then, you asked, and you're interested,
I know, and that's what you're here for--to find out about the
Blaisdells." "To--to--f-find out--" stammered Mr. "Yes, for your book, I mean." "Oh, yes--of course; for my book," agreed Mr. He
had the guilty air of a small boy who has almost been caught in a raid
on the cooky jar. "And although poor Maggie isn't really a Blaisdell herself, she's
nearly one; and they've got lots of Blaisdell records down there--among
Mother Blaisdell's things, you know. I'll want to see those, of course," declared Mr. Smith, rising to his feet, preparatory to going to his own room. CHAPTER VI

POOR MAGGIE


It was some days later that Mr. Smith asked Benny one afternoon to show
him the way to Miss Maggie Duff's home. "Sure I will," agreed Benny with alacrity. "You don't ever have ter do
any teasin' ter get me ter go ter Aunt Maggie's." "You're fond of Aunt Maggie, then, I take it." Why, I don't know
anybody that don't like Aunt Maggie." "I'm sure that speaks well--for Aunt Maggie," smiled Mr. A feller can take some comfort at Aunt Maggie's," continued
Benny, trudging along at Mr. "She don't have anythin'
just for show, that you can't touch, like 'tis at my house, and there
ain't anythin' but what you can use without gettin' snarled up in a
mess of covers an' tidies, like 'tis at Aunt Jane's. But Aunt Maggie
don't save anythin', Aunt Jane says, an' she'll die some day in the
poor-house, bein' so extravagant. "Well, really, Benny, I--er--" hesitated the man. "Well, I don't believe she will," repeated Benny. "I hope she won't,
anyhow. Poorhouses ain't very nice, are they?" "I--I don't think I know very much about them, Benny." "Well, I don't believe they are, from what Aunt Jane says. And if they
ain't, I don't want Aunt Maggie ter go. She hadn't ought ter have
anythin'--but Heaven--after Grandpa Duff. He's got a chronic grouch, ma says. It means it keeps goin' without stoppin'--the rheumatism, I
mean, not the folks that's got it. Cole don't, and that's what he's got. But when I asked ma what a
grouch was, she said little boys should be seen and not heard. Ma
always says that when she don't want to answer my questions. "Oh, are you POOR, too? "Well, that is, I--I--"

"Ma was wonderin' yesterday what you lived on. Haven't you got any
money, Mr. "Oh, yes, Benny, I've got money enough--to live on." Smith spoke
promptly, and with confidence this time. You're glad, then, ain't you? Ma says we haven't--got
enough ter live on, I mean; but pa says we have, if we didn't try ter
live like everybody else lives what's got more." Smith bit his lip, and looked down a little apprehensively at the
small boy at his side. "I--I'm not sure, Benny, but _I_ shall have to say little boys should
be seen and not--" He stopped abruptly. Benny, with a stentorian shout,
had run ahead to a gate before a small white cottage. On the cozy,
vine-shaded porch sat a white-haired old man leaning forward on his
cane. "Hi, there, Grandpa Duff, I've brought somebody ter see ye!" The gate
was open now, and Benny was halfway up the short walk. Smith doffed his hat and came forward. The man on the porch looked up sharply from beneath heavy brows. Smith, on the topmost step, hesitated. "Is
your--er--daughter in, Mr. His somewhat unfriendly gaze was still bent
upon the newcomer. "Just what do you want of my daughter?" "Why, I--I--" Plainly nonplused, the man paused uncertainly. Then, with
a resumption of his jaunty cheerfulness, he smiled straight into the
unfriendly eyes. Duff,--records of the
Blaisdell family. I'm compiling a book on--

"Humph! Duff curtly, settling back
in his chair. "As I said, I've heard of you. But you needn't come here
asking your silly questions. I shan't tell you a thing, anyway, if you
do. It's none of your business who lived and died and what they did
before you were born. If the Lord had wanted you to know he'd 'a' put
you here then instead of now!" Looking very much as if he had received a blow in the face, Mr. "Aw, grandpa"--began Benny, in grieved expostulation. But a cheery
voice interrupted, and Mr. Smith turned to see Miss Maggie Duff
emerging from the doorway. she greeted him, extending a cordial
hand. For only the briefest of minutes he hesitated. Could she
have heard, and yet speak so unconcernedly? And
yet--He took the chair she offered--but with a furtive glance toward
the old man. Smith tells me he has come to see those records. Now, I'm--"

"Oh, father, dear, you couldn't!" interrupted his daughter with
admonishing earnestness. "You mustn't go and get all those down!" Smith almost gasped aloud in his amazement, but Miss Maggie did not
seem to notice him at all.) "Why, father, you couldn't--they're too
heavy for you! There are the Bible, and all those papers. Besides, I shouldn't think you'd want
to get them!" Smith, hearing this, almost gasped aloud in his amazement, he
quite did so at what happened next. His mouth actually fell open as he
saw the old man rise to his feet with stern dignity. I'm not quite in my dotage yet. I guess I'm
still able to fetch downstairs a book and a bundle of papers." With his
thumping cane a resolute emphasis to every other step, the old man
hobbled into the house. "There, grandpa, that's the talk!" "But you said--"

"Er--Benny, dear," interposed Miss Maggie, in a haste so precipitate
that it looked almost like alarm, "run into the pantry and see what you
can find in the cooky jar." The last of her sentence was addressed to
Benny's flying heels as they disappeared through the doorway. Smith searched the woman's face for some hint, some
sign that this extraordinary shift-about was recognized and understood;
but Miss Maggie, with a countenance serenely expressing only cheerful
interest, was over by the little stand, rearranging the pile of books
and newspapers on it. "I think, after all," she began thoughtfully, pausing in her work,
"that it will be better indoors. It blows so out here that you'll be
bothered in your copying, I am afraid." She was still standing at the table, chatting about the papers,
however, when at the door, a few minutes later, appeared her father, in
his arms a big Bible, and a sizable pasteboard box. "Right here, father, please," she said then, to Mr. The old man frowned and cast disapproving eyes on his daughter and the
table. I don't want them there," he observed coldly. With the words he turned back into the house. Smith's bewildered eyes searched Miss Maggie's face and
once again they found nothing but serene unconcern. "This way, please," she directed cheerily. And, still marveling, he
followed her into the house. Smith thought he had never seen so charming a living-room. A
comfortable chair invited him, and he sat down. He felt suddenly rested
and at home, and at peace with the world. Realizing that, in some way,
the room had produced this effect, he looked curiously about him,
trying to solve the secret of it. Reluctantly to himself he confessed that it was a very ordinary room. The carpet was poor, and was badly worn. The chairs, while comfortable
looking, were manifestly not expensive, and had seen long service. Simple curtains were at the windows, and a few fair prints were on the
walls. Two or three vases, of good lines but cheap materials, held
flowers, and there was a plain but roomy set of shelves filled with
books--not immaculate, leather-backed, gilt-lettered "sets" but rows of
dingy, worn volumes, whose very shabbiness was at once an invitation
and a promise. Smith see protecting cover
mat, or tidy. He decided then that this must be why he felt suddenly so
rested and at peace with all mankind. Even as the conviction came to
him, however he was suddenly aware that everything was not, after all,
peaceful or harmonious. Duff and his daughter were arranging the Bible and the
papers. Miss Maggie suggested piles in a certain order: her father
promptly objected, and arranged them otherwise. Miss Maggie placed the
papers first for perusal: her father said "Absurd!" Miss Maggie started to draw up a chair to the table: her father
derisively asked her if she expected a man to sit in that--and drew up
a different one. Smith, when he was finally invited to take a
seat at the table, found everything quite the most convenient and
comfortable possible. Once more into Miss Maggie's face he sent a sharply inquiring glance,
and once more he encountered nothing but unruffled cheerfulness. With a really genuine interest in the records before him, Mr. The Bible had been in the Blaisdell family for
generations, and it was full of valuable names and dates. Duff, on the other side of the table, was arranging into piles the
papers before him. He complained of the draft, and Miss Maggie shut the
window. He said then that he didn't mean he wanted to suffocate, and
she opened the one on the other side. The clock had hardly struck three
when he accused her of having forgotten his medicine. Yet when she
brought it he refused to take it. She had not brought the right kind of
spoon, he said, and she knew perfectly well he never took it out of
that narrow-bowl kind. He complained of the light, and she lowered the
curtain; but he told her that he didn't mean he didn't want to see at
all, so she put it up halfway. He said his coat was too warm, and she
brought another one. He put it on grudgingly, but he declared that it
was as much too thin as the other was too thick. Smith, in spite of his efforts to be politely deaf and blind, found
himself unable to confine his attention to birth, death, and marriage
notices. Once he almost uttered an explosive "Good Heavens, how do you
stand it?" But he stopped himself just in time, and
fiercely wrote with a very black mark that Submit Blaisdell was born in
eighteen hundred and one. Duff's attention was frowningly turned across the table toward himself. "If you will spend your time over such silly stuff, why don't you use a
bigger book?" "Because it wouldn't fit my pocket," smiled Mr. "Just what business of yours is it, anyhow, when these people lived and
died?" "Why don't you let them alone, then? "Why, I--I--" Mr. "Well, I can tell you it's a silly business, whatever you find. If you
find your grandfather's a bigger man than you are, you'll be proud of
it, but you ought to be ashamed of it--'cause you aren't bigger
yourself! On the other hand, if you find he ISN'T as big as you are,
you'll be ashamed of that, when you ought to be proud of it--'cause
you've gone him one better. But can't you do any work, real work?" "He is doing work, real work, now, father," interposed Miss Maggie
quickly. "He's having a woeful time, too. If you'd only help him, now,
and show him those papers." "Well, I shan't," he observed tartly. "I'M not a fool, if he is. I'm
going out to the porch where I can get some air." "There, work as long as you like, Mr. I knew you'd rather work
by yourself," nodded Miss Maggie, moving the piles of papers nearer him. "But, good Heavens, how do you stand--" exploded Mr. Smith before he
realized that this time he had really said the words aloud. "After all, it
doesn't matter. You couldn't help
seeing--how things were, of course, and I forgot, for a moment, that
you were a stranger. You see,
father is nervous, and not at all well. "But do you mean that you always have to tell him to do what you don't
want, in order to--well--that is--" Mr. Smith, finding himself in very
deep water, blushed again painfully. Miss Maggie met his dismayed gaze with cheerful candor. "Tell him to do what I DON'T want in order to get him to do what I do
want him to? But I don't mind; really I don't. And when you know how, what does it matter? To most of the world we say, 'Please do,' when we
want a thing, while to him we have to say, 'Please don't.' You see, it's really very simple--when you know how." He wanted to say more; but
Miss Maggie, with a smiling nod, turned away, so he went back to his
work. Benny, wandering in from the kitchen, with both hands full of cookies,
plumped himself down on the cushioned window-seat, and drew a sigh of
content. The blithe voice and pleasant smile took all the sting
from the prompt refusal. Maybe pa would--a little; but Bess and ma wouldn't. Miss Maggie crossed to a little stand and picked up
a small box. Benny shifted his now depleted stock of cookies to one hand, dropped to
his knees on the floor, and dumped the contents of the box upon the
seat before him. "They won't let me eat cookies any more at home--in the house, I mean. "But you know you have to pick up your crumbs here, dear." But I don't mind--after I've had the fun of eatin' first. But
they won't let me drop 'em ter begin with, there, nor take any of the
boys inter the house. Honest, Aunt Maggie, there ain't anything a
feller can do,'seems so, if ye live on the West Side," he persisted
soberly. Smith, copying dates at the table, was conscious of a slightly
apprehensive glance in his direction from Miss Maggie's eyes, as she
murmured:--

"But you're forgetting your puzzle, Benny. "I can't do puzzles there, either." "All the more reason, then, why you should like to do them here. See,
where does this dog's head go?" Listlessly Benny took the bit of pictured wood in his fingers and began
to fit it into the pattern before him. "I used ter do 'em an' leave 'em 'round, but ma says I can't now. Callers might come and find 'em, an' what would they say--on the West
Side! An' that's the way 'tis with everything. Ma an' Bess are always
doin' things, or not doin' 'em, for those callers. "Yes, yes, dear, but they will, when they get acquainted. You haven't
found where the dog's head goes yet." "Pa says he don't want ter get acquainted. He'd rather have the old
friends, what don't mind baked beans, an' shirt-sleeves, an' doin' yer
own work, an' what thinks more of yer heart than they do of yer
pocketbook. An' say, we have ter wash our
hands every meal now--on the table, I mean--in those little glass
wash-dishes. Ma went down an' bought some, an' she's usin' 'em every
day, so's ter get used to 'em. She says everybody that is anybody has
'em nowadays. Bess thinks they're great, but I don't. I don't like 'em
a mite." It doesn't matter--it doesn't really matter,
does it, if you do have to use the little dishes? Come, you're not half
doing the puzzle." Benny shifted his position, and picked up a three-cornered
bit of wood carrying the picture of a dog's paw. You see, things are so different--on the West Side. Miss Maggie turned from the puzzle with a start. It's keepin' books for a man. It brings in
quite a lot extry, ma says; but she wouldn't let me have some new
roller skates when mine broke. She's savin' up for a chafin' dish. You eat out of it, some way--I
mean, it cooks things ter eat; an' Bess wants one. ALL our eatin's different,'seems so, on the West Side. Ma has
dinners nights now, instead of noons. She says the Pennocks do, an'
everybody does who is anybody. Pa don't, either,
an' half the time he can't get home in time for it, anyhow, on account
of gettin' back to his new job, ye know, an'--"

"Oh, I've found where the dog's head goes," cried Miss Maggie, There
was a hint of desperation in her voice. "I shall have your puzzle all
done for you myself, if you don't look out, Benny. I don't believe you
can do it, anyhow." retorted Benny, with sudden
spirit, falling to work in earnest. "I never saw a puzzle yet I
couldn't do!" Smith, bending assiduously over his work at the table, heard Miss
Maggie's sigh of relief--and echoed it, from sympathy. CHAPTER VII

POOR MAGGIE AND SOME OTHERS


It was half an hour later, when Mr. Smith and Benny were walking across
the common together, that Benny asked an abrupt question. "Is Aunt Maggie goin' ter be put in your book, Mr. "Why--er--yes; her name will be entered as the daughter of the man who
married the Widow Blaisdell, probably. Aunt Maggie don't have
nothin' much, yer know, except her father an' housework--housework
either for him or some of us. An' I guess she's had quite a lot of
things ter bother her, an' make her feel bad, so I hoped she'd be in
the book. Though if she wasn't, she'd just laugh an' say it doesn't
matter, of course. "Yes, when things plague, an' somethin' don't go right. She says it
helps a lot ter just remember that it doesn't matter. "Well, no,--I don't think I do see," frowned Mr. "Oh, yes," plunged in Benny; "'cause, you see, if yer stop ter think
about it--this thing that's plaguin' ye--you'll see how really small
an' no-account it is, an' how, when you put it beside really big things
it doesn't matter at all--it doesn't REALLY matter, ye know. Aunt
Maggie says she's done it years an' years, ever since she was just a
girl, an' somethin' bothered her; an' it's helped a lot." "But there are lots of things that DO matter," persisted Mr. Benny swelled a bit importantly, "I know what you mean. Aunt
Maggie says that, too; an' she says we must be very careful an' not get
it wrong. It's only the little things that bother us, an' that we wish
were different, that we must say 'It doesn't matter' about. It DOES
matter whether we're good an' kind an' tell the truth an' shame the
devil; but it DOESN'T matter whether we have ter live on the West Side
an' eat dinner nights instead of noons, an' not eat cookies any of the
time in the house,--see?" "Good for you, Benny,--and good for Aunt Maggie!" Oh, you don't know Aunt Maggie, yet. She's always tryin'
ter make people think things don't matter. A moment later he had turned down his own street, and Mr. Very often, in the days that followed, Mr. Smith thought of this speech
of Benny's. He had opportunity to verify it, for he was seeing a good
deal of Miss Maggie, and it seemed, indeed, to him that half the town
was coming to her to learn that something "didn't matter"--though very
seldom, except to Benny, did he hear her say the words themselves. It
was merely that to her would come men, women, and children, each with a
sorry tale of discontent or disappointment. And it was always as if
they left with her their burden, for when they turned away, head and
shoulders were erect once more, eyes were bright, and the step was
alert and eager. For that matter, he wondered how she
did--a great many things. Smith was, indeed, seeing a good deal of Miss Maggie these days. He
told himself that it was the records that attracted him. Sometimes he just sat in one of the comfortable
chairs and watched Miss Maggie, content if she gave him a word now and
then. He liked the way she carried her head, and the way her hair waved away
from her shapely forehead. He liked the quiet strength of the way her
capable hands lay motionless in her lap when their services were not
required. He liked to watch for the twinkle in her eye, and for the
dimple in her cheek that told a smile was coming. He liked to hear her
talk to Benny. He even liked to hear her talk to her father--when he
could control his temper sufficiently. Best of all he liked his own
comfortable feeling of being quite at home, and at peace with all the
world--the feeling that always came to him now whenever he entered the
house, in spite of the fact that the welcome accorded him by Mr. Duff
was hardly more friendly than at the first. Smith it was a matter of small moment whether Mr. He even indulged now and then in a bout of his
own with the gentleman, chuckling inordinately when results showed that
he had pitched his remark at just the right note of contrariety to get
what he wanted. Smith, at least nominally, spent his
time at his legitimate task of studying and copying the Blaisdell
family records, of which he was finding a great number. Rufus Blaisdell
apparently had done no little "digging" himself in his own day, and Mr. Smith told Miss Maggie that it was all a great "find" for him. She said that she was glad if she could be
of any help to him, and she told him to come whenever he liked. She
arranged the Bible and the big box of papers on a little table in the
corner, and told him to make himself quite at home; and she showed so
plainly that she regarded him as quite one of the family, that Mr. Smith might be pardoned for soon considering himself so. It was while at work in this corner that he came to learn so much of
Miss Maggie's daily life, and of her visitors. Although many of these visitors were strangers to him, some of them he
knew. Hattie Blaisdell, with a countenance even more
florid than usual. She was breathless and excited, and her eyes were
worried. She was going to give a luncheon, she said. She wanted Miss
Maggie's silver spoons, and her forks, and her hand painted
sugar-and-creamer, and Mother Blaisdell's cut-glass dish. Smith, supposing that Miss Maggie herself was to be at the
luncheon, was just rejoicing within him that she was to have this
pleasant little outing, when he heard Mrs. Blaisdell telling her to be
sure to come at eleven to be in the kitchen, and asking where could she
get a maid to serve in the dining-room, and what should she do with
Benny. He'd have to be put somewhere, or else he'd be sure to upset
everything. Smith did not hear Miss Maggie's answer to all this, for she
hurried her visitor to the kitchen at once to look up the spoons, she
said. But indirectly he obtained a very conclusive reply; for he found
Miss Maggie gone one day when he came; and Benny, who was in her place,
told him all about it, even to the dandy frosted cake Aunt Maggie had
made for the company to eat. Jane had a tired
frown between her brows and a despairing droop to her lips. She carried
a large bundle which she dropped unceremoniously into Miss Maggie's lap. "There, I'm dead beat out, and I've brought it to you. You've just got
to help me," she finished, sinking into a chair. "Why, of course, if I can. Miss Maggie's deft fingers
were already untying the knot. But I thought the last time it couldn't ever be done again." "Yes, I know; but there's lots of good in it yet," interposed Mrs. Jane
decidedly; "and I've bought new velvet and new lace, and some buttons
and a new lining. I THOUGHT I could do it alone, but I've reached a
point where I just have got to have help. "Yes, of course, but"--Miss Maggie was lifting a half-finished sleeve
doubtfully--"why didn't you go to Flora? She'd know exactly--"

Mrs. "Because I can't afford to go to Flora," she interrupted coldly. "I
have to pay Flora, and you know it. If I had the money I should be glad
to do it, of course. But I haven't, and charity begins at home I think. Besides, I do go to her for NEW dresses. Of
course, if you don't WANT to help me--"

"Oh, but I do," plunged in Miss Maggie hurriedly. "Come out into the
kitchen where we'll have more room," she exclaimed, gathering the
bundle into her arms and springing to her feet. "I've got some other lace at home--yards and yards. I got a lot, it was
so cheap," recounted Mrs. "But I'm afraid
it won't do for this, and I don't know as it will do for anything, it's
so--"

The kitchen door slammed sharply, and Mr. Half an
hour later, however, he saw Mrs. The frown was
gone from her face and the droop from the corners of her mouth. Miss Flora's thin little face looked
more pinched than ever, and her eyes more anxious, Mr. Smith's greeting, was so wan he
wished she had not tried to give it. She sat down then, by the window, and began to chat with Miss Maggie;
and very soon Mr. Smith heard her say this:--

"No, Maggie, I don't know, really, what I am going to do--truly I
don't. Why, I don't earn enough to pay my
rent, hardly, now, ter say nothin' of my feed." "But I thought that Hattie--ISN'T Hattie having some new dresses--and
Bessie, too?" "Yes, oh, yes; they are having three or four. But they don't come to ME
any more. They've gone to that French woman that makes the Pennocks'
things, you know, with the queer name. And of course it's all right,
and you can't blame 'em, livin' on the West Side, as they do now. And,
of course, I ain't so up ter date as she is. (Miss Maggie laughed merrily, but Mr. Smith, copying dates at the table, detected a note in the laugh that
was not merriment.) "You're up to date enough for me. I've got just the
job for you, too. "Why, Maggie, you haven't, either!" (In spite of the
incredulity of voice and manner, Miss Flora sprang joyfully to her
feet.) "You never had me make you a--" Again the kitchen door slammed
shut, and Mr. Smith was left to finish the sentence for himself. Neither was his face
expressing just then the sympathy which might be supposed to be
showing, after so sorry a tale as Miss Flora had been telling. Smith, with an actual elation of countenance, was
scribbling on the edge of his notebook words that certainly he had
never found in the Blaisdell records before him: "Two months more,
then--a hundred thousand dollars. Half an hour later, as on the previous day, Mr. Smith saw a
metamorphosed woman hurrying down the little path to the street. But
the woman to-day was carrying a bundle--and it was the same bundle that
the woman the day before had brought. Smith soon learned, were Miss Maggie's visitors
women. Besides Benny, with his grievances, young Fred Blaisdell came
sometimes, and poured into Miss Maggie's sympathetic ears the story of
Gussie Pennock's really remarkable personality, or of what he was going
to do when he went to college--and afterwards. Jim Blaisdell drifted in quite frequently Sunday afternoons, though
apparently all he came for was to smoke and read in one of the big
comfortable chairs. Smith himself had fallen into the way of
strolling down to Miss Maggie's almost every Sunday after dinner. Frank Blaisdell rattled up to the door in
his grocery wagon. His face was very red, and his mutton-chop whiskers
were standing straight out at each side. Jane had collapsed, he said, utterly collapsed. All the week she had
been house-cleaning and doing up curtains; and now this morning,
expressly against his wishes, to save hiring a man, she had put down
the parlor carpet herself. Now she was flat on her back, and supper to
be got for the boarder, and the Saturday baking yet to be done. And
could Maggie come and help them out? Smith hurried out from his corner
and insisted that "the boarder" did not want any supper anyway--and
could they not live on crackers and milk for the coming few days? But Miss Maggie laughed and said, "Nonsense!" And in an incredibly
short time she was ready to drive back in the grocery wagon. Later,
when he went home, Mr. Smith found her there, presiding over one of the
best suppers he had eaten since his arrival in Hillerton. She came
every day after that, for a week, for Mrs. Jane remained "flat on her
back" seven days, with a doctor in daily attendance, supplemented by a
trained nurse peremptorily ordered by that same doctor from the nearest
city. Miss Maggie, with the assistance of Mellicent, attended to the
housework. But in spite of the excellence of the cuisine, meal time was
a most unhappy period to everybody concerned, owing to the sarcastic
comments of Mr. Frank Blaisdell as to how much his wife had "saved" by
not having a man to put down that carpet. Mellicent had little time now to go walking or auto-riding with Carl
Pennock. Her daily life was, indeed, more pleasure-starved than
ever--all of which was not lost on Mr. Smith and Mellicent
were fast friends now. Given a man with a sympathetic understanding on
one side, and a girl hungry for that same sympathy and understanding,
and it could hardly be otherwise. Smith
knew now just how hungry a young girl can be for fun and furbelows. "Of course I've got my board and clothes, and I ought to be thankful
for them," she stormed hotly to him one day. But sometimes it seems as if I'd actually be willing to go hungry
for meat and potato, if for once--just once--I could buy a five-pound
box of candy, and eat it up all at once, if I wanted to! But now, why
now I can't even treat a friend to an ice-cream soda without seeing
mother's shocked, reproachful eyes over the rim of the glass!" It was not easy then (nor many times subsequently) for Mr. Smith to
keep from asking Mellicent the utterly absurd question of how many
five-pound boxes of candy she supposed one hundred thousand dollars
would buy. But he did keep from it--by heroic self-sacrifice and the
comforting recollection that she would know some day, if she cared to
take the trouble to reckon it up. In Mellicent's love affair with young Pennock Mr. Not that he regarded it as really serious, but because it
appeared to bring into Mellicent's life something of the youth and
gayety to which he thought she was entitled. He was almost as concerned
as was Miss Maggie, therefore, when one afternoon, soon after Mrs. Jane
Blaisdell's complete recovery from her "carpet tax" (as Frank Blaisdell
termed his wife's recent illness), Mellicent rushed into the Duff
living-room with rose-red cheeks and blazing eyes, and an
explosive:--"Aunt Maggie, Aunt Maggie, can't you get mother to let me
go away somewhere--anywhere, right off?" [Illustration caption: "I CAN'T HELP IT, AUNT MAGGIE. I'VE JUST GOT TO
BE AWAY!"] And just to-morrow the Pennocks' dance?" "But that's it--that's why I want to go," flashed Mellicent. "I don't
want to be at the dance--and I don't want to be in town, and NOT at the
dance." Smith, at his table in the corner, glanced nervously toward the
door, then bent assiduously over his work, as being less conspicuous
than the flight he had been tempted for a moment to essay. But even
this was not to be, for the next moment, to his surprise, the girl
appealed directly to him. Smith, please, won't YOU take me somewhere to-morrow?" Even Miss Maggie was shocked now, and showed it. "I can't help it, Aunt Maggie. "But, my dear, to ASK a gentleman--" reproved Miss Maggie. She came to
an indeterminate pause. Smith had crossed the room and dropped into
a chair near them. "See here, little girl, suppose you tell us just what is behind--all
this," he began gently. Please let it go that I want to be away. "Mellicent, we can't do that." "We can't do--anything, until you tell us what it is." Mellicent's eyes, still mutinous, sought first
the kindly questioning face of the man, then the no less kindly but
rather grave face of the woman. Then in a little breathless burst it
came. "It's just something they're all saying Mrs. Two little red spots had come into Miss Maggie's cheeks. "It was just that--that they weren't going to let Carl Pennock go with
me any more--anywhere, or come to see me, because I--I didn't belong to
their set." Miss Maggie said nothing, but the red spots deepened. It's just--that we aren't rich like them. "That you haven't got--got--Oh, ye gods!" Almost
instantly, however, he sobered: he had caught the expression of the two
faces opposite. "I beg your pardon," he apologized promptly. "It was only that to
me--there was something very funny about that." "But, Mellicent, are you sure? I don't believe she ever said it,"
doubted Miss Maggie. "He hasn't been near me--for a week. "I don't care a bit--not a bit--about THAT!" What does
it matter if she did say it, dear? "But I can't bear to have them all talk--and notice," choked Mellicent. "And we were together such a lot before; and now--I tell you I CAN'T go
to that dance to-morrow night!" "And you shan't, if you don't want to," Mr. "Right
here and now I invite you and your Aunt Maggie to drive with me
to-morrow to Hubbardville. There are some records there that I want to
look up. It will take all day, and we
shan't be home till late in the evening. I'll go straight now
and telephone to somebody--everybody--that I shan't be there; that I'm
going to be OUT OF TOWN!" She sprang joyously to her feet--but Miss
Maggie held out a restraining hand. You don't care--you SAID you didn't care--that
Carl Pennock doesn't come to see you any more?" "Then you wouldn't want others to think you did, would you?" "You have said that you'd go to this party, haven't you? That is, you
accepted the invitation, didn't you, and people know that you did,
don't they?" But--just what do you think these people are going to say
to-morrow night, when you aren't there?" "Why, that I--I--" The color drained from her face and left it white. "They wouldn't EXPECT me to go after that--insult." "Then they'll understand that you--CARE, won't they?" "Why, I--I--They--I CAN'T--" She turned sharply and walked to the
window. For a long minute she stood, her back toward the two watching
her. Then, with equal abruptness, she turned and came back. Her cheeks
were very pink now, her eyes very bright. She carried her head with a
proud little lift. Smith, that I won't go with you to-morrow, after all,"
she said steadily. "I've decided to go--to that dance." The next moment the door shut crisply behind her. CHAPTER VIII

A SANTA CLAUS HELD UP


It was about five months after the multi-millionaire, Mr. Stanley G.
Fulton, had started for South America, that Edward D. Norton, Esq.,
received the following letter:--

DEAR NED:--I'm glad there's only one more month to wait. I feel like
Santa Claus with a box of toys, held up by a snowdrift, and I just
can't wait to see the children dance--when they get them. And let me say right here and now how glad I am that I did this thing. Oh, yes, I'll admit I still feel like the small boy at the keyhole, at
times, perhaps; but I'll forget that--when the children begin to dance. And, really, never have I seen a bunch of people whom I thought a
little money would do more good to than the Blaisdells here in
Hillerton. My only regret is that I didn't know about Miss Maggie Duff,
so that she could have had some, too. (Oh, yes, I've found out all
about "Poor Maggie" now, and she's a dear--the typical
self-sacrificing, self-effacing bearer of everybody's burdens,
including a huge share of her own!) However, she isn't a Blaisdell, of
course, so I couldn't have worked her into my scheme very well, I
suppose, even if I had known about her. They are all fond of
her--though they impose on her time and her sympathies abominably. But
I reckon she'll get some of the benefits of the others' thousands. Jane, in particular, is always wishing she could do something for "Poor
Maggie," so I dare say she'll be looked out for all right. As to who will prove to be the wisest handler of the hundred thousand,
and thus my eventual heir, I haven't the least idea. As I said before,
they all need money, and need it badly--need it to be comfortable and
happy, I mean. They aren't really poor, any of them, except, perhaps,
Miss Flora. She is a little hard up, poor soul. I
wonder what she'll get first, Niagara, the phonograph, or something to
eat without looking at the price. Did I ever write you about those
"three wishes" of hers? I can't see that any of the family are really extravagant unless,
perhaps, it's Mrs. She IS ambitious, and is inclined
to live on a scale a little beyond her means, I judge. But that will be
all right, of course, when she has the money to gratify her tastes. Jim--poor fellow, I shall be glad to see him take it easy, for once. He
reminds me of the old horse I saw the other day running one of those
infernal treadmill threshing machines--always going, but never getting
there. He works, and works hard, and then he gets a job nights and
works harder; but he never quite catches up with his bills, I fancy. What a world of solid comfort he'll take with that hundred thousand! I
can hear him draw the long breath now--for once every bill paid! Of course, the Frank Blaisdells are the most thrifty of the bunch--at
least, Mrs. Frank, "Jane," is--and I dare say they would be the most
conservative handlers of my millions. Anyhow, I
shall be glad to see them enjoy themselves meanwhile with the hundred
thousand. Jane will be constrained to clear my room of a few
of the mats and covers and tidies! At least, I shall
surely have a vacation from her everlasting "We can't afford it," and
her equally everlasting "Of course, if I had the money I'd do it." Praise be for that!--and it'll be worth a hundred thousand to me,
believe me, Ned. As for her husband--I'm not sure how he will take it. It isn't corn or
peas or flour or sugar, you see, and I'm not posted as to his opinion
of much of anything else. He'll spend some of it, though,--I'm sure of
that. I don't think he always thoroughly appreciates his wife's thrifty
ideas of economy. I haven't forgotten the night I came home to find
Mrs. Frank rampaging around the house with
every gas jet at full blast. It seems he was packing his bag to go on a
hurried business trip. He laughed a little sheepishly--I suppose he saw
my blinking amazement at the illumination--and said something about
being tired of always feeling his way through pitch-dark rooms. So, as
I say, I'm not quite sure of Mr. Frank when he comes into possession of
the hundred thousand. He's been cooped up in the dark so long he may
want to blow in the whole hundred thousand in one grand blare of light. However, I reckon I needn't worry--he'll still have Mrs. Jane--to turn
some of the gas jets down! As for the younger generation--they're fine, every one of them; and
just think what this money will mean to them in education and
advantages! Jim's son, Fred, eighteen, is a fine, manly boy. He's got
his mother's ambitions, and he's keen for college--even talks of
working his way (much to his mother's horror) if his father can't find
the money to send him. Of course, that part will be all right now--in a
month. The daughter, Bessie (almost seventeen), is an exceedingly pretty girl. She, too, is ambitious--almost too much so, perhaps, for her happiness,
in the present state of their pocketbook. But of course that, too, will
be all right, after next month. Benny, the nine-year-old, will be
concerned as little as any one over that hundred thousand dollars, I
imagine. The real value of the gift he will not appreciate, of course;
in fact, I doubt if he even approves of it--lest his privileges as to
meals and manners be still further curtailed. Now,
Mellicent--

Perhaps in no one do I expect to so thoroughly rejoice as I do in poor
little pleasure-starved Mellicent. I realize, of course, that it will
mean to her the solid advantages of college, music-culture, and travel;
but I must confess that in my dearest vision, the child is reveling in
one grand whirl of pink dresses and chocolate bonbons. I GAVE her one five-pound box of candy, but I never repeated the
mistake. Besides enduring the manifestly suspicious disapproval of her
mother because I had made the gift, I have had the added torment of
seeing that box of chocolates doled out to that poor child at the rate
of two pieces a day. They aren't gone yet, but I'll warrant they're as
hard as bullets--those wretched bonbons. But there is yet another phase of the money business in connection with
Mellicent that pleases me mightily. A certain youth by the name of Carl
Pennock has been beauing her around a good deal, since I came. The
Pennocks have some money--fifty thousand, or so, I believe--and it is
reported that Mrs. Pennock has put her foot down on the budding
romance--because the Blaisdells HAVE NOT GOT MONEY ENOUGH! (Begin to
see where my chuckles come in?) However true this report may be, the
fact remains that the youth has not been near the house for a month
past, nor taken Mellicent anywhere. Of course, it shows him and his
family up--for just what they are; but it has been mortifying for poor
Mellicent. She's showing her pluck like a little trump, however, and
goes serenely on her way with her head just enough in the air--but not
too much. I don't think Mellicent's real heart is affected in the least--she's
only eighteen, remember--but her pride IS. Jane
is thoroughly angry as well as mortified. She says Mellicent is every
whit as good as those Pennocks, and that the woman who would let a
paltry thing like money stand in the way of her son's affections is a
pretty small specimen. For her part, she never did have any use for
rich folks, anyway, and she is proud and glad that she's poor! However, so much
for her--and she may change her opinion one of these days. My private suspicion is that young Pennock is already repentant, and is
pulling hard at his mother's leading-strings; for I was with Mellicent
the other day when we met the lad face to face on the street. Mellicent
smiled and nodded casually, but Pennock--he turned all colors of the
rainbow with terror, pleading, apology, and assumed indifference all
racing each other across his face. Dear, dear, but he was a sight! There is, too, another feature in the case. It seems that a new family
by the name of Gaylord have come to town and opened up the old Gaylord
mansion. Gaylord is a son of old Peter Gaylord, and is a millionaire. They are making quite a splurge in the way of balls and liveried
servants, and motor cars, and the town is agog with it all. There are
young people in the family, and especially there is a girl, Miss Pearl,
whom, report says, the Pennocks have selected as being a suitable mate
for Carl. At all events the Pennocks and the Gaylords have struck up a
furious friendship, and the young people of both families are in the
forefront of innumerable social affairs--in most of which Mellicent is
left out. So now you have it--the whole story. And next month comes to
Mellicent's father one hundred thousand dollars. Do you wonder I say
the plot thickens? (The man who
says health biscuit to me now gets knocked down--and I've got the
strength to do it, too!) I've gained
twenty pounds, and I'm having the time of my life. I'm even enjoying
being a genealogist--a little. I've about exhausted the resources of
Hillerton, and have begun to make trips to the neighboring towns. I can
even spend an afternoon in an old cemetery copying dates from
moss-grown gravestones, and not entirely lose my appetite for dinner--I
mean, supper. I was even congratulating myself that I was really quite
a genealogist when, the other day, I met the REAL THING. Heavens, Ned,
that man had fourteen thousand four hundred and seventy-two dates at
his tongue's end, and he said them all over to me. He knows the name of
every Blake (he was a Blake) back to the year one, how many children
they had (and they had some families then, let me tell you! ), and when
they all died, and why. I was
hunting for a certain stone and I asked him a question. It was
like setting a match to one of those Fourth-of-July flower-pot
sky-rocket affairs. That question was the match that set him going, and
thereafter he was a gushing geyser of names and dates. He began at the Blaisdells, but skipped almost at once to the
Blakes--there were a lot of them near us. In five minutes he had me
dumb from sheer stupefaction. In ten minutes he had made a century run,
and by noon he had got to the Crusades. We went through the Dark Ages
very appropriately, waiting in an open tomb for a thunderstorm to pass. We had got to the year one when I had to leave to drive back to
Hillerton. I've invited him to come to see Father Duff. I thought I'd
like to have them meet. He knows a lot about the Duffs--a Blake married
one, 'way back somewhere. I'd like to hear him and Father Duff
talk--or, rather, I'd like to hear him TRY to talk to Father Duff. Did
I ever write you Father Duff's opinion of genealogists? I'm not seeing so much of Father Duff these days. Now that it's grown a
little cooler he spends most of his time in his favorite chair before
the cook stove in the kitchen. It should be shipped by freight and read
in sections. But I wanted you to know how things are here. You can
appreciate it the more--when you come. You're not forgetting, of course, that it's on the first day of
November that Mr. Stanley G. Fulton's envelope of instructions is to be
opened. As ever yours,

JOHN SMITH. CHAPTER IX

"DEAR COUSIN STANLEY"


It was very early in November that Mr. Smith, coming home one
afternoon, became instantly aware that something very extraordinary had
happened. Frank Blaisdell, his wife, Jane,
and their daughter, Mellicent. Mellicent's cheeks were pink, and her
eyes more star-like than ever. Her
eyes were excited, but incredulous. Frank was still in his white
work-coat, which he wore behind the counter, but which he never wore
upstairs in his home. It was an ecstatic cry from Mellicent that came first to Mr. Smith, you can't guess what's happened! You
couldn't guess in a million years!" Smith was looking almost as happily
excited as Mellicent herself. Smith,
we are going to have a hundred thousand--"

"Mellicent, I wouldn't talk of it--yet," interfered her mother sharply. "But, mother, it's no secret. "Of course not--if it's true. But it isn't true," retorted the woman,
with excited emphasis. "No man in his senses would do such a thing." Smith, looking suddenly a little less
happy. "Leave a hundred thousand dollars apiece to three distant relations he
never saw." "But he was our cousin--you said he was our cousin," interposed
Mellicent, "and when he died--"

"The letter did not say he had died," corrected her mother. "He just
hasn't been heard from. But he will be heard from--and then where will
our hundred thousand dollars be?" "But the lawyer's coming to give it to us," maintained Mr. "Here, read this,
please, and tell us if we have lost our senses--or if somebody else
has." A close observer might have noticed that his
hand shook a little. The letterhead carried the name of a Chicago law
firm, but Mr. He plunged at once into the
text of the letter. I want to hear it again," pleaded Mellicent. Smith then, after clearing his throat),--I
understand that you are a distant kinsman of Mr. Stanley G. Fulton, the
Chicago millionaire. Fulton left this city on what was reported to
be a somewhat extended exploring tour of South America. Before his
departure he transferred to me, as trustee, certain securities worth
about $300,000. He left with me a sealed envelope, entitled "Terms of
Trust," and instructed me to open such envelope in six months from the
date written thereon--if he had not returned--and thereupon to dispose
of the securities according to the terms of the trust. I will add that
he also left with me a second sealed envelope entitled "Last Will and
Testament," but instructed me not to open such envelope until two years
from the date written thereon. I have opened the envelope
entitled "Terms of Trust," and find that I am directed to convert the
securities into cash with all convenient speed, and forthwith to pay
over one third of the net proceeds to his kinsman, Frank G. Blaisdell;
one third to his kinsman, James A. Blaisdell; and one third to his
kinswoman, Flora B. Blaisdell, all of Hillerton. I shall, of course, discharge my duty as trustee under this instrument
with all possible promptness. Some of the securities have already been
converted into cash, and within a few days I shall come to Hillerton to
pay over the cash in the form of certified checks; and I shall ask you
at that time to be so good as to sign a receipt for your share. Meanwhile this letter is to apprise you of your good fortune and to
offer you my congratulations. Very truly yours,

EDWARD D. NORTON. "Well, what do you think of it?" Frank Blaisdell, his arms
akimbo. "Why, it's fine, of course. "Then it's all straight, you think?" "Je-hos-a-phat!" "But he'll come back--you see if he don't!" You'll still have your hundred thousand," smiled Mr. I doubt if he could, if he wanted to." "And we're really going to have a whole hundred thousand dollars?" "I reckon you are--less the inheritance tax, perhaps. "Do you mean we've
got to PAY because we've got that money?" "Why, y-yes, I suppose so. Isn't there an inheritance tax in this
State?" Jane's lips were at their most economical
pucker. "Do we have to pay a GREAT deal? Isn't there any way to save
doing that?" "No, there isn't," cut in her husband crisply. "And I guess we can pay
the inheritance tax--with a hundred thousand to pay it out of. We're
going to SPEND some of this money, Jane." The telephone bell in the hall jangled its peremptory summons, and Mr. In a minute he returned, a new excitement on his
face. And they've got it, too, haven't they?" "And Aunt Flora, and--" She stopped suddenly, a growing dismay in her
eyes. "Why, he didn't--he didn't leave a cent to AUNT MAGGIE!" There was genuine concern
in Frank Blaisdell's voice. "But we can give her some of ours, mother,--we can give her some of
ours," urged the girl. "It isn't ours to give--yet," remarked her mother, a bit coldly. "But, mother, you WILL do it," importuned Mellicent. "You've always
said you would, if you had it to give." "And I say it again, Mellicent. I shall never see her suffer, you may
be sure,--if I have the money to relieve her. But--" She stopped
abruptly at the sound of an excited voice down the hall. Miss Flora,
evidently coming in through the kitchen, was hurrying toward them. "Jane--Mellicent--where are you? she
panted, as she reached the room and sank into a chair. "Did you ever
hear anything like it in all your life? You had one, too, didn't you?" she cried, her eyes falling on the letter in her brother's hand. "But
'tain't true, of course!" Miss Flora wore no head-covering. She wore one glove (wrong side out),
and was carrying the other one. Her dress, evidently donned hastily for
the street, was unevenly fastened, showing the topmost button without a
buttonhole. Smith says it's true," triumphed Mellicent. So almost accusing was the look in her eyes that Mr. "Why--er--ah--the letter speaks for itself Miss Flora," he stammered. "But it CAN'T be true," reiterated Miss Flora. "The idea of a man I
never saw giving me a hundred thousand dollars like that!--and Frank
and Jim, too!" "But he's your cousin--you said he was your cousin," Mr. "And you have his picture in your album. I didn't know HE knew I was his cousin. I
don't s'pose he's got MY picture in HIS album! It's some other Flora Blaisdell, I tell you." "There, I never thought of that," cried Jane. "It probably is some
other Blaisdells. Well, anyhow, if it is, we won't have to pay that
inheritance tax. At this moment the rattling of the front-door knob and an imperative
knocking brought Mrs. "There's Hattie, now, and that door's locked," she cried, hurrying into
the hall. When she returned a moment later Harriet Blaisdell and Bessie were with
her. Harriet Blaisdell a new, indescribable air of
commanding importance. Smith she appeared to have grown inches
taller. "Well, I do hope, Jane, NOW you'll live in a decent place," she was
saying, as they entered the room, "and not oblige your friends to climb
up over a grocery store." "Well, I guess you can stand the grocery store a few more days, Hattie,"
observed Frank Blaisdell dryly. "How long do you s'pose we'd live--any
of us--if 'twa'n't for the grocery stores to feed us? I told him I was coming here, and to come right over
himself at once; that the very first thing we must have was a family
conclave, just ourselves, you know, so as to plan what to give out to
the public." Smith was on his feet, looking somewhat embarrassed;
"perhaps, then, you would rather I were not present at the--er--family
conclave." "Why, you ARE one of the family,'seems so," cried Mellicent. "Besides, you are interested in what concerns us, I know--for the book;
so, of course, you'll be interested in this legacy of dear Cousin
Stanley's." Smith collapsed suddenly behind his handkerchief, with one of the
choking coughs to which he appeared to be somewhat addicted. "Ain't you getting a little familiar with 'dear Cousin Stanley,'
Hattie?" "But, Hattie, we were just sayin', 'fore you came, that it couldn't be
true; that it must mean some other Blaisdells somewhere." "There couldn't be any other Frank and Jim
and Flora Blaisdell, in a Hillerton, too. Besides, Jim said over the
telephone that that was one of the best law firms in Chicago. Don't you
suppose they know what they're talking about? I'm sure, I think it's
quite the expected thing that he should leave his money to his own
people. Come, don't let's waste any more time over that. What we've got
to decide is what to DO. First, of course, we must order expensive
mourning all around." "I
never thought--" He stopped abruptly, his face almost purple. Bessie Blaisdell had the floor. "Why, mother, I look perfectly horrid in black, you know I do," she was
wailing. "And there's the Gaylords' dance just next week; and if I'm in
mourning I can't go there, nor anywhere. What's the use in having all
that money if we've got to shut ourselves up like that, and wear horrid
stuffy black, and everything?" spoke up Miss Flora, with unusual sharpness for
her. I'm sure the least we can do
in return for this wonderful gift is to show our respect and
appreciation by going into the very deepest black we can. I'm sure I'd
be glad to." Harriet had drawn her brows together in deep thought. "I'm
not sure, after all, that it would be best. The letter did not say that
dear Cousin Stanley had died--he just hadn't been heard from. In that
case, I don't think we ought to do it. And it would be too bad--that
Gaylord dance is going to be the biggest thing of the season, and of
course if we WERE in black--No; on the whole, I think we won't, Bessie. Of course, in two years from now, when we get the rest, it will be
different." There's another letter to be opened in two years
from now, disposing of the rest of the property. And he was worth
millions, you know, millions!" "But maybe he--er--Did it say you were to--to get those millions then?" "Oh, no, it didn't SAY it, Mr. Harriet Blaisdell's smile
was a bit condescending. He just didn't give it all now because he wanted to give
himself two more years to come back in, I suppose. And, of course, if he hadn't come back by then, he would be
dead. Oh, yes, we shall get it, I'm sure." Well, I wouldn't spend them millions--till I'd got 'em,
Hattie," advised her brother-in-law dryly. "I wasn't intending to, Frank," she retorted with some dignity. "But
that's neither here nor there. What we're concerned with now is what to
do with what we have got. Even this will make a tremendous sensation in
Hillerton. It ought to be written up, of course, for the papers, and by
some one who knows. Why, Frank, do you
realize? We shall be rich--RICH--and all in a flash like this! I wonder
what the Pennocks will say NOW about Mellicent's not having money
enough for that precious son of theirs! Think what we can do for the
children. Think--"

"Aunt Jane, Aunt Jane, is ma here?" Wide open banged the front door as
Benny bounded down the hall. Tommy
Hooker says our great-grandfather in Africa has died an' left us a
million dollars, an' that we're richer'n Mr. Pennock or even the
Gaylords, or anybody! "Not quite, Benny, though we have been left a nice little fortune by
your cousin, Stanley G. Fulton--remember the name, dear, your cousin,
Stanley G. Fulton. And it wasn't Africa, it was South America." "And did you all get some, too?" panted Benny, looking eagerly about
him. "We sure did," nodded his Uncle Frank, "all but poor Mr. Stanley G. Fulton didn't know he was a cousin, too," he
joked, with a wink in Mr. She got some, too, didn't
she?" Your Aunt Maggie is not a Blaisdell at all. She's a Duff--a very different family." "I don't care, she's just as good as a Blaisdell," cut in Mellicent;
"and she seems like one of us, anyway." "Say," he turned
valiantly to Mr. Smith, "shouldn't you think he might have given Aunt
Maggie a little of that money?" "I guess he would if he'd known her!" Once more the peculiar earnestness vibrated
through Mr. "But now he's dead, an' he can't. I guess if he could see Aunt Maggie
he'd wish he hadn't died 'fore he could fix her up just as good as the
rest." Smith was laughing now, but his voice was
just as emphatic, and there was a sudden flame of color in his face. "Your Cousin Stanley isn't dead, my dear,--that is, we are not sure he
is dead," spoke up Benny's mother quickly. "He just has not been heard
from for six months." "But he must be dead, or he'd have come back," reasoned Miss Flora,
with worried eyes; "and I, for my part, think we OUGHT to go into
mourning, too." "Of course he'd have come back," declared Mrs. Jane, "and kept the
money himself. Don't you suppose he knew what he'd written in that
letter, and don't you suppose he'd have saved those three hundred
thousand dollars if he could? "Well, anyhow, we're not going into mourning till we have to." I'm sure I don't see any use in having the money if
we've got to wear black and not go anywhere," pouted Bessie. "Are we rich, then, really, ma?" "Richer 'n the Pennocks?" "Well--hardly that"--her face clouded perceptibly--"that is, not until
we get the rest--in two years." "Then, if we're rich we can have everything we want, can't we?" Benny's
eyes were beginning to sparkle. "I guess there'll be enough to satisfy your wants, Benny," laughed his
Uncle Frank. "Then we can go back to the East Side and live just as we've a mind to,
without carin' what other folks do, can't we?" "Cause if we
ARE rich we won't have ter keep tryin' ter make folks THINK we are. The rest were laughing; but Benny's mother had raised shocked
hands of protest. We shall live in a house of our own, now, of course--but it won't be on
the East Side." "And Fred'll go to college," put in Miss Flora eagerly. "Yes; and I shall send Bessie to a fashionable finishing school," bowed
Mrs. "Hey, Bess, you've got ter be finished," chuckled Benny. pouted Bessie, looking not altogether
pleased. "Hasn't she got to be finished, too?" "Mellicent hasn't got the money to be finished--yet," observed Mrs. "Oh, I don't know what I'm going to do," breathed Mellicent, drawing an
ecstatic sigh. "But I hope I'm going to do--just what I want to, for
once!" "And I'll make you some pretty dresses that you can wear right off,
while they're in style," beamed Miss Flora. Frank Blaisdell gave a sudden laugh. "But what are YOU going to do, Flo? Here you've been telling what
everybody else is going to do with the money." A blissful sigh, very like Mellicent's own, passed Miss Flora's lips. "Oh, I don't know," she breathed in an awe-struck voice. "It don't seem
yet--that it's really mine." "Well, 't isn't," declared Mrs. "And
I, for one, am going back to work--in the kitchen, where I belong. And--Well, if here ain't Jim at last," she broke off, as her younger
brother-in-law appeared in the doorway. "You're too late, pa, you're too late! "I knew they would have, Benny; and I haven't been needed, I'm
sure,--your mother's here." Harriet bridled, but did not look unpleased. "But, say, Jim," breathed Miss Flora, "ain't it wonderful--ain't it
perfectly wonderful?" "It is, indeed,--very wonderful," replied Mr. Jim

A Babel of eager voices arose then, but Mr. Jim's face, and trying to fathom its
expression. A little later, when the women had gone into the kitchen and Mr. Frank
had clattered back to his work downstairs, Mr. Smith thought he had the
explanation of that look on Mr. Jim and Beany were
standing over by the fireplace together. "Pa, ain't you glad--about the money?" "I should be, shouldn't I, my son?" "But you look--so funny, and you didn't say anything, hardly." The man, with his eyes fixed on the glowing
coals in the grate, appeared not to have heard. But in a moment he
said:--

"Benny, if a poor old horse had been climbing a long, long hill all day
with the hot sun on his back, and a load that dragged and dragged at
his heels, and if he couldn't see a thing but the dust of the road that
blinded and choked him, and if he just felt that he couldn't go another
step, in spite of the whip that snapped 'Get there--get there!' all day
in his ears--how do you suppose that poor old horse would feel if
suddenly the load, and the whip, and the hill, and the dust
disappeared, and he found himself in a green pasture with the cool
gurgle of water under green trees in his ears--how do you suppose that
poor old horse would feel?" "Say, he'd like it great, wouldn't he? But, pa, you didn't tell me yet
if you liked the money." The man stirred, as if waking from a trance. He threw his arm around
Benny's shoulders. Why, of course, I like it, Benny, my boy! Why, I'm going to
have time now--to get acquainted with my children!" Smith, with a sudden tightening of his throat,
slipped softly into the hall and thence to his own room. Smith,
just then, did not wish to be seen. CHAPTER X

WHAT DOES IT MATTER? The days immediately following the receipt of three remarkable letters
by the Blaisdell family were nerve-racking for all concerned. Jane's insistence that they weren't sure yet that the thing was
true, the family steadfastly refused to give out any definite
information. Even the eager Harriet yielded to Jane on this point,
acknowledging that it WOULD be mortifying, of course, if they SHOULD
talk, and nothing came of it. Their enigmatic answers to questions, and their expressive shrugs and
smiles, however, were almost as exciting as the rumors themselves; and
the Blaisdells became at once a veritable storm center of surmises and
gossip--a state of affairs not at all unpleasing to some of them, Mrs. Miss Maggie Duff, however, was not so well pleased. Smith, one
day, she freed her mind--and Miss Maggie so seldom freed her mind that
Mr. "I wish," she began, "I do wish that if that Chicago lawyer is coming,
he'd come, and get done with it! Certainly the present state of affairs
is almost unbearable." "It does make it all the harder for you, to have it drag along like
this, doesn't it?" "That you are not included in the bequest, I mean." Besides, as I've told
you before, there is no earthly reason why I should have been included. It's the delay, I mean, for the Blaisdells--for the whole town, for
that matter. and 'They say' is getting on
my nerves!" "Why, Miss Maggie, I didn't suppose you HAD any nerves," bantered the
man. "But even the gossip and the questioning aren't the worst. Between Hattie's pulling one way and Jane the other,
I feel like a bone between two quarrelsome puppies. Hattie is already
house-hunting, on the sly, and she's bought Bessie an expensive watch
and a string of gold beads. Jane, on the other hand, insists that Mr. Fulton will come back and claim the money, so she's running her house
now on the principle that she's LOST a hundred thousand dollars, and so
must economize in every possible way. "I don't have to--imagine it," murmured the man. Flora, poor soul, went into a restaurant the other day and
ordered roast turkey, and now she's worrying for fear the money won't
come and justify her extravagance. Mellicent, with implicit faith that
the hundred thousand is coming wants to wear her best frocks every day. And, as if she were not already quite excited enough, young Pennock has
very obviously begun to sit up and take notice." "You don't mean he is trying to come back--so soon!" "Well, he's evidently caught the glitter of the gold from afar," smiled
Miss Maggie. "At all events, he's taking notice." "Doesn't see him, APPARENTLY. But she comes and tells me his every last
move (and he's making quite a number of them just now! ), so I think she
does see--a little." She's just excited now, as any young girl would
be; and I'm afraid she's taking a little wicked pleasure in--not seeing
him." "But it's all bad--this delay," chafed Miss Maggie again. That's why I do wish that
lawyer would come, if he's coming." "I reckon he'll be here before long," murmured Mr. Smith, with an
elaborately casual air. "But--I wish you were coming in on the deal." His kindly eyes were gazing straight into her face now. "I'm a Duff, not a Blaisdell--except when they want--" She bit her lip. "I mean, I'm not a Blaisdell at all,"
she finished hastily. "You're not a Blaisdell--except when they want something of you!" "Oh PLEASE, I didn't mean to say--I DIDN'T say--THAT," cried Miss
Maggie, in very genuine distress. "No, I know you didn't, but I did," flared the man. "Miss Maggie, it's
a downright shame--the way they impose on you sometimes." I like to have them--I mean, I like to do what I can for
them," she corrected hastily, laughing in spite of herself. "You like to get all tired out, I suppose." "And it doesn't matter, anyway, of course," he gibed. Smith was still sitting erect, still
speaking with grim terseness. "But let me tell you right here and now
that I don't approve of that doctrine of yours." "That 'It-doesn't-matter' doctrine of yours. I tell you it's very
pernicious--very! "Oh, well--it doesn't matter--if
you don't." He caught the twinkle in her eyes and threw up his hands despairingly. With a sudden businesslike air of determination Miss Maggie faced him. "Just what is the matter with that doctrine, please, and what do you
mean?" "I mean that things DO matter, and that we merely shut our eyes to the
real facts in the case when we say that they don't. War, death, sin,
evil--the world is full of them, and they do matter." I never say 'It doesn't matter' to war, or
death, or sin, or evil. But there are other things--"

"But the other things matter, too," interrupted the man irritably. "Right here and now it matters that you don't share in the money; it
matters that you slave half your time for a father who doesn't anywhere
near appreciate you; it matters that you slave the rest of the time for
every Tom and Dick and Harry and Jane and Mehitable in Hillerton that
has run a sliver under a thumb, either literally or metaphorically. It
matters that--"

But Miss Maggie was laughing merrily. Smith, you
don't know what you are saying!" It's YOU who don't know what you are saying!" "But, pray, what would you have me say?" "I'd have you say it DOES matter, and I'd have you insist on having
your rights, every time." The man fell back, so sudden and so astounding was the change that had
come to the woman opposite him. She was leaning forward in her chair,
her lips trembling, her eyes a smouldering flame. "What if I had insisted on my rights, all the way up?" "Would I have come home that first time from college? Would I have
stepped into Mother Blaisdell's shoes and kept the house? Would I have
swept and baked and washed and ironed, day in and day out, to make a
home for father and for Jim and Frank and Flora? Would I have come back
again and again, when my beloved books were calling, calling, always
calling? Would I have seen other girls love and marry and go to homes
of their own, while I--Oh, what am I saying, what am I saying?" she
choked, covering her eyes with the back of her hand, and turning her
face away. "Please, if you can, forget what I said. Indeed, I
NEVER--broke out like that--before. Smith, on his feet, was trying to
work off his agitation by tramping up and down the small room. "But I am ashamed," moaned Miss Maggie, her face still averted. "And I
can't think why I should have been so--so wild. It was just something
that you said--about my rights, I think. You see--all my life I've just
HAD to learn to say 'It doesn't matter,' when there were so many things
I wanted to do, and couldn't. And--don't you see?--I found out, after a
while, that it didn't really matter, half so much--college and my own
little wants and wishes as that I should do--what I had to do,
willingly and pleasantly at home." "But, good Heavens, how could you keep from tearing 'round and throwing
things?" I--I smashed a bowl once, and two cups." She
laughed shamefacedly, and met his eyes now. "But I soon found--that it
didn't make me or anybody else--any happier, and that it didn't help
things at all. So I tried--to do the other way. And now, please, PLEASE
say you'll forget all this--what I've been saying. Smith turned on his heel and marched up and down the
room again. Stanley G. Fulton, if you must know, for not giving you any of
that money." Miss Maggie threw out both her hands with a
gesture of repulsion. "If I've heard that word once, I've heard it a
hundred times in the last week. Sometimes I wish I might never hear it
again." "You don't want to be deaf, do you? Well, you'd have to be, to escape
hearing that word." But--" again she threw out her hands. "Don't you WANT--money, really?" We have to have money, too; but
I don't think it's--everything in the world, by any means." "You don't think it brings happiness, then?" "Most of--er--us would be willing to take the risk." "Now, in the case of the Blaisdells here--don't you think this money is
going to bring happiness to them?" Smith, with a concern all out of
proportion to his supposed interest in the matter, "you don't mean to
say you DON'T think this money is going to bring them happiness!" This money'll bring them happiness all right, of
course,--particularly to some of them. But I was just wondering; if you
don't know how to spend five dollars so as to get the most out of it,
how will you spend five hundred, or five hundred thousand--and get the
most out of that?" CHAPTER XI

SANTA CLAUS ARRIVES


It was not long after this that Mr. Smith found a tall, gray-haired
man, with keen gray eyes, talking with Mrs. Jane Blaisdell and
Mellicent in the front room over the grocery store. Smith, a joyful light of recognition in his eyes. Then suddenly he stooped and picked up something from the floor. When
he came upright his face was very red. He did not look at the tall,
gray-haired man again as he advanced into the room. Smith, it's the lawyer--he's come. Jane Blaisdell to the
keen-eyed man, who, also, for no apparent reason, had grown very red. Smith's a Blaisdell, too,--distant, you know. He's doing a
Blaisdell book." The lawyer smiled
and held out his hand, but there was an odd constraint in his manner. "So you're a Blaisdell, too, are you?" Smith, smiling straight into the lawyer's eyes. "But not near enough to come in on the money, of course," explained
Mrs. "He isn't a Hiller-Blaisdell. He's just boarding here, while
he writes his book. So he isn't near enough to come in--on the money." This time
it was the lawyer who was smiling straight into Mr. A sudden question from Mellicent seemed
to freeze the smile on his lips. "Why--er--you must have seen his pictures in the papers," stammered the
lawyer. Smith with a bland
smile, as he seated himself. "Why--er--" The lawyer came to a still more unhappy pause. "Of course, we've seen his pictures," broke in Mellicent, "but those
don't tell us anything. So won't you tell us what he
was like, please, while we're waiting for father to come up? Was he
nice and jolly, or was he stiff and haughty? Smith, for some
reason, seemed to be highly amused. Oh, just an ordinary man, you know,--somewhat conceited, of
course." (A queer little half-gasp came from Mr. Smith, but the lawyer
was not looking at Mr. "Eccentric--you've heard that, probably. And he HAS done crazy things, and no mistake. Of course, with his money
and position, we won't exactly say he had bats in his belfry--isn't
that what they call it?--but--"

Mr. Smith gave a real gasp this time, and Mrs. Jane Blaisdell
ejaculated:--

"There, I told you so! And now he'll come
back and claim the money. And if we've gone and
spent any of it--" A gesture of despair finished her sentence. "Give yourself no uneasiness on that score, madam," the lawyer assured
her gravely. "I think I can safely guarantee he will not do that." "I did not say that, madam. I said I was very sure he would not come
back and claim this money that is to be paid over to your husband and
his brother and sister. Dead or alive, he has no further power over
that money now." Smith says we've probably got to pay a tax on it," thrust in
Mrs. "Do you know how much we'll HAVE to pay? And isn't there any way we can save doing that?" Norton could answer, a heavy step down the hall heralded Mr. Frank Blaisdell's advance, and in the ensuing confusion of his arrival,
Mr. As he passed the lawyer, however, Mellicent
thought she heard him mutter, "You rascal!" But afterwards she
concluded she must have been mistaken, for the two men appeared to
become at once the best of friends. Norton remained in town several
days, and frequently she saw him and Mr. Smith chatting pleasantly
together, or starting off apparently for a walk. Mellicent was very
sure, therefore, that she must have been mistaken in thinking she had
heard Mr. Smith utter so remarkable an exclamation as he left the room
that first day. Norton in Hillerton, and for some days
afterward, the Blaisdells were too absorbed in the mere details of
acquiring and temporarily investing their wealth to pay attention to
anything else. Robert Chalmers,
and the heads of two other Hillerton banks, the three legatees set
themselves to the task of "finding a place to put it," as Miss Flora
breathlessly termed it. Hattie said that, for her part, she should like to leave their
share all in the bank: then she'd have it to spend whenever she wanted
it. She yielded to the shocked protestations of the others, however,
and finally consented that her husband should invest a large part of it
in the bonds he so wanted, leaving a generous sum in the bank in her
own name. She was assured that the bonds were just as good as money,
anyway, as they were the kind that were readily convertible into cash. Jane, when she understood the matter, was for investing every cent
of theirs where it would draw the largest interest possible. Jane
had never before known very much about interest, and she was fascinated
with its delightful possibilities. She spent whole days joyfully
figuring percentages, and was awakened from her happy absorption only
by the unpleasant realization that her husband was not in sympathy with
her ideas at all. He said that the money was his, not hers, and that,
for once in his life, he was going to have his way. "His way" in this
case proved to be the prompt buying-out of the competing grocery on the
other corner, and the establishing of good-sized bank account. The rest
of the money he said Jane might invest for a hundred per cent, if she
wanted to. Jane was pleased to this extent, and asked if it were possible that she
could get such a splendid rate as one hundred per cent. She was not so pleased later, when Mr. Norton and the
bankers told her what she COULD get--with safety; and she was very
angry because they finally appealed to her husband and she was obliged
to content herself with a paltry five or six per cent, when there were
such lovely mining stocks and oil wells everywhere that would pay so
much more. She told Flora that she ought to thank her stars that SHE had the money
herself in her own name, to do just as she pleased with, without any
old-fogy men bossing her. But Flora only shivered and said "Mercy me!" and that, for her part,
she wished she didn't have to say what to do with it. She was scared
of her life of it, anyway, and she was just sure she should lose it,
whatever she did with it; and she'most wished she didn't have it, only
it would be nice, of course, to buy things with it--and she supposed
she would buy things with it, after a while, when she got used to it,
and was not afraid to spend it. Miss Flora was, indeed, quite breathless most of the time, these days. She tried very hard to give the kind gentlemen who were helping her no
trouble, and she showed herself eager always to take their advice. But
she wished they would not ask her opinion; she was always afraid to
give it, and she didn't have one, anyway; only she did worry, of
course, and she had to ask them sometimes if they were real sure the
places they had put her money were perfectly safe, and just couldn't
blow up. It was so comforting always to see them smile, and hear them
say: "Perfectly, my dear Miss Flora, perfectly! To be sure, one day, the big fat man, not Mr. Chalmers,
did snap out: "No, madam; only the Lord Almighty can guarantee a
government bond--the whole country may be blown to atoms by a volcano
to-morrow morning!" She was startled, terribly startled; but she saw at once, of course,
that it must be just his way of joking, for of course there wasn't any
volcano big enough to blow up the whole United States; and, anyway, she
did not think it was nice of him, and it was almost like swearing, to
say "the Lord Almighty" in that tone of voice. Chalmers, or to the
other man with a wart on his nose. Miss Flora had never had a check-book before, but she tried very hard
to learn how to use it, and to show herself not too stupid. She was
glad there were such a lot of checks in the book, but she didn't
believe she'd ever spend them all--such a lot of money! She had had a
savings-bank book, to be sure, but she not been able to put anything in
the bank for a long time, and she had been worrying a good deal lately
for fear she would have to draw some out, business had been so dull. But she would not have to do that now, of course, with all this money
that had come to her. They told her that she could have all the money she wanted by just
filling out one of the little slips in her check-book the way they had
told her to do it and taking it to Mr. Chalmers's bank--that there were
a good many thousand dollars there waiting for her to spend, just as
she liked; and that, when they were gone, Mr. Chalmers would tell her
how to sell some of her bonds and get more. There were other things, too, that they had told her--too many for her
to remember--something about interest, and things called coupons that
must be cut off the bonds at certain times. She tried to remember it
all; but Mr. Chalmers had been very kind and had told her not to fret. Meanwhile, he had rented her a
nice tin box (that pulled out like a drawer) in the safety-deposit
vault under the bank, where she could keep her bonds and all the other
papers--such a lot of them!--that Mr. Chalmers told her she must keep
very carefully. But it was all so new and complicated, and everybody was always talking
at once, so! No wonder, indeed, that Miss Flora was quite breathless with it all. By the time the Blaisdells found themselves able to pay attention to
Hillerton, or to anything outside their own astounding personal
affairs, they became suddenly aware of the attention Hillerton was
paying to THEM. The grocery store, the residence of Frank
Blaisdell, and Miss Flora's humble cottage might be found at nearly any
daylight hour with from one to a dozen curious-eyed gazers on the
sidewalk before them. The town paper had contained an elaborate account
of the bequest and the remarkable circumstances attending it; and
Hillerton became the Mecca of wandering automobiles for miles around. Big metropolitan dailies got wind of the affair, recognized the magic
name of Stanley G. Fulton, and sent reporters post-haste to Hillerton. Speculation as to whether the multi-millionaire was really dead was
prevalent everywhere, and a search for some clue to his reported South
American exploring expedition was undertaken in several quarters. Various rumors concerning the expedition appeared immediately, but none
of them seemed to have any really solid foundation. Interviews with the
great law firm having the handling of Mr. Fulton's affairs were
printed, but even here little could be learned save the mere fact of
the letter of instructions, upon which they had acted according to
directions, and the other fact that there still remained one more
packet--understood to be the last will and testament--to be opened in
two years' time if Mr. The lawyers were
bland and courteous, but they really had nothing to say, they declared,
beyond the already published facts. In Hillerton the Blaisdells accepted this notoriety with characteristic
variation. Miss Flora, after cordially welcoming one "nice young man,"
and telling him all about how strange and wonderful it was, and how
frightened she felt, was so shocked and distressed to find all that she
said (and a great deal that she did not say!) staring at her from the
first page of a big newspaper, that she forthwith barred her doors, and
refused to open them till she satisfied herself, by surreptitious peeps
through the blinds, that it was only a neighbor who was knocking for
admittance. An offer of marriage from a Western ranchman and another
from a Vermont farmer (both entire strangers) did not tend to lessen
her perturbation of mind. Frank, at the grocery store, rather welcomed questioners--so long as
there was a hope of turning them into customers; but his wife and
Mellicent showed almost as much terror of them as did Miss Flora
herself. James Blaisdell and Fred stoically endured such as refused to be
silenced by their brusque non-committalism. Benny, at first welcoming
everything with the enthusiasm he would accord to a circus, soon
sniffed his disdain, as at a show that had gone stale. Hattie was the only one that found in it any
real joy and comfort. Even Bessie, excited and interested as she was,
failed to respond with quite the enthusiasm that her mother showed. Hattie saw every reporter, talked freely of "dear Cousin Stanley"
and his wonderful generosity, and explained that she would go into
mourning, of course, if she knew he was really dead. She sat for two
new portraits for newspaper use, besides graciously posing for staff
photographers whenever requested to do so; and she treasured carefully
every scrap of the printed interviews or references to the affair that
she could find. She talked with the townspeople, also, and told Al
Smith how fine it was that he could have something really worth while
for his book. Smith, these days, was keeping rather closely to his work,
especially when reporters were in evidence. He had been heard to
remark, indeed, that he had no use for reporters. Certainly he fought
shy of those investigating the Fulton-Blaisdell legacy. He read the
newspaper accounts, though, most attentively, particularly the ones
from Chicago that Mr. It was in one
of these papers that he found this paragraph:--

There seems to be really nothing more that can be learned about the
extraordinary Stanley G. Fulton-Blaisdell affair. The bequests have
been paid, the Blaisdells are reveling in their new wealth, and Mr. There is nothing now to do but to await
the opening of the second mysterious packet two years hence. This, it
is understood, is the final disposition of his estate; and if he is
really dead, such will doubtless prove to be the case. There are those,
however, who, remembering the multi-millionaire's well-known
eccentricities, are suspecting him of living in quiet retirement
somewhere, laughing in his sleeve at the tempest in the teapot that he
has created; and that long before the two years are up, he will be back
on Chicago's streets, debonair and smiling as ever. The fact that so
little can be found in regard to the South American exploring
expedition might give color to this suspicion; but where on this
terrestrial ball could Mr. Stanley G. Fulton find a place to live in
UNREPORTED retirement? Smith did not show this paragraph to the Blaisdells. He destroyed
the paper containing it, indeed, promptly and effectually--with a
furtive glance over his shoulder as he did so. It was at about this
time, too, that Mr. Smith began to complain of his eyes and to wear
smoked glasses. Smith," said Benny, the first time he saw
him. "Why, I didn't hardly know you!" Smith, with suddenly a beaming
countenance. "Oh, well, that doesn't matter, does it?" Smith
gave an odd little chuckle as he turned away. CHAPTER XII

THE TOYS RATTLE OUT


Early in December Mrs. Hattie, after an extended search, found a
satisfactory home. It was a somewhat pretentious house, not far from
the Gaylord place. Hattie had it repapered and repainted
throughout and two new bathrooms put in. (She said that everybody who
was anybody always had lots of bathrooms.) Then she set herself to
furnishing it. She said that, of course, very little of their old
furniture would do at all. She was talking to Maggie Duff about it one
day when Mr. She was radiant that afternoon
in a handsome silk dress and a new fur coat. "You're looking very well--and happy, Mrs. "I am well, and I'm perfectly happy, Mr. You know about the new home, of course. Well, it's all
ready, and I'm ordering the furnishings. Oh, you don't know what it
means to me to be able at last to surround myself with all the
beautiful things I've so longed for all my life!" "I'm very glad, I'm sure." Smith said the words as if he meant them. "Yes, of course; and poor Maggie here, she says she's glad, too,--though
I don't see how she can be, when she never got a cent, do you, Mr. But, poor Maggie, she's got so used to being left out--"

"Hush, hush!" "You'll find money isn't everything in this world, Hattie Blaisdell,"
growled Mr. Duff, who, to-day, for some unknown reason, had deserted
the kitchen cookstove for the living-room base-burner. "And when I see
what a little money does for some folks I'm glad I'm poor. I wouldn't
be rich if I could. Furthermore, I'll thank you to keep your sympathy
at home. "Why, Father Duff," bridled Mrs. Hattie indignantly, "you know how poor
Maggie has had to--"

"Er--but tell us about the new home," interrupted Mr. Smith quickly,
"and the fine new furnishings." "Why, there isn't much to tell yet--about the furnishings, I mean. But I can tell you what I'm GOING to have." Hattie settled herself more comfortably, and began to look happy again. "As I was saying to Maggie, when you came in, I shall get almost
everything new--for the rooms that show, I mean,--for, of course, my
old things won't do at all. I want
oil paintings, of course, in gilt frames." She glanced a little
disdainfully at the oak-framed prints on Miss Maggie's walls. "Going in for old masters, maybe," suggested Mr. Duff, with a sarcasm
that fell pointless at Mrs. "I'm going to have anything
old in my house--where it can be seen--For once I'm going to have NEW
things--all new things. You have to make a show or you won't be
recognized by the best people." "But, Hattie, my dear," began Miss Maggie, flushing a little, and
carefully avoiding Mr. Smith's eyes, "old masters are--are very
valuable, and--"

"I don't care if they are," retorted Mrs. "If
they're old, I don't want them, and that settles it. I'm going to have
velvet carpets and the handsomest lace curtains that I can find; and
I'm going to have some of those gold chairs, like the Pennocks have,
only nicer. Theirs are awfully dull, some of them. And I'm going to
buy--"

"Humph! Pity you can't buy a little common sense--somewhere!" snarled
old man Duff, getting stiffly to his feet. "You'll need it, to swing
all that style." "Oh, I don't mind what Father Duff says," laughed Mrs. But
there was a haughty tilt to her chin and an angry sparkle in her eyes
as she, too, arose. "I'm just going, anyway, so you don't need to
disturb yourself, Father Duff." But Father Duff, with another "Humph!" and a muttered something about
having all he wanted already of "silly chatter," stamped out into the
kitchen, with the usual emphasis of his cane at every other step. It was just as well, perhaps, that he went, for Mrs. Hattie Blaisdell
had been gone barely five minutes when her sister-in-law, Mrs. "I've come to see you about a very important matter, Maggie," she
announced, as she threw off her furs--not new ones--and unbuttoned her
coat--which also was not new. "Then certainly I will take myself out of the way," said Mr. Smith,
with a smile, making a move to go. "Part of it
concerns you, and I'm glad you're here, anyway. I'm afraid I shall have to give up boarding you, and one thing I
came to-day for was to ask Maggie if she'd take you. I wanted to give
poor Maggie the first chance at you, of course." Smith laughed,--but unmistakably he blushed. "The
first--But, my dear woman, it is just possible that Miss Maggie may
wish to--er--decline this great honor which is being conferred upon
her, and she may hesitate, for the sake of my feelings, to do it before
me. NOW I'm very sure I ought to have left at once." (Was Miss Maggie blushing the least bit, too?) "I shall be
very glad to take Mr. Smith as a boarder if he wants to come--but HE'S
got something to say about it, remember. But tell me, why are you
letting him go, Jane?" "Now this surely WILL be embarrassing," laughed
Mr. "Do I eat too much, or am I merely noisy,
and a nuisance generally?" She was looking at Miss
Maggie, her eyes somber, intent. She says it's perfectly absurd for me to take boarders, with all
our money; and she's making a terrible fuss about where we live. She
says she's ashamed--positively ashamed of us--that we haven't moved
into a decent place yet." Miss Maggie's lips puckered a little. "Y-yes, only it will cost so much. I've always wanted a house--with a
yard, I mean; and 'twould be nice for Mellicent, of course." "Y-yes, I know I have; but it'll cost so much, Maggie. It costs not only the money itself, but all the interest that the money
could be earning. Why, Maggie, I never saw anything like it." Her face
grew suddenly alert and happy. "I never knew before how much money,
just MONEY, could earn, while you didn't have to do a thing but sit
back and watch it do it. It's the most fascinating thing I ever saw. I
counted up the other day how much we'd have if we didn't spend a cent
of it for ten years--the legacy, I mean." "Aren't you going to
spend any of that money before ten years' time?" The anxious frown came again to her
face. We have spent a lot of it, already. Frank has
bought out that horrid grocery across the street, and he's put a lot in
the bank, and he spends from that every day, I know. And I'm WILLING to
spend some, of course. But we had to pay so much inheritance tax and
all that it would be my way not to spend much till the interest had
sort of made that up, you know; but Frank and Mellicent--they won't
hear to it a minute. They want to move, too, and they're teasing me all
the time to get new clothes, both for me and for her. I can't do a thing with Hattie. You say yourself you'd like to," answered Miss Maggie
promptly. Smith leaped to his feet and thrust his hands into his pockets as
he took a nervous turn about the room, before he spoke. "Good Heavens, woman, that money was given you to--that is, it was
probably given you to use. "But I am using it," argued Mrs. "I think I'm making
the very best possible use of it when I put it where it will earn more. Besides, what does the Bible say about that man with one
talent that didn't make it earn more?" Smith turned on his heel and renewed his march. "I think the only thing money is good for is to exchange it for
something you want," observed Miss Maggie sententiously. She gazed at Miss Maggie with
fondly reproving eyes. "Yes, we all know your ideas of money, Maggie. You're very sweet and
dear, and we love you; but you ARE extravagant." You use everything you have every day; and you never protect a
thing. Actually, I don't believe there's a tidy or a linen slip in this
house." Smith breathe a fervent "Thank the Lord!" "And that brings me right up to something else I was going
to say. I want you to know that I'm going to help you." Miss Maggie looked distressed and raised a protesting hand; but Mrs. Jane smilingly shook her head and went on. I always said I should, if I had money, and I shall--though
I must confess that I'd have a good deal more heart to do it if you
weren't quite so extravagant. But again she only smilingly shook her head and continued speaking. "And if we move, I'm going to give you the parlor carpet, and some rugs
to protect it." "Thank you; but, really, I don't want the parlor carpet," refused Miss
Maggie, a tiny smouldering fire in her eyes. "And I shall give you some money, too," smiled Mrs. Jane, very
graciously,--"when the interest begins to come in, you know. It's too bad you should have nothing while I
have so much." The smouldering fire in Miss Maggie's eyes had become a
flame now. "Nonsense, Maggie, you mustn't be so proud. Wasn't I poor just the other day? However, since it distresses you so,
we won't say any more about it now. Then, you advise me--you both advise me--to move, do you?" "I do, most certainly," bowed Miss Maggie, still with a trace of
constraint. "For Heaven's sake, lady, go home, and spend--some of that money!" "Well, I don't see but what I shall have to, with everybody against me
like this," she sighed, getting slowly to her feet. "But if you
knew--if either of you knew--how really valuable money is, and how much
it would earn for you, if you'd only let it, I don't believe you'd be
quite so fast to tell me to go and spend it." "Perhaps not; but then, you see, we don't know," smiled Miss Maggie,
once again her cheery self. Smith faced Miss Maggie with a quizzical
smile. "You mean--"

"I'm awaiting orders--as your new boarder." They'll not be alarming, I assure you. And I think it's mighty good of you to take me. But--SHOULD you, do you think? Haven't you got enough, with your father
to care for? Annabelle and Florence
Martin, a farmer's daughters are very anxious to be in town to attend
school this winter, and I have said that I would take them. "I can imagine how much work you'll let them do! It strikes me the
'help' is on the other foot. I shall be
glad enough to come, and I'll stay--unless I find you're doing too much
and going beyond your strength. I'll arrange that he proposes the idea himself. Besides,"--she twinkled merrily--"you really get along wonderfully with
father, you know. And, as for the work--I shall have more time now:
Hattie will have some one else to care for her headaches, and Jane
won't put down any more carpets, I fancy, for a while." "Honestly, Miss Maggie, one of the
best things about this Blaisdell money, in my eyes, is that it may give
you a little rest from being chief cook and bottle washer and head
nurse combined, on tap for any minute. But, say, that woman WILL spend
some of that money, won't she?" I saw Frank last evening--though I didn't think it
necessary to say so to her. I think you'll find that
they move very soon, and that the ladies of the family have some new
clothes." Er--ah--well, I am," he asserted stoutly. "Such a windfall
of wealth ought to bring happiness, I think; and it seemed to, to Mrs. Hattie, though, of course, she'll learn better, as time goes on how to
spend her money. Jane--And, by the way, how is Miss Flora
bearing up--under the burden?" And do I hear 'Poor Maggie' say 'Poor Flora'?" "Oh, she won't be 'poor' long," smiled Miss Maggie. "She'll get used to
it--this stupendous sum of money--one of these days. But just now she's
nearly frightened to death." "Yes-both because she's got it, and because she's afraid she'll lose
it. That doesn't sound logical, I know, but Flora isn't being logical
just now. To begin with, she hasn't the least idea how to spend money. Under my careful guidance, however, she has bought her a few new
dresses--though they're dead black--"

"Black!" "Yes, she's put on mourning," smiled Miss Maggie, as he came to a
dismayed stop. She declared she wouldn't feel half
decent unless she did, with that poor man dead, and giving her all that
money." "But he isn't dead--that is, they aren't sure he's dead," amended Mr. She says he must be, or he would have appeared
in time to save all that money. She's very much shocked, especially at
Hattie, that there is so little respect being shown his memory. So she
is all the more determined to do the best she can on her part." "But she--she didn't know him, so she can't--er--really MOURN for him,"
stammered the man. There was a most curious helplessness on Mr. "No, she says she can't really mourn," smiled Miss Maggie again, "and
that's what worries her the most of anything--because she CAN'T mourn,
and when he's been so good to her--and he with neither wife nor chick
nor child TO mourn for him, she says. But she's determined to go
through the outward form of it, at least. So she's made herself some
new black dresses, and she's bought a veil. Fulton's
picture (she had one cut from a magazine, I believe), and has had it
framed and, hung on her wall. On the mantel beneath it she keeps fresh
flowers always. She says it's the nearest she can come to putting
flowers on his grave, poor man!" "And she doesn't go anywhere, except to church, and for necessary
errands." "That explains why I haven't seen her. I've
persuaded her to do that. She'll go with a party, of course,--one of
those 'personally conducted' affairs, you know. All her life she's wanted to see Niagara. Now she's going, and
she can hardly believe it's true. She wants a phonograph, too, but
she's decided not to get that until after six months' mourning is
up--it's too frivolous and jolly for a house of mourning." "It is funny, isn't it, that she takes it quite so seriously? Bessie
suggested (I'm afraid Bessie was a little naughty!) that she get the
phonograph, but not allow it to play anything but dirges and hymn
tunes." "But isn't the woman going to take ANY comfort with that money?" Smith,
what it means to her, to feel that she need never want again, and that
she can buy whatever she pleases, without thinking of the cost. That's
why she's frightened--because she IS so happy. She thinks it can't be
right to be so happy. When she isn't
being frightened about that, she's being frightened for fear she'll
lose it, and thus not have it any more. I don't think she quite
realizes yet what a big sum of money it is, and that she'd have to lose
a great deal before she lost it all." "Oh, well, she'll get used to that, in time. They'll all get used to
it--in time," declared Mr. "Then
they'll begin to live sanely and sensibly, and spend the money as it
should be spent. Of course, you couldn't expect them to know what to
do, at the very first, with a sum like that dropped into their laps. Smith, his face suddenly alert and interested again. "What would you do
if you should fall heir to a hundred thousand dollars--to-morrow?" Her eyes became luminous, unfathomable. "There is so much that a hundred thousand dollars could do--so much! Why, I would--" Her face changed again abruptly. She sniffed as at an
odor from somewhere. Then lightly she sprang to her feet and crossed to
the stove. "What would I do with a hundred thousand dollars?" she
demanded, whisking open a damper in the pipe. "I'd buy a new
base-burner that didn't leak gas! That's what I'd do with a hundred
thousand dollars. I wasn't thinking of charging quite that for your board. But you seemed so interested, I didn't know but what you were going to
hand over the hundred thousand, just to see what I would do with it,"
she challenged mischievously. "However, I'll stop talking nonsense, and
come down to business. New Boarder, I'll
let you choose which of two rooms you'd like." But, as had occurred once or twice before, Mr. Smith's face, as he followed her, was a study. CHAPTER XIII

THE DANCING BEGINS


Christmas saw many changes in the Blaisdell families. The James Blaisdells had moved into the big house near the Gaylord
place. Hattie had installed two maids in the kitchen, bought a
handsome touring car, and engaged an imposing-looking chauffeur. Fred
had entered college, and Bessie had been sent to a fashionable school
on the Hudson. Benny, to his disgust, had also been sent away to an
expensive school. Christmas, however, found them all at home for the
holidays, and for the big housewarming that their parents were planning
to give on Christmas night. The Frank Blaisdells had also moved. They were occupying a new house
not too far from the grocery store. Jane said that she wished to live in it awhile, so as to be sure she
would really like it. Besides, it would save the interest on the money
for that much time, anyway. True, she had been a little disturbed when
her husband reminded her that they would be paying rent meanwhile. But
she said that didn't matter; she was not going to put all that money
into a house just yet, anyway,--not till she was sure it was the best
they could do for the price. They, too, were planning a housewarming. Theirs was to come the night
after Christmas. Jane told her husband that they should not want
theirs the same night, of course, as Hattie's, and that if she had hers
right away the next night, she could eat up any of the cakes or ice
cream that was left from Hattie's party, and thus save buying so much
new for herself. But her husband was so indignant over the idea of
eating "Hattie's leavings" that she had to give up this part of her
plan, though she still arranged to have her housewarming on the day
following her sister-in-law's. Mellicent, like Bessie, was home from school, though not from the same
school. Jane had found another one that was just as good as
Bessie's, she said, and which did not cost near so much money. Smith was not living with them now, of course. He was boarding at Miss
Maggie Duff's. Miss Flora was living in the same little rented cottage she had
occupied for many years. She said that she should move, of course, when
she got through her mourning, but, until then she thought it more
suitable for her to stay where she was. She had what she wanted to eat,
now, however, and she did not do dressmaking any longer. She still did
her own housework, in spite of Harriet Blaisdell's insistence that she
get a maid. She said that there was plenty of time for all those things
when she had finished her mourning. She went out very little, though
she did go to the housewarming at her brother James's--"being a
relative, so," she decided that no criticism could be made. It seemed as if all Hillerton went to that house-warming. Those who
were not especially invited to attend went as far as the street or the
gate, and looked on enviously. Hattie had been very generous with
her invitations, however. She said that she had asked everybody who
ever pretended to go anywhere. She told Maggie Duff that, of course,
after this, she should be more exclusive--very exclusive, in fact; but
that this time Jim wanted to ask everybody, and she didn't mind so
much--she was really rather glad to have all these people see the
house, and all--they certainly never would have the chance again. Hattie had very kindly
included him in the invitation. She had asked Father Duff, too,
especially, though she said she knew, of course, that he would not
go--he never went anywhere. Father Duff bristled up at this, and
declared that he guessed he would go, after all, just to show them that
he could, if he wanted to. Hattie grew actually pale, but Miss
Maggie exclaimed joyfully that, of course, he would go--he ought to go,
to show proper respect! Father Duff said no then, very decidedly; that
nothing could hire him to go, and that he had no respect to show. He
declared that he had no use for gossip and gabble and unwholesome
eating; and he said that he should not think Maggie would care to go,
either,--unless she could be in the kitchen, where it would seem
natural to her! Hattie, however, smiled kindly, and said, of course, now she could
afford to hire better help than Maggie (caterers from the city and all
that), so Maggie would not have to be in the kitchen, and that with
practice she would soon learn not to mind at all being 'round among
folks in the parlor. Father Duff had become so apoplectically angry at this that Mr. Smith,
who chanced to be present, and who also was very angry, was forced to
forget his own wrath in his desire to make the situation easier for
Miss Maggie. He had not supposed that Miss Maggie would go at all, after that. He
had even determined not to go himself. But Miss Maggie, after a day's
thought, had laughed and had said, with her eyes twinkling: "Oh, well,
it doesn't matter, you know,--it doesn't REALLY matter, does it?" He saw almost
everybody he knew in Hillerton, and many that he did not know. He heard
the Blaisdells and their new wealth discussed from all viewpoints, and
he heard some things about the missing millionaire benefactor that were
particularly interesting--to him. The general opinion seemed to be that
the man was dead; though a few admitted that there was a possibility,
of course, that he was merely lost somewhere in darkest South America
and would eventually get back to civilization, certainly long before
the time came to open the second letter of instructions. Many professed
to know the man well, through magazine and newspaper accounts (there
were times when Mr. Smith adjusted more carefully the smoked glasses
which he was still wearing); and some had much to say of the
millionaire's characteristics, habits, and eccentricities; all of which
Mr. Then, too, there were the Blaisdells themselves. They were all there,
even to Miss Flora, who was in dead black; and Mr. Miss Flora told him that she was so happy she could not sleep nights,
but that she was rather glad she couldn't sleep, after all, for she
spent the time mourning for poor Mr. Fulton, and thinking how good he
had been to her. And THAT made it seem as if she was doing SOMETHING
for him. She said, Yes, oh, yes, she was going to stop black mourning
in six months, and go into grays and lavenders; and she was glad Mr. Smith thought that was long enough, quite long enough for the black,
but she could not think for a moment of putting on colors now, as he
suggested. She said, too, that she had decided not to go to Niagara for
the present. And when he demurred at this, she told him that really she
would rather not. It would be warmer in the spring, and she would much
rather wait till she could enjoy every minute without feeling
that--well, that she was almost dancing over the poor man's grave, as
it were. He turned away, indeed, rather
precipitately--so precipitately that Miss Flora wondered if she could
have said anything to offend him. Her dress was new, and in good style,
yet she in some way looked odd to Mr. In a moment he knew the
reason: she wore no apron. Smith had never seen her without an
apron before. Even on the street she wore a black silk one. He
complimented her gallantly on her fine appearance. Thank you, of course," she answered worriedly. "But it
cost an awful lot--this dress did; but Frank and Mellicent would have
it. That child!--have you seen her to-night?" She, too is looking most
charming, Mrs. "Yes, I know she is--and some other folks so, too, I notice. "Well, she will be, if she isn't now. "But I thought--that was broken up." YOU know what that woman said--the insult! But now, since this
money came--" She let an expressive gesture complete the sentence. I don't think he'll make much
headway--now." "Indeed, he won't--if I can help myself!" "I reckon he won't stand much show with Miss Mellicent--after what's
happened." "I guess he won't," snapped the woman. "He isn't worth half what SHE is
now. As if I'd let her look at HIM!" There was an odd expression
on his face. Smith, I don't know what I am going to do--with
Mellicent," she sighed. She's as wild as a hawk and as--as flighty as a humming-bird,
since this money came. Smith, looking suddenly very happy
himself. "Youth is the time for joy and laughter; and I'm sure I'm glad
she is taking a little pleasure in life." Smith, you know as well as I do that life isn't all pink
dresses and sugar-plums. It is a serious business, and I have tried to
bring her up to understand it. I have taught her to be thrifty and
economical, and to realize the value of a dollar. But now--she doesn't
SEE a dollar but what she wants to spend it. "You aren't sorry--the money came?" Smith was eyeing her with a
quizzical smile. Blaisdell's answer was promptly emphatic. "And I hope I shall be found worthy of the gift, and able to handle it
wisely." "Er-ah--you mean--" Mr. "I mean that I regard wealth as one of the greatest of trusts, to be
wisely administered, Mr. "That is why it distresses me so to see my daughter so carried away
with the mere idea of spending. I thought I'd taught her differently,"
sighed the woman. He found her
in the music-room, which had been cleared for dancing. She was
surrounded by four young men. One held her fan, one carried her white
scarf on his arm, a third was handing her a glass of water. The fourth
was apparently writing his name on her dance card. The one writing on the
dance programme he knew was young Hibbard Gaylord. Leaning against a window-casing
near by, he watched the kaleidoscopic throng, bestowing a not too
conspicuous attention upon the group about Miss Mellicent Blaisdell. Mellicent was the picture of radiant loveliness. The rose in her cheeks
matched the rose of her gown, and her eyes sparkled with happiness. Smith could see, she dispensed her favors with rare
impartiality; though, as he came toward them finally, he realized at
once that there was a merry wrangle of some sort afoot. He had not
quite reached them when, to his surprise, Mellicent turned to him in
very evident relief. "I'm going to sit it out
with him. I shan't dance it with either of you." protested young Gaylord and Carl Pennock abjectly. If you WILL both write your names down for the same dance, it is
nothing more than you ought to expect." "I shan't be satisfied with anything--but to sit it out with Mr. Smith," she bowed, as she took his promptly offered arm. Smith bore her away followed by the despairing groans of the
two disappointed youths and the taunting gibes of their companions. Oh, I'm so glad you came," sighed Mellicent. "And it looked like a real rescue, too." "Wasn't one of them young Pennock?" "Oh, yes, he's come back. I wonder if he thinks I don't know--WHY!" She shrugged her shoulders with a demure dropping of her eyes. "Oh, I let him come back--to a certain extent. I shouldn't want him to
think I cared or noticed enough to keep him from coming back--some." "But there's a line beyond which he may not pass, eh?" "There certainly is!--but let's not talk of him. In a secluded corner they sat down on a gilt settee. "And it's all so wonderful, this--all this! Smith, I'm so happy
I--I want to cry all the time. And that's so silly--to want to cry! So long--all my life--I've had to WAIT for things so. It was
always by and by, in the future, that I was going to have--anything
that I wanted. And now to have them like this, all at once, everything
I want--why, Mr. Smith, it doesn't seem as if it could be true. "But it is true, dear child; and I'm so glad--you've got your
five-pound box of candy all at once at last. And I HOPE you can treat
your friends to unlimited soda waters." A new eagerness came to her
eyes. "I'm going to give mother a present--a frivolous, foolish
present, such as I've always wanted to. I'm going to give her a gold
breast-pin with an amethyst in it. And I'm
going to take my own money for it, too,--not the new money that father
gives me, but some money I've been saving up for years--dimes and
quarters and half-dollars in my baby-bank. Mother always made me save
'most every cent I got, you see. And I'm going to take it now for this
pin. She won't mind if I do spend it foolishly now--with all the rest
we have. And she'll be so pleased with the pin!" "Yes, always; but she never thought she could afford it. I'm
going to open the bank to-morrow and count it; and I'm so excited over
it!" Fulton himself ever
took more joy counting his millions than I shall take in counting those
quarters and half-dollars to-morrow." Smith spoke with confident emphasis,
yet in a voice that was not quite steady. Smith," smiled Mellicent, a bit mistily. And we miss you terribly--honestly we
do!--since you went away. But I'm glad Aunt Maggie's got you. That's the only thing that makes me feel bad,--about the money,
I mean,--and that is that she didn't have some, too. But mother's going
to give her some. She SAYS she is, and--"

But Mellicent did not finish her sentence. A short, sandy-haired youth
came up and pointed an accusing finger at her dance card; and Mellicent
said yes, the next dance was his. Smith
as she floated away, and Mr. Smith, well content, turned and walked
into the adjoining room. These two
ladies, also, were pictures of radiant loveliness--especially were they
radiant, for every beam of light found an answering flash in the
shimmering iridescence of their beads and jewels and opalescent sequins. Smith, what do you think of my party?" "I think a great deal--of your party," smiled the man. "Oh, it'll do--for Hillerton." Miss Bessie smiled mischievously into
her mother's eyes, shrugged her shoulders, and passed on into the
music-room. "As if it wasn't quite the finest thing Hillerton ever had--except the
Gaylord parties, of course," bridled Mrs. "That's just daughter's way of teasing me--and, of course, now she IS
where she sees the real thing in entertaining--she goes home with those
rich girls in her school, you know. But this is a nice party, isn't it
Mr. "Daughter says we should have wine; that everybody who is anybody has
wine now--champagne, and cigarettes for the ladies. Still, I've heard the Gaylords do. I've never been there
yet, though, of course, we shall be invited now. I'm crazy to see the
inside of their house; but I don't believe it's MUCH handsomer than
this. You've never been
there, any more than I have, and you're a man of simple tastes, I
judge, Mr. "Benny says that Aunt
Maggie's got the nicest house he ever saw, and that Mr. So, you see, I have grounds for my opinion." "Well, I'm not sure I ever said just that to Benny, but I'll not
dispute it. Miss Maggie's house is indeed wonderfully delightful--to
live in." "I've no doubt of it," conceded Mrs. She always did contrive to make the most of everything she had. But
she's never been ambitious for really nice things, I imagine. At least,
she always seems contented enough with her shabby chairs and carpets. While I--" She paused, looked about her, then drew a blissful sigh. Smith, you don't know--you CAN'T know what it is to me to just look
around and realize that they are all mine--these beautiful things!" Smith, there isn't a piece of furniture in this room
that didn't cost more than the Pennocks'--I know, because I've been
there. And my curtains are nicer, too, and my pictures, they're so much
brighter--some of her oil paintings are terribly dull-looking. And my
Bessie--did you notice her dress to-night? And if you had, you wouldn't have realized how expensive it
was. What do you know about the cost of women's dresses?" It was one hundred and fifty
dollars, a HUNDRED AND FIFTY DOLLARS, and it came from New York. I
don't believe that white muslin thing of Gussie Pennock's cost fifty! "Yes, of course you have--with Fred. He
goes with Pearl Gaylord more now. There, you can see them this minute,
dancing together--the one in the low-cut, blue dress. Pretty, too,
isn't she? Her father's worth a million, I suppose. I wonder how
'twould feel to be worth--a million." She spoke musingly, her eyes
following the low-cut blue dress. "But, then, maybe I shall know, some
time,--from Cousin Stanley, I mean," she explained smilingly, in answer
to the question she thought she saw behind Mr. "Oh, of course, there's nothing sure about it. But he gave us SOME, and
if he's dead, of course, that other letter'll be opened in two years;
and I don't see why he wouldn't give us the rest, as long as he'd shown
he remembered he'd got us. "Well--er--as to that--" Mr. "Well, there aren't any other relations so near, anyway, so I can't
help thinking about it, and wondering," she interposed. "And 'twould be
MILLIONS, not just one million. He's worth ten or twenty, they say. But, then, we shall know in time." "Oh, yes, you'll know--in time," agreed Mr. Smith with a smile, turning
away as another guest came up to his hostess. Smith's smile had been rather forced, and his face was still
somewhat red as he picked his way through the crowded rooms to the
place where he could see Frank Blaisdell standing alone, surveying the
scene, his hands in his pockets. Smith, this is some show, ain't it?' I should say so--though I can't say I'm stuck on the brand,
myself. But, as for this money business, do you know? I can't sense it yet--that it's true. Ain't she swingin' the style to-night?" "She certainly is looking handsome and very happy." I believe in takin'
some comfort as you go along--not that I've taken much, in times past. Why, man, I'm just like a potato-top grown in a cellar,
and I'm comin' out and get some sunshine. SHE'S been a potato-top in a cellar all right. But now--Have you
seen her to-night?" "I have--and a very charming sight she was," smiled Mr. "Well, she's goin' to be
that right along now. She's GOIN' where she wants to go, and DO what
she wants to do; and she's goin' to have all the fancy fluma-diddles to
wear she wants." I'm glad to hear that, too," laughed Mr. This savin' an' savin' is all very well, of course, when
you have to. But I've saved all my life and, by jingo, I'm goin' to
spend now! I'm glad to have one on my side, anyhow. I only wish--You
couldn't talk my wife 'round to your way of thinkin', could you?" he
shrugged, with a whimsical smile. "My wife's eaten sour cream to save
the sweet all her life, an' she hain't learned yet that if she'd eat
the sweet to begin with she wouldn't have no sour cream--'twouldn't
have time to get sour. She eats the specked
ones always; so she don't never eat anything but the worst there is. An' she says they're the meanest apples she ever saw. Now I tell her if
she'll only pick out the best there is every time, as I do she'll not
only enjoy every apple she eats, but she'll think they're the nicest
apples that ever grew. Here I am havin' to urge my
wife to spend money, while my sister-in-law here--Talk about ducks
takin' to the water! That ain't no name for the way she sails into
Jim's little pile." "Hain't seen him--but I can guess where he is, pretty well. You go down
that hall and turn to your left. In a little room at the end you'll
find him. He told Hattie 'twas the only room in the
house he'd ask for, but he wanted to fix it up himself. Hattie, she
wanted to buy all sorts of truck and fix it up with cushions and
curtains and Japanese gimcracks like she see a den in a book, and make
a showplace of it. There ain't
nothin' in it but books and chairs and a couch and a big table; and
they're all old--except the books--so Hattie don't show it much, when
she's showin' off the house. Jim always would rather read than eat, and he hates
shindigs of this sort a little worse 'n I do." I'll look
him up," nodded Mr. Deliberately, but with apparent carelessness, strolled Mr. Smith
through the big drawing-rooms, and down the hall. Then to the left--the
directions were not hard to follow, and the door of the room at the end
was halfway open, giving a glimpse of James Blaisdell and Benny before
the big fireplace. With a gentle tap and a cheerful "Do you allow intruders?" James Blaisdell sprang to his feet. The frown on his face
gave way to a smile. "I thought--Well, never mind what I thought. "Thank you, if you don't mind." Smith dropped into a chair and looked about him. "It's'most as nice as Aunt Maggie's,
ain't it? And I can eat all the cookies here I want to, and come in
even if my shoes are muddy, and bring the boys in, too." "It certainly is--great," agreed Mr. Smith, his admiring eyes sweeping
the room again. The deep,
comfortable chairs, the shaded lights, the leaping fire on the hearth,
the book-lined walls--even the rhythmic voices of the distant violins
seemed to sing of peace and quietness and rest. "Dad's been showin' me the books he used ter like when he was a little
boy like me," announced Benny. "Hain't he got a lot of 'em?--books, I
mean." James Blaisdell stirred a little in his chair. "I suppose I have--crowded them a little," he admitted. "But, you see,
there were so many I'd always wanted, and when the chance came--well, I
just bought them; that's all." "And you have the time now to read them." "I have, thank--Well, I suppose I should say thanks to Mr. Stanley G.
Fulton," he laughed, with some embarrassment. Fulton could
know--how much I do thank him," he finished soberly, his eyes caressing
the rows of volumes on the shelves. "You see, when you've wanted
something all your life--" He stopped with an expressive gesture. "You don't care much for--that, then, I take it," inferred Mr. Smith,
with a wave of his hand toward the distant violins. "Dad says there's only one thing worse than a party, and that's two
parties," piped up Benny from his seat on the rug. Smith laughed heartily, but the other looked still more discomfited. "I'm afraid Benny is--is telling tales out of school," he murmured. "Well, 'tis out of school, ain't it?" Smith, did you have ter go ter a private school when you were a little
boy? But if it's Cousin
Stanley's money that's made us somebody, I wished he'd kept it at
home--'fore I had ter go ter that old school." "Oh, come, come, my boy," remonstrated the father, drawing his son into
the circle of his arm. "That's neither kind nor grateful; besides, you
don't know what you're talking about. From case to case, then, they went, the host eagerly displaying and
explaining, the guest almost as eagerly watching and listening. And in
the kindling eye and reverent fingers of the man handling the volumes,
Mr. Smith caught some inkling of what those books meant to Jim
Blaisdell. "You must be fond of--books, Mr. Blaisdell," he said somewhat
awkwardly, after a time. "Ma says dad'd rather read than eat," giggled Benny; "but pa says
readin' IS eatin'. But I'd rather have a cookie, wouldn't you, Mr. "You wait till you find what there IS in these books, my son," smiled
his father. "You'll love them as well as I do, some day. And your
brother--" He paused, a swift shadow on his face. "My boy, Fred, loves books, too. He helped me a lot in my
buying. He was in here--a little while ago. But he couldn't stay, of
course. He said he had to go and dance with the girls--his mother
expected it." Just as if he didn't want ter go himself!" "You couldn't HIRE him ter stay away--'specially if Pearl
Gaylord's 'round." "Oh, well, he's young, and young feet always dance When Pan pipes,"
explained the father, with a smile that was a bit forced. "But Pan
doesn't always pipe, and he's ambitious--Fred is." The man turned
eagerly to Mr. "He's going to be a lawyer--you see, he's
got a chance now. He led his class in high school,
and he'll make good in college, I'm sure. He can have the best there is
now, too, without killing himself with work to get it. He's got a fine
mind, and--" The man stopped abruptly, with a shamed laugh. You'll forgive 'the fond father,' I know. I
always forget myself when I'm talking of that boy--or, rather perhaps
it's that I'm REMEMBERING myself. You see, I want him to do all that I
wanted to do--and couldn't. And--"

"Jim, JIM!" "There, I might have
known where I'd find you. Come, the guests are going, and are looking
for you to say good-night. They'll think we don't know anything--how to behave, and
all that. Smith, you'll excuse him, I know." "I must be going myself, for that
matter," he finished, as he followed his hostess through the doorway. Five minutes later he had found Miss Maggie, and was making his adieus. Miss Maggie, on the way home, was strangely silent. "Well, that was some party," began Mr. [Illustration with caption: "JIM, YOU'LL HAVE TO COME!"] "I'm glad at last to see that poor child enjoying herself." Smith frowned and stole a sidewise glance at his companion. Could Miss Maggie be showing at last a tinge of envy and
jealousy? And yet--

"Even Miss Flora seemed to be having a good time, in spite of that
funereal black," he hazarded again. James Blaisdell and Miss Bessie were very radiant
and shining." "Oh, yes, they--shone." Smith bit his lip, and stole another sidewise glance. James Blaisdell was so fond of--er--books. I had
quite a chat with him in his den." "He says Fred--"

"Did you see that Gaylord girl?" Miss Maggie was galvanized into sudden
life. "He's perfectly bewitched with her. And she--that ridiculous
dress--and for a young girl! Oh, I wish Hattie would let those people
alone!" "Oh, well, he'll be off to college next week," soothed Mr. Her brother!--and he's worse than she is, if
anything. Why, he was drunk to-night, actually drunk, when he came! I don't want Fred with any of them." "No, I don't like their looks myself very well, but--I fancy young
Blaisdell has a pretty level head on him. His father says--"

"His father worships him," interrupted Miss Maggie. But into Fred--into Fred he's pouring his whole lost
youth. You don't understand, of course, Mr. You
haven't known him all the way, as I have." Miss Maggie's voice shook
with suppressed feeling. From boyhood he was going to write--great plays, great
poems, great novels. I think he
even tried to sell his things, in his 'teens; but of course nothing
came of that--but rejection slips. Of
course, we couldn't send him. He couldn't stand
the double task, and he broke down completely. We sent him into the
country to recuperate, and there he met Hattie Snow, fell head over
heels in love with her blue eyes and golden hair, and married her on
the spot. Of course, there was nothing to do then but to go to work,
and Mr. Hammond took him into his real estate and insurance office. He's been there ever since, plodding plodding, plodding." "You can imagine there wasn't much time left for books. I think, when
he first went there, he thought he was still going to write the great
poem, the great play the great novel, that was to bring him fame and
money. Hattie had little patience with his
scribbling, and had less with the constant necessity of scrimping and
economizing. She was always ambitious to get ahead and be somebody,
and, of course, as the babies came and the expenses increased, the
demand for more money became more and more insistent. He worked, and worked hard, and then
he got a job for evenings and worked harder. But I don't believe he
ever quite caught up. That's why I was so glad when this money
came--for Jim. he's thrown his whole lost youth
into Fred. And Fred--"

"Fred is going to make good. But--I wish those Gaylords had been at the bottom of
the Red Sea before they ever came to Hillerton," she fumed with sudden
vehemence as she entered her own gate. CHAPTER XIV

FROM ME TO YOU WITH LOVE


It was certainly a gay one--that holiday week. Beginning with the James
Blaisdells' housewarming it was one continuous round of dances,
dinners, sleigh-rides and skating parties for Hillerton's young people
particularly for the Blaisdells, the Pennocks, and the Gaylords. Smith, at Miss Maggie's, saw comparatively little of it all, though
he had almost daily reports from Benny, Mellicent, or Miss Flora, who
came often to Miss Maggie's for a little chat. It was from Miss Flora
that he learned the outcome of Mellicent's present to her mother. The
week was past, and Miss Flora had come down to Miss Maggie's for a
little visit. Smith still worked at the table in the corner of the living-room,
though the Duff-Blaisdell records were all long ago copied. He was at
work now sorting and tabulating other Blaisdell records. Smith
seemed to find no end to the work that had to be done on his Blaisdell
book. As Miss Flora entered the room she greeted Mr. Smith cordially, and
dropped into a chair. "Well, they've gone at last," she panted, handing her furs to Miss
Maggie; "so I thought I'd come down and talk things over. Smith," she begged, as he made a move toward departure. "I hain't
come; to say nothin' private; besides, you're one of the family,
anyhow. Smith went back to his table, and Miss Flora
settled herself more comfortably in Miss Maggie's easiest chair. "So they're all gone," said Miss Maggie cheerily. "Yes; an' it's time they did, to my way of thinkin'. Mercy me, what a
week it has been! They hain't been still a minute, not one of 'em,
except for a few hours' sleep--toward mornin'." "But what a good time they've had!" And didn't it do your soul good to see Mellicent? But Jane--Jane
nearly had a fit. She told Mellicent that all this gayety was nothing
but froth and flimsiness and vexation of spirit. That she knew it
because she'd been all through it when she was young, and she knew the
vanity of it. And Mellicent--what do you suppose that child said?" "I can't imagine," smiled Miss Maggie. "She said SHE wanted to see the vanity of it, too. Pretty cute of her,
too, wasn't it? Still it's just as well she's gone back to school, I
think myself. She's been repressed and held back so long, that when she
did let loose, it was just like cutting the puckering string of a
bunched-up ruffle--she flew in all directions, and there was no holding
her back anywhere; and I suppose she has been a bit foolish and
extravagant in the things she's asked for. Poor dear, though, she did
get one setback." "Did she tell you about the present for her mother?" "That she was going to get it--yes." Miss Flora's thin lips snapped grimly over the
terse words. And 'twas a beauty--one of them light purple stones with two
pearls. Mellicent showed it to me--on the way home from the store, you
know. 'Oh, I don't mind the saving all
those years now,' she cried, 'when I see what a beautiful thing they've
let me get for mother' And she went off so happy she just couldn't keep
her feet from dancing." '"I can imagine it," nodded Miss Maggie. "Well, in an hour she was back. All the light
and happiness and springiness were gone. She
still carried the little box in her hand. 'I'm takin' it back,' she
choked. "'Oh, yes, she liked the pin,' said Mellicent, all teary;'she thinks
it's beautiful. She says she never heard
of such foolish goings-on--paying all that money for a silly, useless
pin. I--I told her 'twas a PRESENT from me, but she made me take it
back. I'm on my way now back to the store. I'm to get the money, if I
can. If I can't, I'm to get a credit slip. Mother says we can take it
up in forks and spoons and things we need. I--I told her 'twas a
present, but--' She couldn't say another word, poor child. She just
turned and almost ran from the room. She went away
this morning, I suppose. I didn't see her again, so I don't know how
she did come out with the store-man." Smith had fallen to writing furiously, with vicious little jabs of his
pencil.) "But Jane never did believe in present-giving. They never gave
presents to each other even at Christmas. She always called it a
foolish, wasteful practice, and Mellicent was always SO unhappy
Christmas morning!" Jane
never let 'em take even comfort, and now that they CAN take some
comfort, Jane's got so out of the habit, she don't know how to begin." "I don't think YOU can
say much on that score." "Why, Maggie Duff, I'M taking comfort," bridled Miss Flora. "Didn't I
have chicken last week and turkey three weeks ago? And do I ever skimp
the butter or hunt for cake-rules with one egg now? And ain't I going
to Niagara and have a phonograph and move into a fine place just as
soon as my mourning is up? "All right, I'll wait," laughed Miss Maggie. Then, a bit anxiously, she
asked: "Did Fred go to-day?" "Yes, looking fine as a fiddle, too. I was sweeping off the steps when
he went by the house. Said he was going in now
for real work--that he'd played long enough. He said he wouldn't be
good for a row of pins if he had many such weeks as this had been." "I'm glad he realized it," observed Miss Maggie grimly. "I suppose the
Gaylord young people went, too." "Hibbard did, but Pearl doesn't go till next week. She isn't in the
same school with Bess, you know. It's even grander than Bess's they
say. Hattie wants to get Bess into it next year. Oh, I forgot; we've
got to call her 'Elizabeth' now. Hattie says nicknames are all out now, and that
'Elizabeth' is very stylish and good form and the only proper thing to
call her. She says we must call her 'Harriet,' too. But I'm afraid I shall forget--sometimes." "I'm afraid--a good many of us will," laughed Miss Maggie. "It all came from them Gaylords, I believe," sniffed Flora. "I don't
think much of 'em; but Hattie seems to. I notice she don't put nothin'
discouragin' in the way of young Gaylord and Bess. But he pays'most as
much attention to Mellicent, so far as I can see, whenever Carl Pennock
will give him a chance. Did you ever see the beat of that boy? I hope Mellicent'll give him a good lesson, before
she gets through with it. He deserves it," she ejaculated, as she
picked up her fur neck-piece, and fastened it with a jerk. In the doorway she paused and glanced cautiously toward Mr. Smith, perceiving the glance, tried very hard to absorb himself in the
rows of names dates before him; but he could not help hearing Miss
Flora's next words. "Maggie, hain't you changed your mind a mite yet? WON'T you let me give
you some of my money? But Miss Maggie, with a violent shake of her head, almost pushed Miss
Flora into the hall and shut the door firmly. Smith, left alone at his table, wrote again furiously, and with
vicious little jabs of his pencil. Smith was finding
a most congenial home. He liked Miss Maggie better than ever, on closer
acquaintance. The Martin girls fitted pleasantly into the household,
and plainly did much to help the mistress of the house. Father Duff was
still as irritable as ever, but he was not so much in evidence, for his
increasing lameness was confining him almost entirely to his own room. This meant added care for Miss Maggie, but, with the help of the
Martins, she still had some rest and leisure, some time to devote to
the walks and talks with Mr. Smith said it was absolutely
imperative, for the sake of her health, that she should have some
recreation, and that it was an act of charity, anyway, that she should
lighten his loneliness by letting him walk and talk with her. Smith could not help wondering a good deal these days about Miss
Maggie's financial resources. He knew from various indications that
they must be slender. Yet he never heard her plead poverty or preach
economy. In spite of the absence of protecting rugs and tidies,
however, and in spite of the fact that she plainly conducted her life
and household along the lines of the greatest possible comfort, he saw
many evidences that she counted the pennies--and that she made every
penny count. He knew, for a fact, that she had refused to accept any of the
Blaisdells' legacy. Jane, to be sure, had not offered any money yet
(though she had offered the parlor carpet, which had been promptly
refused), but Frank and James and Flora had offered money, and had
urged her to take it. Miss Maggie, however would have none of it. Smith suspected that Miss Maggie was proud, and that she regarded
such a gift as savoring too much of charity. Smith wished HE could
say something to Miss Maggie. Smith was, indeed, not a little
disturbed over the matter. He did try once to say something; but Miss
Maggie tossed it off with a merry: "Take their money? I should
feel as if I were eating up some of Jane's interest, or one of Hattie's
gold chairs!" After that she would not let him get near the subject. There seemed then really nothing that he could do. It was about this
time, however, that Mr. Smith began to demand certain extra
luxuries--honey, olives, sardines, candied fruits, and imported
jellies. They were always luxuries that must be bought, not prepared in
the home; and he promptly increased the price of his board--but to a
sum far beyond the extra cost of the delicacies he ordered. When Miss
Maggie remonstrated at the size of the increase, he pooh-poohed her
objections, and declared that even that did not pay for having such a
nuisance of a boarder around, with all his fussy notions. He insisted,
moreover, that the family should all partake freely of the various
delicacies, declaring that it seemed to take away the sting of his
fussiness if they ate as he ate, and so did not make him appear
singular in his tastes. They often came to Miss Maggie's, and occasionally he
called at their homes. They seemed to regard him, indeed, as quite one of the family, and they
asked his advice, and discussed their affairs before him with as much
freedom as if he were, in truth, a member of the family. Hattie Blaisdell was having a very gay winter, and
that she had been invited twice to the Gaylords'. He knew that James
Blaisdell was happy in long evenings with his books before the fire. From Fred's mother he learned that Fred had made the most exclusive
club in college, and from Fred's father he learned that the boy was
already leading his class in his studies. He heard of Bessie's visits
to the homes of wealthy New Yorkers, and of the trials Benny's teachers
were having with Benny. He knew something of Miss Flora's placid life in her "house of
mourning" (as Bessie had dubbed the little cottage), and he heard of
the "perfectly lovely times" Mellicent was having at her finishing
school. He dropped in occasionally to talk over the price of beans and
potatoes with Mr. Frank Blaisdell in his bustling grocery store, and he
often saw Mrs. It was at Miss Maggie's, indeed,
one day, that he heard Mrs. Jane say, as she sank wearily into a
chair:--

"Well, I declare! Sometimes I think I'll never give anybody a thing
again!" Smith, at his table, was conscious of a sudden lively interest. So
often, in his earlier acquaintance with Mrs. Jane, while he boarded
there, had he heard her say to mission-workers, church-solicitors, and
doorway beggars, alike, something similar to this; "No, I can give you
nothing. I'd love to, if I could--really I
would. It makes me quite unhappy to hear of all this need and
suffering. And if I were rich I would; but
as it is, I can only give you my sympathy and my prayers." He had wondered several times,
since the money came, as to Mrs. Hence his interest now
in what she was about to say. "Why, Jane, what's the matter?" "And positively a more
ungrateful set of people all around I never saw. You know I've never been able to do anything. And now I was so happy that I COULD do something, and I told
them so; and they seemed real pleased at first. I gave two dollars
apiece to the Ladies' Aid, the Home Missionary Society, and the Foreign
Missionary Society--and, do you know? They
acted for all the world as if they expected more--the grasping things! On the way home, just as I passed the Gale girls' I heard
Sue say: 'What's two dollars to her? "What's the good of giving, if you aren't going to get any credit, or
thanks, just because you're rich, I should like to know? "Look at Cousin Mary Davis--YOU know how poor they've
always been, and how hard it's been for them to get along. Her
Carrie--Mellicent's age, you know--has had to go to work in Hooper's
store. Well, I sent Mellicent's old white lace party dress to Mary. 'Twas some soiled, of course, and a little torn; but I thought she
could clean it and make it over beautifully for Carrie. But, what do
you think?--back it came the next day with a note from Mary saying very
crisply that Carrie had no place to wear white lace dresses, and they
had no time to make it over if she did. Didn't I invite her to my housewarming? But how
are you going to help a person like that?" "But, Jane, there must be ways--some ways." Miss Maggie's forehead was
wrinkled into a troubled frown. Davis has
been sick a long time, you remember." "Yes, I know he has; and that's all the more reason, to my way of
thinking, why they should be grateful for anything--ANYTHING! The
trouble is, she wants to be helped in ways of her own choosing. They
wanted Frank to take Sam, the boy,--he's eighteen now--into the store,
and they wanted me to get embroidery for Nellie to do at home--she's
lame, you know, but she does do beautiful work. Frank hates relatives in the store; he says they cause all
sorts of trouble with the other help; and I certainly wasn't going to
ask him to take any relatives of MINE. As for Nellie--I DID ask Hattie
if she couldn't give her some napkins to do, or something, and she gave
me a dozen for her--she said Nellie'd probably do them as cheap as
anybody, and maybe cheaper. But she told me not to go to the Gaylords
or the Pennocks, or any of that crowd, for she wouldn't have them know
for the world that we had a relative right here in town that had to
take in sewing. I told her they weren't her relations nor the
Blaisdells'; they were mine, and they were just as good as her folks
any day, and that it was no disgrace to be poor. Besides, she got mad then, and took back the
dozen napkins she'd given me. So I didn't have anything for poor
Nellie. Miss Maggie's lips shut in a thin straight line. "Besides, if I'd taken
them to her, they wouldn't have appreciated it, I know. Why, last November, when the money came, I sent
them nearly all of Mellicent's and my old summer things--and if little
Tottie didn't go and say afterwards that her mamma did wish Cousin Jane
wouldn't send muslins in December when they hadn't room enough to store
a safety pin. Oh, of course, Mary didn't say that to ME, but she must
have said it somewhere, else Tottie wouldn't have got hold of it. 'Children and fools,' you know," she finished meaningly, as she rose to
go. Smith noticed that Miss Maggie seemed troubled that evening, and he
knew that she started off early the next morning and was gone nearly
all day, coming home only for a hurried luncheon. It being Saturday,
the Martin girls were both there to care for Father Duff and the house. Smith suspect that he had learned the
reason for all this. Then a thin-faced young girl with tired eyes came
to tea one evening and was introduced to him as Miss Carrie Davis. Later, when Miss Maggie had gone upstairs to put Father Duff to bed,
Mr. Smith heard Carrie Davis telling Annabelle Martin all about how
kind Miss Maggie had been to Nellie, finding her all that embroidery to
do for that rich Mrs. Gaylord, and how wonderful it was that she had
been able to get such a splendid job for Sam right in Hooper's store
where she was. Smith thought he understood then Miss Maggie's long absence on
Saturday. Smith was often running across little kindnesses that Miss Maggie
had done. He began to think that Miss Maggie must be a very charitable
person--until he ran across several cases that she had not helped. Then
he did not know exactly what to think. His first experience of this kind was when he met an unmistakably
"down-and-out" on the street one day, begging clothing, food, anything,
and telling a sorry tale of his unjust discharge from a local factory. Smith gave the man a dollar, and sent him to Miss Maggie. He
happened to know that Father Duff had discarded an old suit that
morning--and Father Duff and the beggar might have been taken for twins
as to size. On the way home a little later he met the beggar returning,
just as forlorn, and even more hungry-looking. "Well, my good fellow, couldn't she fix you up?" She
didn't fix me up ter nothin'--but chin music!" A few days later he heard an eager-eyed young woman begging Miss Maggie
for a contribution to the Pension Fund Fair in behalf of the underpaid
shopgirls in Daly's. Daly's was a Hillerton department Store, notorious
for its unfair treatment of its employees. Miss Maggie seemed interested, and asked many questions. The eager-eyed
young woman became even more eager-eyed, and told Miss Maggie all about
the long hours, the nerve-wearing labor, the low wages--wages upon
which it was impossible for any girl to live decently--wages whose
meagerness sent many a girl to her ruin. Miss Maggie listened attentively, and said, "Yes, yes, I see," several
times. But in the end the eager-eyed young woman went away empty-handed
and sad-eyed. He had thought Miss Maggie was so kind-hearted! She gave to some
fairs--why not to this one? Smith hunted up the
eager-eyed young woman and gave her ten dollars. He would have given
her more, but he had learned from unpleasant experience that large
gifts from unpretentious Mr. John Smith brought comments and curiosity
not always agreeable. It was not until many weeks later that Mr. Smith chanced to hear of the
complete change of policy of Daly's department store. Hours were
shortened, labor lightened, and wages raised. Incidentally he learned
that it had all started from a crusade of women's clubs and church
committees who had "got after old Daly" and threatened all sorts of
publicity and unpleasantness if the wrongs were not righted at once. He
learned also that the leader in the forefront of this movement had
been--Maggie Duff. As it chanced, it was on that same day that a strange man accosted him
on the street. "Say, she was all right, she was, old man. I been hopin' I'd see ye
some day ter tell ye." "Ye don't know me, do ye? Well, I do look diff'rent, I'll own. Ye give
me a dollar once, an' sent me to a lady down the street thar. I thought 'twas only
chin-music she was givin' me. She hunted up the
wife an' kids, an' what's more, she went an' faced my boss, an' she got
me my job back, too. "Why, I'm--I'm glad, of course!" CHAPTER XV

IN SEARCH OF REST


June brought all the young people home again. It brought, also, a great
deal of talk concerning plans for vacation. Bessie--Elizabeth--said
they must all go away. From James Blaisdell this brought a sudden and vigorous remonstrance. "Nonsense, you've just got home!" "Hillerton'll be a
vacation to you all right. I
haven't seen a thing of my children for six months." (Elizabeth had learned to give very
silvery laughs.) She shrugged her shoulders daintily and looked at her
rings. You wouldn't really doom us to Hillerton all summer,
daddy." "What isn't the matter with Hillerton?" "But I thought we--we would have lovely auto trips," stammered her
mother apologetically. "Take them from here, you know, and stay
overnight at hotels around. I've always wanted to do that; and we can
now, dear." "Why, mumsey, we're going to
the shore for July, and to the mountains for August. You and daddy and
I. And Fred's going, too, only he'll be at the Gaylord camp in the
Adirondacks, part of the time." James Blaisdell's eyes, fixed on his son, were
half wistful, half accusing. "Well, I sort of had to, governor," he apologized. There are some things a man has to do! Gaylord asked me, and--Hang it
all, I don't see why you have to look at me as if I were committing a
crime, dad!" "You aren't, dear, you aren't," fluttered Fred's mother hurriedly; "and
I'm sure it's lovely you've got the chance to go to the Gaylords' camp. And it's right, quite right, that we should travel this summer, as
Bessie--er--Elizabeth suggests. I never thought; but, of course, you
young people don't want to be hived up in Hillerton all summer!" "Bet your life we don't, mater," shrugged Fred, carefully avoiding his
father's eyes, "after all that grind." But Fred had turned away, and did not, apparently, hear his father's
grieved question. Smith learned all about the vacation plans a day or two later from
Benny. "Yep, we're all goin' away for all summer," he repeated, after he had
told the destination of most of the family. "I don't think ma wants to,
much, but she's goin' on account of Bess. Besides, she says everybody
who is anybody always goes away on vacations, of course. They're goin' to the beach first, and I'm goin' to a boys' camp up
in Vermont--Mellicent, she's goin' to a girls' camp. "She tried to get Bess to go--Gussie
Pennock's goin'. But Bess!--my you should see her nose go up in the
air! She said she wa'n't goin' where she had to wear great coarse shoes
an' horrid middy-blouses all day, an' build fires an' walk miles an'
eat bugs an' grasshoppers." "Is Miss Mellicent going to do all that?" "Bess says she is--I mean, ELIZABETH. We have to call her
that now, when we don't forget it. Have you seen
her since she came back?" "She's swingin' an awful lot of style--Bess is. She makes dad dress up
in his swallow-tail every night for dinner. An' she makes him and Fred
an' me stand up the minute she comes into the room, no matter if
there's forty other chairs in sight; an' we have to STAY standin' till
she sits down--an' sometimes she stands up a-purpose, just to keep US
standing. She says a gentleman never sits when a lady
is standin' up in his presence. An' she's lecturin' us all the time on
the way to eat an' talk an' act. Why, we can't even walk natural any
longer. An' she says the way Katy serves our meals is a disgrace to any
civilized family." She got mad an' gave notice on the spot. An' that made ma
'most have hysterics--she did have one of her headaches--'cause good
hired girls are awful scarce, she says. we'll get
some from the city next time that know their business, an' we're goin'
away all summer, anyway, an' won't ma please call them'maids,' as she
ought to, an' not that plebeian 'hired girl.' Everything's 'plebeian' with Bess now. Oh we're havin' great times at
our house since Bess--ELIZABETH--came!" grinned Benny, tossing his cap
in the air, and dancing down the walk much as he had danced the first
night Mr. The James Blaisdells were hardly off to shore and camp when Miss Flora
started on her travels. Smith learned all about her plans, too, for
she came down one day to talk them over with Miss Maggie. Miss Flora was looking very well in a soft gray and white summer silk. Her forehead had lost its lines of care, and her eyes were no longer
peering for wrinkles. panted Miss Flora, as she fluttered up the steps and sank into
one of the porch chairs. Smith was putting
up a trellis for Miss Maggie's new rosebush. He was working faithfully,
but not with the skill of accustomedness. Miss Flora settled back into her chair and
smoothed out the ruffles across her lap. "It isn't too gay, is it? You
know the six months are more than up now." "I hoped it wasn't," sighed Miss Flora happily. "Well, I'm all packed
but my dresses." "Why, I thought you weren't going till Monday," said Miss Maggie. I suppose I am a little ahead of time. But you see, I
ain't used to packing--not a big trunk, so--and I was so afraid I
wouldn't get it done in time. I was going to put my dresses in; but
Mis' Moore said they'd wrinkle awfully, if I did, and, of course, they
would, when you come to think of it. So I shan't put those in till
Sunday night. I'm so glad Mis' Moore's going. It'll be so nice to have
somebody along that I know." "And she knows everything--all about tickets and checking the baggage,
and all that. You know we're only going to be personally conducted to
Niagara. After that we're going to New York and stay two weeks at some
nice hotel. I want to see Grant's Tomb and the Aquarium, and Mis' Moore
wants to go to Coney Island. She says she's always wanted to go to
Coney Island just as I have to Niagara." "I'm glad you can take her," said Miss Maggie heartily. You know, even if she has such a nice
family, and all, she hasn't much money, and she's been awful nice to me
lately. I used to think she didn't like me, too. But I must have been
mistaken, of course. And 'twas so with Mis' Benson and Mis' Pennock,
too. But now they've invited me there and have come to see me, and are
SO interested in my trip and all. Why, I never knew I had so many
friends, Maggie. Miss Maggie said nothing, but, there was an odd expression on her face. Smith pounded a small nail home with an extra blow of his hammer. "And they're all so kind and interested about the money, too," went on
Miss Flora, gently rocking to and fro. "Bert Benson sells stocks and
invests money for folks, you know, and Mis' Benson said he'd got some
splendid-payin' ones, and he'd let me have some, and--"

"Flo, you DIDN'T take any of that Benson gold-mine stock!" Smith's hammer stopped, suspended in mid-air. Miss Maggie relaxed in her chair, and Mr. Smith's hammer fell with a
gentle tap on the nail-head. "But I felt real bad about it--when Mis'
Benson had been so kind as to offer it, you know. It looked sort of--of
ungrateful, so." Miss Maggie's voice vibrated with indignant scorn. "Flora, you won't--you WON'T invest your money without asking Mr. "But I tell you I didn't," retorted Miss Flora, with unusual sharpness,
for her. "But it was good stock, and it pays splendidly. "Jane!--but I thought Frank wouldn't let her." "Oh, Frank said all right, if she wanted to, she might. I suspect he
got tired of her teasing, and it did pay splendidly. Why, 'twill pay
twenty-five per cent, probably, this year, Mis' Benson says. You see, he felt he'd got to pacify Jane some way, I s'pose,
she's so cut up about his selling out." Miss Flora
gave the satisfied little wriggle with which a born news-lover always
prefaces her choicest bit of information. "Frank has sold his grocery
stores--both of 'em." Why, I should as soon think of his--his selling himself,"
cried Mr. "Well, they ain't--because he's separated 'em." Miss Flora was rocking
a little faster now. That he's worked hard all his life, and it's
time he took some comfort. He says he doesn't take a minute of comfort
now 'cause Jane's hounding him all the time to get more money, to get
more money. She's crazy to see the interest mount up, you know--Jane
is. But he says he don't want any more money. He wants to SPEND money
for a while. He's going to retire from
business and enjoy himself." Smith, "this is a piece of news, indeed!" "I should say it was," cried Miss Maggie, still almost incredulous. "Oh, she's turribly fussed up over it, as you'd know she would be. Such
a good chance wasted, she thinks, when he might be making all that
money earn more. You know Jane wants to turn everything into money now. Honestly, Maggie, I don't believe Jane can look at the moon nowadays
without wishing it was really gold, and she had it to put out to
interest!" "Well, it's so," maintained Miss Flora, "So 't ain't any wonder, of
course, that she's upset over this. That's why Frank give in to her, I
think, and let her buy that Benson stock. Besides, he's feeling
especially flush, because he's got the cash the stores brought, too. "I'm sorry about that stock," frowned Miss Maggie. Mis' Benson said 'twas," comforted Miss
Flora. "When
did this happen--the sale of the store, I mean?" She's ALWAYS hated it that Frank had a grocery store,
you know; and since the money's come, and she's been going with the
Gaylords and the Pennocks, and all that crowd, she's felt worse than
ever. She was saying to me only last week how ashamed she was to think
that her friends might see her own brother-in-law any day wearing
horrid white coat, and selling molasses over the counter. My, but
Hattie'll be tickled all right--or 'Harriet,' I suppose I should say,
but I never can remember it. "But what is Frank going to--to do with himself?" "Why, Flora, he'll be lost without that grocery store!" "Oh, he's going to travel, first. He says he always wanted to, and he's
got a chance now, and he's going to. They're going to the Yellowstone
Park and the Garden of the Gods and to California. And that's another
thing that worries Jane--spending all that money for them just to ride
in the cars." "Oh, yes, she's going, too. She says she's got to go to keep Frank from
spending every cent he's got," laughed Miss Flora. "I was over there
last night, and they told me all about it." "Just as soon as they can get ready. Frank's got to help Donovan, the
man that's bought the store, a week till he gets the run of things, he
says. Miss Flora got to
her feet, and smoothed out the folds of her skirt. "He's as tickled as
a boy with a new jack-knife. Frank has been a turrible
hard worker all his life. I'm glad he's going to take some comfort,
same as I am." When Miss Flora had gone, Miss Maggie turned to Mr. Smith with eyes
that still carried dazed unbelief. "DID Flora say that Frank Blaisdell had sold his grocery stores?" Jane, that he ought not to enjoy his
money, certainly?" He's got money enough to retire, if he wants to, and he's
certainly worked hard enough to earn a rest." But, to me, it's--just this: while he's
got plenty to retire UPON, he hasn't got anything to--to retire TO." "And, pray, what do you mean by that?" Smith, I've known that man from the time he was trading
jack-knives and marbles and selling paper boxes for five pins. I
remember the whipping he got, too, for filching sugar and coffee and
beans from the pantry and opening a grocery store in our barn. From
that time to this, that boy has always been trading SOMETHING. He's
been absolutely uninterested in anything else. I don't believe he's
read a book or a magazine since his school days, unless it had
something to do with business or groceries. He hasn't a sign of a
fad--music, photography, collecting things--nothing. Now, what I want to
know is, what is the man going to do?" "Oh, he'll find something," laughed Mr. "He's going to travel,
first, anyhow." "Yes, he's going to travel, first. And then--we'll see," smiled Miss
Maggie enigmatically, as Mr. By the middle of July the Blaisdells were all gone from Hillerton and there
remained only their letters for Miss Maggie--and for Mr. Miss
Maggie was very generous with her letters. Smith's
genuine interest, she read him extracts from almost every one that
came. And the letters were always interesting--and usually
characteristic. Benny wrote of swimming and tennis matches, and of "hikes" and the
"bully eats." Hattie wrote of balls and gowns and the attention "dear
Elizabeth" was receiving from some really very nice families who were
said to be fabulously rich. Neither James nor Bessie wrote at all. Mellicent wrote frequently--gay, breezy letters full to the brim of the
joy of living. She wrote of tennis, swimming, camp-fire stories, and
mountain trails: they were like Benny's letters in petticoats, Miss
Maggie said. Long and frequent epistles came from Miss Flora. Miss Flora was having
a beautiful time. Niagara was perfectly lovely--only what a terrible
noise it made! She was glad she did not have to stay and hear it
always. She liked New York, only that was noisy, too, though Mrs. Moore liked Coney Island, too, but Miss
Flora much preferred Grant's Tomb, she said. It was so much more quiet
and ladylike. She thought some things at Coney Island were really not
nice at all, and she was surprised that Mrs. Between the lines it could be seen that in spite of all the good times,
Miss Flora was becoming just the least bit homesick. She wrote Miss
Maggie that it did seem queer to go everywhere, and not see a soul to
bow to. It gave her such a lonesome feeling--such a lot of faces, and
not one familiar one! She had tried to make the acquaintance of several
people--real nice people; she knew they were by the way they looked. But they wouldn't say hardly anything to her, nor answer her questions;
and they always got up and moved away very soon. To be sure, there was one nice young man. He was lovely to them, Miss
Flora said. It was when they were down to
Coney Island. He helped them through the crowds, and told them about
lots of nice things they didn't want to miss seeing. He walked with
them, too, quite awhile, showing them the sights. He was very kind--he
seemed so especially kind, after all those other cold-hearted people,
who didn't care! Moore both lost their
pocketbooks, and had such an awful time getting back to New York. It
was right after they had said good-bye to the nice young gentleman that
they discovered that they had lost them. They were so sorry that they
hadn't found it out before, Miss Flora said, for he would have helped
them, she was sure. But though they looked everywhere for him, they
could not find him at all, and they had to appeal to strangers, who
took them right up to a policeman the first thing, which was very
embarrassing, Miss Flora said. Moore felt as if they
had been arrested, almost! Miss Maggie pursed her lips a little, when
she read this letter to Mr. From Jane, also, came several letters, and from Frank Blaisdell one
short scrawl. Frank said he was having a bully time, but that he'd seen some of the
most shiftless-looking grocery stores that he ever set eyes on. He
asked if Maggie knew how trade was at his old store, and if Donovan was
keeping it up to the mark. He said that Jane was well, only she was
getting pretty tired because she WOULD try to see everything at once,
for fear she'd lose something, and not get her money's worth, for all
the world just as she used to eat things to save them. Jane wrote that she was having a very nice time, of course,--she
couldn't help it, with all those lovely things to see; but she said she
never dreamed that just potatoes, meat, and vegetables could cost so
much anywhere as they did in hotels, and as for the prices those
dining-cars charged--it was robbery--sheer robbery! And why an
able-bodied man should be given ten cents every time he handed you your
own hat, she couldn't understand. Smith passed a very quiet summer, but a very
contented one. He kept enough work ahead to amuse him, but never enough
to drive him. He took frequent day-trips to the surrounding towns, and
when possible he persuaded Miss Maggie to go with him. Miss Maggie was
wonderfully good company. As the summer advanced, however, he did not
see so much of her as he wanted to, for Father Duff's increasing
infirmities made more and more demands on her time. Annabelle was learning the
milliner's trade, and Florence had taken a clerkship for afternoons
during the summer. They still helped about the work, and relieved Miss
Maggie whenever possible. They were sensible, jolly girls, and Mr. CHAPTER XVI

THE FLY IN THE OINTMENT


In August Father Duff died. James
Blaisdell was already in town. She wrote
that she could not think of coming down for the funeral, but she
ordered an expensive wreath. Frank and Jane were in the Far West, and
could not possibly have arrived in time, anyway. Smith helped in every way that he could help, and Miss Maggie told
him that he was a great comfort, and that she did not know what she
would have done without him. James Blaisdell helped,
too, in every way possible, and at last the first hard sad days were
over, and the household had settled back into something like normal
conditions again. Miss Maggie had more time now, and she went often to drive or for motor
rides with Mr. Together they explored cemeteries for miles
around; and although Miss Maggie worried sometimes because they found
so little Blaisdell data, Mr. Smith did not seem to mind it at all. In September Miss Flora moved into an attractive house on the West
Side, bought some new furniture, and installed a maid in the
kitchen--all under Miss Maggie's kindly supervision. In September, too,
Frank and Jane Blaisdell came home, and the young people began to
prepare for the coming school year. Hattie one day, coming out of Miss Maggie's gate. She smiled and greeted him cordially, but she looked so palpably upset
over something that he exclaimed to Miss Maggie, as soon he entered the
house: "What was it? Miss Maggie smiled--but she frowned, too. "No, oh, no--except that Hattie has discovered that a hundred thousand
dollars isn't a million." "Oh, where she's been this summer she's measured up, of course, with
people a great deal richer than she. Here in
Hillerton her hundred--and two-hundred-dollar dresses looked very grand
to her, but she's discovered that there are women who pay five hundred
and a thousand, and even more. She feels very cheap and
poverty-stricken now, therefore, in her two-hundred-dollar gowns. If she only would stop trying to live like somebody else!" "But I thought--I thought this money was making them happy," stammered
Mr. "It was--until she realized that somebody else had more," sighed Miss
Maggie, with a shake of her head. "Oh, well, she'll get over that." "At any rate, it's brought her husband some comfort." "Y-yes, it has; but--"

"What do you mean by that?" he demanded, when she did not finish her
sentence. "I was wondering--if it would bring him any more." "Oh, no, but they've spent a lot--and Hattie is beginning again her old
talk that she MUST have more money in order to live 'even decent.' It
sounds very familiar to me, and to Jim, I suspect, poor fellow. I saw
him the other night, and from what he said, and what she says, I can
see pretty well how things are going. She's trying to get some of her
rich friends to give Jim a better position, where he'll earn more. She
doesn't understand, either, why Jim can't go into the stock market and
make millions, as some men do. I'm afraid she isn't always--patient. She says there are Fred and Elizabeth and Benjamin to educate, and that
she's just got to have more money to tide them over till the rest of
the legacy comes." "Good Heavens, does that
woman think that--" Mr. Smith stopped with the air of one pulling
himself back from an abyss. It is funny--the way she takes that for
granted, isn't it? Still, there are grounds for it, of course." Do YOU think--she'll get more, then?" To my mind the whole thing was rather
extraordinary, anyway, that he should have given them anything--utter
strangers as they were. Still, as Hattie says, as long as he HAS
recognized their existence, why, he may again of course. Still, on the
other hand, he may have very reasonably argued that, having willed them
a hundred thousand apiece, that was quite enough, and he'd give the
rest somewhere else." "And he may come back alive from South America"

"He may." "But Hattie isn't counting on either of these contingencies, and she is
counting on the money," sighed Miss Maggie, sobering again. "And
Jim,--poor Jim!--I'm afraid he's going to find it just as hard to keep
caught up now--as he used to." He stood looking
out of the window, apparently in deep thought. Miss Maggie, with another sigh, turned and went out into the kitchen. The next day, on the street, Mr. She was
with a tall, manly-looking, square-jawed young fellow whom Mr. Mellicent smiled and blushed adorably. Then, to
his surprise, she stopped him with a gesture. Smith, I know it's on the street, but I--I want Mr. Gray to meet
you, and I want you to meet Mr. Smith is--is a very good
friend of mine, Donald." Smith greeted Donald Gray with a warm handshake and a keen glance
into his face. The blush, the hesitation, the shy happiness in
Mellicent's eyes had been unmistakable. Smith felt suddenly that
Donald Gray was a man he very much wanted to know--a good deal about. Then he went home and straight to Miss
Maggie. "Well, to begin with, he's devoted to Mellicent." "You don't have to tell me that. "What I want to know is, who is he?" "He's a young man whom Mellicent met this summer. He plays the violin,
and Mellicent played his accompaniments in a church entertainment. He's the son of a minister near their
camp, where the girls went to church. He's
hard hit--that's sure. He came to Hillerton at once, and has gone to
work in Hammond's real estate office. "Yes, I did--but her mother doesn't." She says he's worse than Carl Pennock--that he hasn't got
any money, not ANY money." "You don't mean
that she's really letting money stand in the way if Mellicent cares for
him? Why, it was only a year ago that she herself was bitterly
censuring Mrs. Pennock for doing exactly the same thing in the case of
young Pennock and Mellicent." "But--she seems to have forgotten that." "Shoe's on the other foot this time." "I don't think Jane has done much yet, by way of opposition. You see
they've only reached home, and she's just found out about it. But she
told me she shouldn't let it go on, not for a moment. She has other
plans for Mellicent." "Shall I be--meddling in what isn't my business, if I ask what they
are?" "You know I am very much
interested in--Miss Mellicent." Perhaps you can suggest--a way out
for us," sighed Miss Maggie. "The case is just this: Jane wants
Mellicent to marry Hibbard Gaylord." I've seen young Gray only once, but I'd give more for his
little finger than I would for a cartload of Gaylords!" "But Jane--well, Jane feels
otherwise. To begin with, she's very much flattered at Gaylord's
attentions to Mellicent--the more so because he's left Bessie--I beg
her pardon, 'Elizabeth'--for her." "Then Miss Elizabeth is in it, too?" That's one of the reasons why Hattie is so anxious
for more money. She wants clothes and jewels for Bessie so she can keep
pace with the Gaylords. You see there's a wheel within a wheel here." "As near as I can judge, young Gaylord is Bessie's devoted slave--until
Mellicent arrives; then he has eyes only for HER, which piques Bessie
and her mother not a little. They were together more or less all summer
and I think Hattie thought the match was as good as made. Now, once in
Hillerton, back he flies to Mellicent." I think--no, I KNOW she cares for young
Gray; but--well, I might as well admit it, she is ready any time to
flirt outrageously with Hibbard Gaylord, or--or with anybody else, for
that matter. I saw her flirting with you at the party last Christmas!" Miss Maggie's face showed a sudden pink blush. If she'll flirt with young Gaylord AND
OTHERS, it's all right. "But I don't like to have her flirt at all, Mr. It's just her bottled-up childhood and youth
bubbling over. She can't help bubbling, she's been repressed so long. She'll come out all right, and she won't come out hand in hand with
Hibbard Gaylord. She'll be quiet, but
she'll be firm. With one hand she'll keep Gray away, and with the other
she'll push Gaylord forward. Even Mellicent herself won't know how it's
done. But it'll be done, and I tremble for the consequences." Smith's eyes had lost their twinkle now. To himself he
muttered: "I wonder if maybe--I hadn't better take a hand in this thing
myself." "You said--I didn't understand what you said," murmured Miss Maggie
doubtfully. "Nothing--nothing, Miss Maggie," replied the man. Then, with
business-like alertness, he lifted his chin. "How long do you say this
has been going on?" "Why, especially since they all came home two weeks ago. Jane knew
nothing of Donald Gray till then." "Oh, he comes in anywhere that he can find a chance; though, to do her
justice, Mellicent doesn't give him--many chances." "What does her father say to all this? "He says nothing--or, rather, he laughs, and says: 'Oh, well, it will
come out all right in time. He's taken him to ride in his car once, to my
knowledge." Frank Blaisdell has--a car?" "Oh, yes, he's just been learning to run it. Jane says he's crazy over
it, and that he's teasing her to go all the time. She says he wants to
be on the move somewhere every minute. "Well, no, I--didn't." "Oh yes, he's joined the Hillerton Country Club, and he goes up to the
links every morning for practice." "I can't imagine it--Frank Blaisdell spending his mornings playing
golf!" "Frank Blaisdell is a retired
business man. He has begun to take some pleasure in life now." Smith, as he turned to go into his own room. Smith called on the Frank Blaisdells that evening. Blaisdell
took him out to the garage (very lately a barn), and showed him the
shining new car. He also showed him his lavish supply of golf clubs,
and told him what a "bully time" he was having these days. He told him,
too, all about his Western trip, and said there was nothing like travel
to broaden a man's outlook. He said a great deal about how glad he was
to get out of the old grind behind the counter--but in the next breath
he asked Mr. Smith if he had ever seen a store run down as his had done
since he left it. Donovan didn't know any more than a cat how such a
store should be run, he said. When they came back from the garage they found callers in the
living-room. Carl Pennock and Hibbard Gaylord were chatting with
Mellicent. Almost at once the doorbell rang, too, and Donald Gray came
in with his violin and a roll of music. She greeted all the young men pleasantly, and asked Carl Pennock
to tell Mr. Then she sat down by
young Gray and asked him many questions about his music. She was SO
interested in violins, she said. Gray waxed eloquent, and seemed wonderfully pleased--for about five
minutes; then Mr. Smith saw that his glance was shifting more and more
frequently and more and more unhappily to Mellicent and Hibbard
Gaylord, talking tennis across the room. Smith apparently lost interest in young Pennock's fish story then. At all events, another minute found him eagerly echoing Mrs. Blaisdell's interest in violins--but with this difference: violins in
the abstract with her became A violin in the concrete with him; and he
must hear it at once. Jane herself could not have told exactly how it was done, but she
knew that two minutes later young Gray and Mellicent were at the piano,
he, shining-eyed and happy, drawing a tentative bow across the strings:
she, no less shining-eyed and happy, giving him "A" on the piano. Smith enjoyed the music very much--so much that he begged for
another selection and yet another. Smith did not appear to realize
that Messrs. Pennock and Gaylord were passing through sham interest and
frank boredom to disgusted silence. Jane's efforts to substitute some other form of entertainment for the
violin-playing. He shook hands very heartily, however, with Pennock and
Gaylord when they took their somewhat haughty departure, a little
later, and, strange to say, his interest in the music seemed to go with
their going; for at once then he turned to Mr. Frank Blaisdell
with a very animated account of some Blaisdell data he had found only
the week before. He did not appear to notice that the music of the piano had become
nothing but soft fitful snatches with a great deal of low talk and
laughter between. Blaisdell, and
especially Mrs. Blaisdell, should know the intimate history of one
Ephraim Blaisdell, born in 1720, and his ten children and forty-nine
grandchildren. He talked of various investments then, and of the
weather. He talked of the Blaisdells' trip, and of the cost of railroad
fares and hotel life. Jane told her husband
after he left that Mr. Smith had talked of everything under the sun,
and that she nearly had a fit because she could not get one minute to
herself to break in upon Mellicent and that horrid Gray fellow at the
piano. She had
never remembered he was such a talker! The young people had a tennis match on the school tennis court the next
day. Smith told Miss Maggie that he thought he would drop around
there. He said he liked very much to watch tennis games. Miss Maggie said yes, that she liked to watch tennis games, too. If
this was just a wee bit of a hint, it quite failed of its purpose, for
Mr. Smith did not offer to take her with him. He changed the subject,
indeed, so abruptly, that Miss Maggie bit her lip and flushed a little,
throwing a swift glance into his apparently serene countenance. Miss Maggie herself, in the afternoon, with an errand for an excuse,
walked slowly by the tennis court. Smith at once--but he
did not seem at all interested in the playing. He had his back to the
court, in fact. He was talking very animatedly with Mellicent
Blaisdell. He was still talking with her--though on the opposite side
of the court--when Miss Maggie went by again on her way home. Miss Maggie frowned and said something just under her breath about
"that child--flirting as usual!" Then she went on, walking very fast,
and without another glance toward the tennis ground. But a little
farther on Miss Maggie's step lagged perceptibly, and her head lost its
proud poise. Miss Maggie, for a reason she could not have explained
herself, was feeling suddenly old, and weary, and very much alone. To the image in the mirror as she took off her hat a few minutes later
in her own hall, she said scornfully:

"Well, why shouldn't you feel old? Miss
Maggie had a habit of talking to herself in the mirror--but never
before had she said anything like this to herself. queried Miss Maggie, without looking up
from the stocking she was mending. Why, I don't remember who did win finally," he answered. Nor did it apparently occur to him that for one who was so greatly
interested in tennis, he was curiously uninformed. Smith left the house soon after breakfast, and,
contrary to his usual custom, did not mention where he was going. Miss
Maggie was surprised and displeased. More especially was she displeased
because she WAS displeased. As if it mattered to her where he went, she
told herself scornfully. The next day and the next it was much the same. demanded Jane, without preamble, glancing at the
vacant chair by the table in the corner. Miss Maggie, to her disgust, could feel the color burning in her
cheeks; but she managed to smile as if amused. "I don't know, I'm sure. "Well, if you were I should ask you to keep him away from Mellicent,"
retorted Mrs. "I mean he's been hanging around Mellicent almost every day for a week." Smith is fifty if
he's a day." "I'm not saying he isn't," sniffed Jane, her nose uptilted. "But I do
say, 'No fool like an old fool'!" Smith has always been fond
of Mellicent, and--and interested in her. But I don't believe he cares
for her--that way." "Then why does he come to see her and take her auto-riding, and hang
around her every minute he gets a chance?" "I know how he
acts at the house, and I hear he scarcely left her side at the tennis
match the other day." "Yes, I--" Miss Maggie did not finish her sentence. A slow change came
to her countenance. The flush receded, leaving her face a bit white. "I wonder if the man really thinks he stands any chance," spluttered
Jane, ignoring Miss Maggie's unfinished sentence. "Why, he's worse than
that Donald Gray. He not only hasn't got the money, but he's old, as
well." "Yes, we're all--getting old, Jane." Miss Maggie tossed the words off
lightly, and smiled as she uttered them. Jane had gone,
she went to the little mirror above the mantel and gazed at herself
long and fixedly. Then resolutely she turned away, picked up her work,
and fell to sewing very fast. Two days later Mellicent went back to school. To Miss Maggie things seemed to settle back
into their old ways again then. Smith she took drives and
motor-rides, enjoying the crisp October air and the dancing sunlight on
the reds and browns and yellows of the autumnal foliage. True, she used
to wonder sometimes if the end always justified the means--it seemed an
expensive business to hire an automobile to take them fifty miles and
back, and all to verify a single date. And she could not help noticing
that Mr. Smith appeared to have many dates that needed verifying--dates
that were located in very diverse parts of the surrounding country. Miss Maggie also could not help noticing that Mr. Smith was getting
very little new material for his Blaisdell book these days, though he
still worked industriously over the old, retabulating, and recopying. She knew this, because she helped him do it--though she was careful to
let him know that she recognized the names and dates as old
acquaintances. To tell the truth, Miss Maggie did not like to admit, even to herself,
that Mr. Smith must be nearing the end of his task. She did not like to
think of the house--after Mr. She told herself
that he was just the sort of homey boarder that she liked, and she
wished she might keep him indefinitely. She thought so all the more when the long evenings of November brought
a new pleasure; Mr. Smith fell into the way of bringing home books to
read aloud; and she enjoyed that very much. They had long talks, too,
over the books they read. In one there was an old man who fell in love
with a young girl, and married her. Miss Maggie, as certain parts of
this story were read, held her breath, and stole furtive glances into
Mr. When it was finished she contrived to question with
careful casualness, as to his opinion of such a marriage. He said he did not
believe that such a marriage should take place, nor did he believe that
in real life, it would result in happiness. Marriage should be between
persons of similar age, tastes, and habits, he said very decidedly. And
Miss Maggie blushed and said yes, yes, indeed! And that night, when
Miss Maggie gazed at herself in the glass, she looked so happy--that
she appeared to be almost as young as Mellicent herself! CHAPTER XVII

AN AMBASSADOR OF CUPID'S


Christmas again brought all the young people home for the holidays. It
brought, also, a Christmas party at James Blaisdell's home. It was a
very different party, however, from the housewarming of a year before. To begin with, the attendance was much smaller; Mrs. Hattie had been
very exclusive in her invitations this time. She had not invited
"everybody who ever went anywhere." There were champagne, and
cigarettes for the ladies, too. Miss Maggie, who
had not attended any social gathering since Father Duff died, yielded
to Mr. Smith's urgings and said that she would go to this. But Miss
Maggie wished afterward that she had not gone--there were so many, many
features about that party that Miss Maggie did not like. She did not like the champagne nor the cigarettes. She did not like
Bessie's showy, low-cut dress, nor her supercilious airs. She did not
like the look in Fred's eyes, nor the way he drank the champagne. She
did not like Jane's maneuvers to bring Mellicent and Hibbard Gaylord
into each other's company--nor the way Mr. Smith maneuvered to get
Mellicent for himself. Of all these, except the very last, Miss Maggie talked with Mr. Smith
on the way home--yet it was the very last that was uppermost in her
mind, except perhaps, Fred. She did speak of Fred; but because that,
too, was so much to her, she waited until the last before she spoke of
it. "You saw Fred, of course," she began then. Short as the word was, it carried a volume of meaning to Miss
Maggie's fearful ears. Smith, it--it isn't true, is it?" "You saw him--drinking, then?" I saw some, and I heard--more. He's got in
with Gaylord and the rest of his set at college, and they're a bad
lot--drinking, gambling--no good." "But Fred wouldn't--gamble, Mr. And
he's so ambitious to get ahead! Surely he'd know he couldn't get
anywhere in his studies, if--if he drank and gambled!" I saw him only a minute at the first, and he
didn't look well a bit, to me." I found him in his den just as I did last year. He
didn't look well to me, either." "Not a word--and that's what worries me the most. Last year he talked a
lot about him, and was so proud and happy in his coming success. This
time he never mentioned him; but he looked--bad." "Oh, books, business:--nothing in particular. And he wasn't interested
in what he did say. "He's talked with me
quite a lot about--about the way they're living. He doesn't like--so
much fuss and show and society." Hattie would get over all that by this time, after
the newness of the money was worn off." It's worse, if anything," sighed
Miss Maggie, as they ascended the steps at her own door. "And Miss Bessie--" he began disapprovingly, then stopped. "Now, Miss
Mellicent--" he resumed, in a very different voice. With a rather loud
rattling of the doorknob she was pushing open the door. she cried, hurrying
into the living-room. Smith, hurrying after, evidently forgot to finish his sentence. Miss Maggie did not attend any more of the merrymakings of that holiday
week. It seemed to Miss Maggie, indeed, that Mr. Smith was away nearly every minute of that long week--and it WAS a long
week to Miss Maggie. Even the Martin girls were away many of the
evenings. Miss Maggie told herself that that was why the house seemed
so lonesome. But though Miss Maggie did not participate in the gay doings, she heard
of them. She heard of them on all sides, except from Mr. Smith--and on
all sides she heard of the devotion of Mr. She
concluded that this was the reason why Mr. Smith understood that Mellicent and young
Gray cared for each other, and she had thought that Mr. Smith even
approved of the affair between them. Now to push himself on the scene
in this absurd fashion and try "to cut everybody out," as it was
vulgarly termed--she never would have believed it of Mr. She had considered him to be a man of good sense and good judgment. And
had he not himself said, not so long ago, that he believed lovers
should be of the same age, tastes, and habits? And yet, here now he
was--

And there could be no mistake about it. The Martin girls brought it home as current gossip. Jane was
highly exercised over it, and even Harriet had exclaimed over the
"shameful flirtation Mellicent was carrying on with that man old enough
to be her father!" Besides, did she not see
with her own eyes that Mr. Smith was gone every day and evening, and
that, when he was at home at meal-time, he was silent and preoccupied,
and not like himself at all? And it was such a pity--she had thought so much of Mr. And Miss Maggie looked ill on the last evening of that holiday week
when, at nine o'clock, Mr. Smith found her sitting idle-handed before
the stove in the living-room. "Why, Miss Maggie, what's the matter with you?" cried the man, in very
evident concern. "You don't look like yourself to-night!" I'm just--tired, I guess. In spite of herself Miss Maggie's voice carried a
tinge of something not quite pleasant. Smith, however, did not appear to notice it. "Yes, I'm home early for once, thank Heaven!" he half groaned, as he
dropped himself into a chair. "It has been a strenuous week for you, hasn't it?" Again the tinge of
something not quite pleasant in Miss Maggie's voice. "Yes, but it's been worth it." There was a
vague questioning in his eyes. Obtaining, apparently, however, no
satisfactory answer from Miss Maggie's placid countenance, he turned
away and began speaking again. "Well, anyway, I've accomplished what I set out to do." "You-you've ALREADY accomplished it?" She was
gazing at him now with startled, half-frightened eyes. Why, Miss Maggie, what's the matter? What makes you look so--so
queer?" Why, nothing--nothing at all," laughed Miss Maggie
nervously, but very gayly. "I may have been a little--surprised, for a
moment; but I'm very glad--very." "Why, yes, for--for you. Isn't one always glad when--when a love affair
is--is all settled?" Smith smiled pleasantly, but without
embarrassment. "It doesn't matter, of course, only--well, I had hoped
it wasn't too conspicuous." "Oh, but you couldn't expect to hide a thing like that, Mr. Smith,"
retorted Miss Maggie, with what was very evidently intended for an arch
smile. "Well, I suppose I couldn't expect to keep a thing like that entirely
in the dark. Still, I don't believe the parties themselves--quite
understood. Of course, Pennock and Gaylord knew that they were kept
effectually away, but I don't believe they realized just how
systematically it was done. I--I can't help being sorry for him." "Certainly; and I should think YOU might give him a little sympathy,"
rejoined Miss Maggie spiritedly. "You KNOW how much he cared for
Mellicent." Why, what in the world are you talking about? Wasn't I doing the best I could for them all the time? Of COURSE, it
kept HIM away from her, too, just as it did Pennock and Gaylord; but HE
understood. Besides, he HAD her part of the time. I let him in whenever
it was possible." "Whatever in the world
are YOU talking about? Do you mean to say you were doing this FOR Mr. You didn't suppose it
was for Pennock or Gaylord, did you? Nor for--" He stopped short and
stared at Miss Maggie in growing amazement and dismay. "You didn't--you
DIDN'T think--I was doing that--for MYSELF?" "Well, of course, I--I--" Miss Maggie was laughing and blushing
painfully, but there was a new light in her eyes. "Well, anyway,
everybody said you were!" Smith leaped to his feet and thrust his hands
into his pockets, as he took a nervous turn about the room. as if, in my position, I'd--How perfectly absurd!" He
wheeled and faced her irritably. Why, I'm not a
marrying man. I don't like--I never saw the woman yet that I--" With
his eyes on Miss Maggie's flushed, half-averted face, he stopped again
abruptly. "Well, I'll be--" Even under his breath he did not finish his
sentence; but, with a new, quite different expression on his face, he
resumed his nervous pacing of the room, throwing now and then a quick
glance at Miss Maggie's still averted face. "It WAS absurd, of course, wasn't it?" Miss Maggie stirred and spoke
lightly, with the obvious intention of putting matters back into usual
conditions again. "But, come, tell me, just what did you do, and how? I'm so interested--indeed, I am!" Smith spoke as if he was thinking of something else
entirely. Smith sat down, but he did not go on speaking
at once. "You said--you kept Pennock and Gaylord away," Miss Maggie hopefully
reminded him. Oh, I--it was really very simple--I just monopolized
Mellicent myself, when I couldn't let Donald have her. I
saw very soon that she couldn't cope with her mother alone. And
Gaylord--well, I've no use for that young gentleman." I've been looking him up for some time. Miss Maggie asked other questions--Miss Maggie was manifestly
interested--and Mr. Very soon he said good-night and went to his own room. Miss Maggie, who still felt
self-conscious and embarrassed over her misconception of his attentions
to Mellicent, was more talkative than usual in her nervous attempt to
appear perfectly natural. The fact that she often found his eyes fixed
thoughtfully upon her, and felt them following her as she moved about
the room, did not tend to make her more at ease. At such times she
talked faster than ever--usually, if possible, about some member of the
Blaisdell family: Miss Maggie had learned that Mr. Smith was always
interested in any bit of news about the Blaisdells. It was on such an occasion that she told him about Miss Flora and the
new house. "I don't know, really, what I am going to do with her," she said. "I
wonder if perhaps you could help me." "Help you?--about Miss Flora?" Can you think of any way to make her contented?" Why, I thought--Don't tell me SHE isn't happy!" There was a
curious note of almost despair in Mr. "Hasn't she a new
house, and everything nice to go with it?" "Oh, yes--and that's what's the trouble. She feels
smothered and oppressed--as if she were visiting somewhere, and not at
home. You see, Miss Flora has always
lived very simply. She isn't used to maids--and the maid knows it,
which, if you ever employed maids, you would know is a terrible state
of affairs." "Oh, but she--she'll get used to that, in time." "Perhaps," conceded
Miss Maggie, "but I doubt it. Some women would, but not Miss Flora. She
is too inherently simple in her tastes. 'Why, it's as bad as always
living in a hotel!' 'You know on my trip I
was so afraid always I'd do something that wasn't quite right, before
those awful waiters in the dining-rooms, and I was anticipating so much
getting home where I could act natural--and here I've got one in my own
house!'" She says Hattie is
always telling her what is due her position, and that she must do this
and do that. She's being invited out, too, to the Pennocks' and the
Bensons'; and they're worse than the maid, she declares. She says she
loves to 'run in' and see people, and she loves to go to places and
spend the day with her sewing; but that these things where you go and
stand up and eat off a jiggly plate, and see everybody, and not really
see ANYBODY, are a nuisance and an abomination." "Well, she's about right there," chuckled Mr. "Yes, I think she is," smiled Miss Maggie; "but that isn't telling me
how to make her contented." Smith, with an irritability that
was as sudden as it was apparently causeless. "I didn't suppose you had
to tell any woman on this earth how to be contented--with a hundred
thousand dollars!" "It would seem so, wouldn't it?" Smith's eyes to her face in a
keen glance of interrogation. "You mean--you'd like the chance to prove it? That you wish YOU had
that hundred thousand?" "Oh, I didn't say--that," twinkled Miss Maggie mischievously, turning
away. Jane Blaisdell on
the street. "You're just the man I want to see," she accosted him eagerly. "Then I'll turn and walk along with you, if I may," smiled Mr. "Well, I don't know as you can do anything," she sighed; "but
somebody's got to do something. Could you--DO you suppose you could
interest my husband in this Blaisdell business of yours?" Smith gave a start, looking curiously disconcerted. "Why, I--I thought he
was--er--interested in motoring and golf." "Oh, he was, for a time; but it's too cold for those now, and he got
sick of them, anyway, before it did come cold, just as he does of
everything. Well, yesterday he asked a question--something about Father
Blaisdell's mother; and that gave me the idea. DO you suppose you could
get him interested in this ancestor business? It's so nice and quiet, and it CAN'T cost much--not like golf clubs and
caddies and gasoline, anyway. "Why, I--I don't know, Mrs. "I--I could show him what I have found, of course." "Well, I wish you would, then. Anyway, SOMETHING'S got to be done," she
sighed. And he
isn't a bit well, either. He ate such a lot of rich food and all sorts
of stuff on our trip that he got his stomach all out of order; and now
he can't eat anything, hardly." Well, if his stomach's knocked out I pity him," nodded Mr. You did say so when you first came,
didn't you? Smith PLEASE, if you know any of those health
fads, don't tell them to my husband. He's tried
dozens of them until I'm nearly wild, and I've lost two hired girls
already. One day it'll be no water, and the next it'll be all he can
drink; and one week he won't eat anything but vegetables, and the next
he won't touch a thing but meat and--is it fruit that goes with meat or
cereals? And lately
he's taken to inspecting every bit of meat and groceries that comes
into the house. Why, he spends half his time in the kitchen, nosing
'round the cupboards and refrigerator; and, of course, NO girl will
stand that! That's why I'm hoping, oh, I AM hoping that you can do
SOMETHING with him on that ancestor business. There, here is the
Bensons', where I've got to stop--and thank you ever so much, Mr. "All right, I'll try," promised Mr. Smith dubiously, as he lifted his
hat. But he frowned, and he was still frowning when he met Miss Maggie
at the Duff supper-table half an hour later. "Well, I've found another one who wants me to tell how to be contented,
though afflicted with a hundred thousand dollars," he greeted her
gloweringly. "Yes.--CAN'T a hundred thousand dollars bring any one satisfaction?" Miss Maggie laughed, then into her eyes came the mischievous twinkle
that Mr. "Don't blame the poor money," she said then demurely. "Blame--the way
it is spent!" CHAPTER XVIII

JUST A MATTER OF BEGGING


True to his promise, Mr. Frank Blaisdell on "the
ancestor business" very soon. Laboriously he got out his tabulated
dates and names and carefully he traced for him several lines of
descent from remote ancestors. Painstakingly he pointed out a "Submit,"
who had no history but the bare fact of her marriage to one Thomas
Blaisdell, and a "Thankful Marsh," who had eluded his every attempt to
supply her with parents. He let it be understood how important these
missing links were, and he tried to inspire his possible pupil with a
frenzied desire to go out and dig them up. He showed some of the
interesting letters he had received from various Blaisdells far and
near, and he spread before him the genealogical page of his latest
"Transcript," and explained how one might there stumble upon the very
missing link he was looking for. He said he didn't care how
many children his great-grandfather had, nor what they died of; and as
for Mrs. Submit and Miss Thankful, the ladies might bury themselves in
the "Transcript," or hide behind that wall of dates and names till
doomsday, for all he cared. He never did like
figures, he said, except figures that represented something worth
while, like a day's sales or a year's profits. Smith ever seen a store run
down as his old one had since he sold out? For that matter, something
must have got into all the grocery stores; for a poorer lot of goods
than those delivered every day at his home he never saw. It was a
disgrace to the trade. He said a good deal more about his grocery store--but nothing whatever
more about his Blaisdell ancestors; so Mr. Smith felt justified in
considering his efforts to interest Mr. Frank Blaisdell in the ancestor
business a failure. It was in February that a certain metropolitan reporter, short for
feature articles, ran up to Hillerton and contributed to his paper, the
following Sunday, a write-up on "The Blaisdells One Year After,"
enlarging on the fine new homes, the motor cars, and the luxurious
living of the three families. And it was three days after this article
was printed that Miss Flora appeared at Miss Maggie's, breathless with
excitement. "Just see what I've got in the mail this morning!" she cried to Miss
Maggie, and to Mr. Smith, who had opened the door for her. With trembling fingers she took from her bag a letter, and a small
picture evidently cut from a newspaper. "There, see," she panted, holding them out. "It's a man in Boston, and
these are his children. He said he knew I must have a real kind heart, and
he's in terrible trouble. He said he saw in the paper about the
wonderful legacy I'd had, and he told his wife he was going to write to
me, to see if I wouldn't help them--if only a little, it would aid them
that much." Miss Maggie had taken the letter and the
picture rather gingerly in her hands. Smith had gone over to the
stove suddenly--to turn a damper, apparently, though a close observer
might have noticed that he turned it back to its former position almost
at once. "He's sick, and he lost his position, and
his wife's sick, and two of the children, and one of 'em's lame, and
another's blind. Oh, it was such a pitiful story, Maggie! Why, some
days they haven't had enough to eat--and just look at me, with all my
chickens and turkeys and more pudding every day than I can stuff down!" He didn't ask me to HIRE him for
anything." "No, no, dear, but I mean--did he give you any references, to show that
he was--was worthy and all right," explained Miss Maggie patiently. He told me himself how
things were with him," rebuked Miss Flora indignantly. "It's all in the
letter there. "But he really ought to have given you SOME reference, dear, if he
asked you for money." "Well, I don't want any reference. I'd be ashamed to
doubt a man like that! And YOU would, after you read that letter, and
look into those blessed children's faces. Besides, he never thought of
such a thing--I know he didn't. Why, he says right in the letter there
that he never asked for help before, and he was so ashamed that he had
to now." [Illustration with caption: "AND LOOK INTO THOSE BLESSED CHILDREN'S
FACES"]

Mr. Smith made a sudden odd little noise in his throat. At all events, he was seized with a fit of coughing just then. Miss Maggie turned over the letter in her hand. "Where does he tell you to send the money?" "It's right there--Box four hundred and something; and I got a money
order, just as he said." Do you mean that you've already sent this money?" I stopped at the office on the way down here." He said he would rather have that than a check." You don't seem to have--delayed any." Why, Maggie, he said he HAD to have it at
once. He was going to be turned out--TURNED OUT into the streets! Think
of those seven little children in the streets! Why,
Maggie, what can you be thinking of?" "I'm thinking you've been the easy victim of a professional beggar,
Flora," retorted Miss Maggie, with some spirit, handing back the letter
and the picture. "Why, Maggie, I never knew you to be so--so unkind," charged Miss
Flora, her eyes tearful. "He can't be a professional beggar. He SAID he
wasn't--that he never begged before in his life." Miss Maggie, with a despairing gesture, averted her face. Smith, you--YOU don't think so, do you?" Smith grew very red--perhaps because he had to stop to cough again. "Well, Miss Flora, I--I'm sorry, but I'm afraid I shall have to agree
with Miss Maggie here, to some extent." You don't know how beautifully he
talked." "You told me; and you say yourself that he gave you only a post-office
box for an address. So you see you couldn't look him up very well." Miss Flora threw back her head a little haughtily. "And I'm glad I don't doubt my fellow men and women as you and Maggie
Duff do! If either of you KNEW what you're talking about, I wouldn't
say anything. You CAN'T KNOW anything about this man,
and you didn't ever get letters like this, either of you, of course. But, anyhow, I don't care if he ain't worthy. I wouldn't let those
children suffer; and I--I'm glad I sent it. I never in my life was so
happy as I was on the way here from the post-office this morning." Without waiting for a reply, she turned away majestically; but at the
door she paused and looked back at Miss Maggie. "And let me tell you that, however good or bad this particular man may
be, it's given me an idea, anyway," she choked. The haughtiness was all
gone now "I know now why it hasn't seemed right to be so happy. It's
because there are so many other folks in the world that AREN'T happy. Why, my chicken and turkey would choke me now if I didn't give some of
it to--to all these others. And I'm going to--I'M GOING TO!" she
reiterated, as she fled from the room. As the door shut crisply, Miss Maggie turned and looked at Mr. Smith had crossed again to the stove and was fussing with the
damper. Miss Maggie, after a moment's hesitation, turned and went out
into the kitchen, without speaking. Smith and Miss Maggie saw very little of Miss Flora after this for
some time. They heard of her
generous gifts to families all over town. A turkey was sent to every house on Mill Street, without exception, and
so much candy given to the children that half of them were made ill,
much to the distress of Miss Flora, who, it was said, promptly sent a
physician to undo her work. The Dow family, hard-working and thrifty,
and the Nolans, notorious for their laziness and shiftlessness, each
received a hundred dollars outright. The Whalens, always with both
hands metaphorically outstretched for alms, were loud in their praises
of Miss Flora's great kindness of heart; but the Davises (Mrs. Jane
Blaisdell's impecunious relatives) had very visible difficulty in
making Miss Flora understand that gifts bestowed as she bestowed them
were more welcome unmade. Every day, from one quarter or another, came stories like these to the
ears of Miss Maggie and Mr. Then one day, about a month later, she appeared as before at the Duff
cottage, breathless and agitated; only this time, plainly, she had been
crying. "Why, Flora, what in the world is the matter?" cried Miss Maggie, as
she hurried her visitor into a comfortable chair and began to unfasten
her wraps. Oh, he ain't here, is he?" she lamented, with a
disappointed glance toward the vacant chair by the table in the corner. "I thought maybe he could help me, some way. I won't go to Frank, or
Jim. They've--they've said so many things. I'll call him,"
comforted Miss Maggie, taking off Miss Flora's veil and hat and
smoothing back her hair. "But you don't want him to find you crying
like this, Flora. "Yes, yes, I know, but I'm not crying--I mean, I won't any more. And
I'll tell you just as soon as you get Mr. It's only that I've
been--so silly, I suppose. Miss Maggie, still with the disturbed frown between her eyebrows,
summoned Mr. Then together they sat down to hear Miss Flora's
story. "It all started, of course, from--from that day I brought the letter
here--from that man in Boston with seven children, you know." "Yes, I remember," encouraged Miss Maggie. "Well, I--I did quite a lot of things after that. I was so glad and
happy to discover I could do things for folks. It seemed to--to take
away the wickedness of my having so much, you know; and so I gave food
and money, oh, lots of places here in town--everywhere,'most, that I
could find that anybody needed it." We heard of the many kind things you did, dear." Miss
Maggie had the air of one trying to soothe a grieved child. "But they didn't turn out to be kind--all of 'em," quavered Miss Flora. I TRIED to do 'em all right!" "I know; but 'tain't those I came to talk about. I got 'em--lots of 'em--after the first one--the one you saw. First I got one, then another and another, till lately I've been
getting 'em every day,'most, and some days two or three at a time." "And they all wanted--money, I suppose," observed Mr. Smith, "for their
sick wives and children, I suppose." "Oh, not for children always--though it was them a good deal. But it
was for different things--and such a lot of them! I never knew there
could be so many kinds of such things. And I was real pleased, at
first,--that I could help, you know, in so many places." "Then you always sent it--the money?" Why, I just had to, the way they wrote; I wanted to, too. They wrote lovely letters, and real interesting ones, too. One man
wanted a warm coat for his little girl, and he told me all about what
hard times they'd had. Another wanted a brace for his poor little
crippled boy, and HE told me things. Why, I never s'posed folks could
have such awful things, and live! One woman just wanted to borrow
twenty dollars while she was so sick. She didn't ask me to give it to
her. Don't you suppose I'd send her that money? And there was a poor blind man--he wanted money to buy
a Bible in raised letters; and of COURSE I wouldn't refuse that! Some
didn't beg; they just wanted to sell things. I bought a diamond ring to
help put a boy through school, and a ruby pin of a man who needed the
money for bread for his children. And there was--oh, there was lots of
'em--too many to tell." "And all from Boston, I presume," murmured Mr. "Oh, no,--why, yes, they were, too, most of 'em, when you come to think
of it. "No, I haven't finished," moaned Miss Flora, almost crying again. "And
now comes the worst of it. As I said, at first I liked it--all these
letters--and I was so glad to help. But they're coming so fast now I
don't know what to do with 'em. And I never saw such a lot of things as
they want--pensions and mortgages, and pianos, and educations, and
wedding dresses, and clothes to be buried in, and--and there were so
many, and--and so queer, some of 'em, that I began to be afraid maybe
they weren't quite honest, all of 'em, and of course I CAN'T send to
such a lot as there are now, anyway, and I was getting so worried. Besides, I got another one of those awful proposals from those dreadful
men that want to marry me. As if I didn't know THAT was for my money! Then to-day, this morning, I--I got the worst of all." From her bag she
took an envelope and drew out a small picture of several children, cut
apparently from a newspaper. "Why, no,--yes, it's the one you brought us a month ago, isn't it?" The one I showed you before is in my bureau drawer
at home. But I got it out this morning, when this one came, and
compared them; and they're just exactly alike--EXACTLY!" "Oh, he wrote again, then,--wants more money, I suppose," frowned Miss
Maggie. This man's name is Haley, and
that one was Fay. Haley says this is a picture of his children,
and he says that the little girl in the corner is Katy, and she's deaf
and dumb; but Mr. Fay said her name was Rosie, and that she was LAME. And all the others--their names ain't the same, either, and there ain't
any of 'em blind. And, of course, I know now that--that one of those
men is lying to me. Why, they cut them out of the same newspaper;
they've got the same reading on the back! And I--I don't know what to
believe now. And there are all those letters at home that I haven't
answered yet; and they keep coming--why, I just dread to see the
postman turn down our street. I didn't
like his first letter and didn't answer it; and now he says if I don't
send him the money he'll tell everybody everywhere what a stingy
t-tight-wad I am. And another man said he'd come and TAKE it if I
didn't send it; and you KNOW how afraid of burglars I am! Oh what shall
I do, what shall I do?" "First, don't you worry another bit,
Miss Flora. Second, just hand those letters over to me--every one of
them. Most rich people have to have secretaries,
you know." "But how'll you know how to answer MY letters?" "N-no, not exactly a secretary. But--I've had some experience with
similar letters," observed Mr. I hoped maybe you
could help me some way, but I never thought of that--your answering
'em, I mean. I supposed everybody had to answer their own letters. How'll you know what I want to say?" "I shan't be answering what YOU want to say--but what _I_ want to say. In this case, Miss Flora, I exceed the prerogatives of the ordinary
secretary just a bit, you see. But you can count on one thing--I shan't
be spending any money for you." "You won't send them anything, then?" Smith, I want to send some of 'em something! "Of course you do, dear," spoke up Miss Maggie. "But you aren't being
either kind or charitable to foster rascally fakes like that," pointing
to the picture in Miss Flora's lap. "I'd stake my life on most of 'em," declared Mr. "They have all
the earmarks of fakes, all right." "But I was having a beautiful time giving until these horrid letters
began to come." "Flora, do you give because YOU like the sensation of giving, and of
receiving thanks, or because you really want to help somebody?" asked
Miss Maggie, a bit wearily. "Why, Maggie Duff, I want to help people, of course," almost wept Miss
Flora. "Well, then, suppose you try and give so it will help them, then," said
Miss Maggie. "One of the most risky things in the world, to my way of
thinking, is a present of--cash. Y-yes, of course," stammered Mr. Smith, growing
suddenly, for some unapparent reason, very much confused. Smith finished speaking, he threw an oddly nervous glance
into Miss Maggie's face. But Miss Maggie had turned back to Miss Flora. "There, dear," she admonished her, "now, you do just as Mr. Just hand over your letters to him for a while, and forget all about
them. He'll tell you how he answers them, of course. But you won't have
to worry about them any more. Besides they'll soon stop coming,--won't
they, Mr. They'll dwindle to a few scattering ones,
anyway,--after I've handled them for a while." "Well, I should like that," sighed Miss Flora. "But--can't I give
anything anywhere?" "But I would investigate a
little, first, dear. Smith threw a swiftly questioning
glance into Miss Maggie's face. "Yes, oh, yes; I believe in--investigation," he said then. "And now,
Miss Flora," he added briskly, as Miss Flora reached for her wraps,
"with your kind permission I'll walk home with you and have a look
at--my new job of secretarying." CHAPTER XIX

STILL OTHER FLIES


It was when his duties of secretaryship to Miss Flora had dwindled to
almost infinitesimal proportions that Mr. Smith wished suddenly that he
were serving Miss Maggie in that capacity, so concerned was he over a
letter that had come to Miss Maggie in that morning's mail. He himself had taken it from the letter-carrier's hand and had placed
it on Miss Maggie's little desk. Casually, as he did so, he had noticed
that it bore a name he recognized as that of a Boston law firm; but he
had given it no further thought until later, when, as he sat at his
work in the living-room, he had heard Miss Maggie give a low cry and
had looked up to find her staring at the letter in her hand, her face
going from red to white and back to red again. "Why, Miss Maggie, what is it?" As she turned toward him he saw that her eyes were full of tears. "Why, it--it's a letter telling me---" She stopped abruptly, her eyes
on his face. "Yes, yes, tell me," he begged. "Why, you are--CRYING, dear!" Smith, plainly quite unaware of the caressing word he had used, came
nearer, his face aglow with sympathy, his eyes very tender. The red surged once more over Miss Maggie's face. She drew back a
little, though manifestly with embarrassment, not displeasure. "It's--nothing, really it's nothing," she stammered. "It's just a
letter that--that surprised me." "Oh, well, I--I cry easily sometimes." With hands that shook visibly,
she folded the letter and tucked it into its envelope. Then with a
carelessness that was a little too elaborate, she tossed it into her
open desk. Very plainly, whatever she had meant to do in the first
place, she did not now intend to disclose to Mr. "Miss Maggie, please tell me--was it bad news?" Smith thought he detected a break very like a sob in the laugh. "But maybe I could--help you," he pleaded. "You couldn't--indeed, you couldn't!" "Miss Maggie, was it--money matters?" He had his answer in the telltale color that flamed instantly into her
face--but her lips said:--

"It was--nothing--I mean, it was nothing that need concern you." She
hurried away then to the kitchen, and Mr. Smith was left alone to fume
up and down the room and frown savagely at the offending envelope
tiptilted against the ink bottle in Miss Maggie's desk, just as Miss
Maggie's carefully careless hand had thrown it. Miss Maggie had several more letters from the Boston law firm, and Mr. Smith knew it--though he never heard Miss Maggie cry out at any of the
other ones. That they affected her deeply, however, he was certain. Her
very evident efforts to lead him to think that they were of no
consequence would convince him of their real importance to her if
nothing else had done so. He watched her, therefore, covertly,
fearfully, longing to help her, but not daring to offer his services. That the affair had something to do with money matters he was sure. That she would not deny this naturally strengthened him in this belief. He came in time, therefore, to formulate his own opinion: she had lost
money--perhaps a good deal (for her), and she was too proud to let him
or any one else know it. He watched then all the more carefully to see if he could detect any
NEW economies or new deprivations in her daily living. Then, because he
could not discover any such, he worried all the more: if she HAD lost
that money, she ought to economize, certainly. Could she be so foolish
as to carry her desire for secrecy to so absurd a length as to live
just exactly as before when she really could not afford it? Smith requested to have hot water
brought to his room morning and night, for which service he insisted,
in spite of Miss Maggie's remonstrances, on paying three dollars a week
extra. There came a strange man to call one day. He was a member of the Boston
law firm. Smith found out that much, but no more. Miss Maggie was
almost hysterical after his visit. She talked very fast and laughed a
good deal at supper that night; yet her eyes were full of tears nearly
all the time, as Mr. "And I suppose she thinks she's hiding it from me--that her heart is
breaking!" Smith savagely to himself, as he watched Miss
Maggie's nervous efforts to avoid meeting his eyes. "I vow I'll have it
out of her. I'll have it out--to-morrow!" Smith did not "have it out" with Miss Maggie the following day,
however. Something entirely outside of himself sent his thoughts into a
new channel. He was alone in the Duff living-room, and was idling over his work, at
his table in the corner, when Mrs. Hattie Blaisdell opened the door and
hurried in, wringing her hands. Smith sprang to his feet and hastened toward her. "Oh, I don't know--I don't know," moaned the woman, flinging herself
into a chair. "There can't anybody do anything, I s'pose; but I've GOT
to have somebody. I can't stay there in that house--I can't--I can't--I
CAN'T!" And you shan't," soothed the man. "And she'll
be here soon, I'm sure--Miss Maggie will. But just let me help you off
with your things," he urged, somewhat awkwardly trying to unfasten her
heavy wraps. Impatiently she jerked off the rich fur coat and
tossed it into his arms; then she dropped into the chair again and fell
to wringing her hands. "Oh, what shall I do, what shall I do?" Can't I send for--for your husband?" Blaisdell fell to weeping afresh. He's gone--to Fred, you know." "Yes, yes, that's what's the matter. Blaisdell, I'm so sorry! The woman dropped her hands from her face and looked up wildly, half
defiantly. He isn't bad and
wicked, is he? And they can't shut him up if--if we pay it back--all of
it that he took? They won't take my boy--to PRISON?" Smith's face, she began to wring her hands
again. I'll have to tell you--I'll have to," she
moaned. "But, my dear woman,--not unless you want to." "I do want to--I do want to! With a visible effort she calmed herself a little and forced
herself to talk more coherently. He wanted seven hundred
dollars and forty-two cents. He said he'd got to have it--if he didn't,
he'd go and KILL himself. He said he'd spent all of his allowance,
every cent, and that's what made him take it--this other money, in the
first place." "You mean--money that didn't belong to him?" "Yes; but you mustn't blame him, you mustn't blame him, Mr. "Yes; and--Oh, Maggie, Maggie, what shall I do? she
broke off wildly, leaping to her feet as Miss Maggie pushed open the
door and hurried in. Miss Maggie,
white-faced, but with a cheery smile, was throwing off her heavy coat
and her hat. A moment later she came over and took Mrs. Hattie's
trembling hands in both her own. "Now, first, tell me all about it,
dear." "Only a little," answered Miss Maggie, gently pushing the other back
into her chair. Jim telephoned him something, just before
he left. She began to wring her hands again, but
Miss Maggie caught and held them firmly. "You see, Fred, he was
treasurer of some club, or society, or something; and--and he--he
needed some money to--to pay a man, and he took that--the money that
belonged to the club, you know, and he thought he could pay it back,
little by little. But something happened--I don't know what--a new
treasurer, or something: anyhow, it was going to be found out--that
he'd taken it. It was going to be found out to-morrow, and so he wrote
the letter to his father. But he looked so--oh, I never
saw him look so white and terrible. And I'm so afraid--of what he'll
do--to Fred. "Is Jim going to give him the money?" And he's going to give it to him. Oh, they can't shut him
up--they CAN'T send him to prison NOW, can they?" No, they won't send him to prison. If Jim has gone with
the money, Fred will pay it back and nobody will know it. But, Hattie,
Fred DID it, just the same." "And, Hattie, don't you see? Don't you
see where all this is leading? But he isn't going to, any more. He said if his father would help him out of this
scrape, he'd never get into another one, and he'd SHOW him how much he
appreciated it." I'm glad to hear that," cried Miss Maggie. "He'll come out all
right, yet." Smith, over at the window, blew his nose
vigorously. Smith had not sat down since Miss Maggie's entrance. He
had crossed to the window, and had stood looking out--at nothing--all
through Mrs. "You do think he will, don't you?" Hattie, turning from one
to the other piteously. "He said he was ashamed of himself; that this
thing had been an awful lesson to him, and he promised--oh, he promised
lots of things, if Jim would only go up and help him out of this. He'd
never, never have to again. But he will, I know he will, if that
Gaylord fellow stays there. The whole thing was his fault--I know it
was. "Why, Hattie, I thought you liked them!" They're mean, stuck-up things, and they snub me awfully. Don't you suppose I know when I'm being snubbed? And that Gaylord
girl--she's just as bad, and she's making my Bessie just like her. I
got Bess into the same school with her, you know, and I was so proud
and happy. Why, my Bess, my own daughter,
actually looks down on us. She's ashamed of her own father and
mother--and she shows it. And it's that Gaylord girl that's done it,
too, I believe. I thought I--I was training my daughter to be a lady--a
real lady; but I never meant to train her to look down on--on her own
mother!" "I'm afraid Bessie--needs something of a lesson," commented Miss Maggie
tersely. "But Bessie will be older, one of these days, Hattie, and then
she'll--know more." "But that's what I've been trying to teach her--'more,' something more
all the time, Maggie," sighed Mrs. "And I've
tried to remember and call her Elizabeth, too.--but I can't. But,
somehow, to-day, nothing seems of any use, any way. And even if she
learns more and more, I don't see as it's going to do any good. I'm not fine enough yet, it seems, for
Mrs. They don't want me among them, and
they show it. And all my old friends are so envious and jealous since
the money came that THEY don't want me, and THEY show it; so I don't
feel comfortable anywhere." "Never mind, dear, just stop trying to live as you think other folks
want you to live, and live as YOU want to, for a while." Hattie smiled faintly, wiped her eyes again, and got to her feet. "Well, just try it," smiled Miss Maggie, helping her visitor into the
luxurious fur coat. "You've no idea how much more comfort you'll take." Hattie's eyes were wistful, but almost instantly they
showed an alert gleam of anger. "Well, anyhow, I'm not going to try to do what those Gaylords do any
longer. And--and you're SURE Fred won't have to go to prison?" "I'm very sure," nodded Miss Maggie. You always make
me feel better, Maggie, and you, too, Mr. "Now, go home and go to bed, and don't
worry any more or you'll have one of your headaches." As the door closed behind her visitor, Miss Maggie turned and sank into
a chair. She looked worn and white, and utterly weary. "I hope she won't meet Frank or Jane anywhere." Do you think they'd blame her--about this
unfortunate affair of Fred's?" I just
came from Frank's, and--"

"Yes?" Something in her face sent a questioning frown to Mr. "Do you remember hearing Flora say that Jane had bought a lot of the
Benson gold-mine stock?" "Well, Benson has failed; and they've just found out that that
gold-mine stock is worth--about two cents on a dollar." And how much--"

"About forty thousand dollars," said Miss Maggie wearily. "Well, I'll be--"

He did not finish his sentence. CHAPTER XX

FRANKENSTEIN: BEING A LETTER FROM JOHN SMITH TO EDWARD D. NORTON,
ATTORNEY AT LAW


DEAR NED:--Wasn't there a story written once about a fellow who created
some sort of a machine man without any soul that raised the very
dickens and all for him? Frank--Frankenstein?--I guess that was it. Well, I've created a Frankenstein creature--and I'm dead up against it
to know what to do with him. Ned, what in Heaven's name am I going to do with Mr. John Smith, let me tell you, is a very healthy, persistent, insistent,
important person, with many kind friends, a definite position in the
world, and no small degree of influence. Worse yet (now prepare for a
stunning blow, Ned! Smith has been so inconsiderate as to fall in
love. And he has fallen in love as absolutely and as
idiotically as if he were twenty-one instead of fifty-two. Now, will
you kindly tell me how Mr. John Smith is going to fade away into
nothingness? And, even if he finds the way to do that, shall he, before
fading, pop the question for Mr. Stanley G. Fulton, or shall he trust
to Mr. Stanley G. Fulton's being able to win for himself the love Mr. Seriously, joking aside, I'm afraid I've made a mess of things, not
only for myself, but for everybody else. I'll spare you rhapsodies, Ned. They say, anyway,
that there's no fool like an old fool. But I will admit that that
future looks very dark to me if I am not to have the companionship of
the little woman, Maggie Duff. Oh, yes, it's "Poor Maggie." As for Miss Maggie herself, perhaps it's
conceited, but I believe she's not entirely indifferent to Mr. Stanley G. Fulton I have my doubts; but,
alas! I have no doubts whatever as to what her opinion will be of Mr. Stanley G. Fulton's masquerading as Mr. Stanley G. Fulton the job he's got on his hands to put himself
right with her, either. But there's one thing he can be sure of, at
least; if she does care for Mr. Stanley G.
Fulton's money that was the bait. you see already I have adopted the Hillerton
vernacular.) But I fear Miss Maggie is indeed "poor" now. She has had
several letters that I don't like the looks of, and a call from a
villainous-looking man from Boston--one of your craft, I believe
(begging your pardon). I think she's lost some money, and I don't
believe she had any extra to lose. She's as proud as Lucifer, however,
and she's determined no one shall find out she's lost any money, so her
laugh is gayer than ever. I can hear
something in her voice that isn't laughter. Ned, what a mess I HAVE made of it! I feel more than ever now
like the boy with his ear to the keyhole. These people are my
friends--or, rather, they are Mr. As for being
mine--who am I, Smith, or Fulton? Will they be Fulton's friends, after
they find he is John Smith? Will they be Smith's friends, even, after
they find he is Fulton? Oh, yes, I can hear you say that it serves me right, and that you
warned me, and that I was deaf to all remonstrances. Now, we'll waste no more time on that. I've acknowledged my error, and my transgression is ever
before me. I built the box, I walked into it, and I deliberately shut
the cover down. I've got to get out--some
way. I can't spend the rest of my natural existence as John Smith,
hunting Blaisdell data--though sometimes I think I'd be willing to, if
it's the only way to stay with Miss Maggie. I tell you, that little
woman can make a home out of--

But I couldn't stay with Miss Maggie. John Smith wouldn't have money
enough to pay his board, to say nothing of inviting Miss Maggie to
board with him, would he? Stanley G. Fulton's last
will and testament on the first day of next November will effectually
cut off Mr. There is no provision in the
will for Mr. I don't think
he'd like that. By the way, I wonder: do you suppose John Smith could
earn--his salt, if he was hard put to it? Very plainly, then, something
has got to be done about getting John Smith to fade away, and Stanley
G. Fulton to appear before next November. And I had thought it would be so easy! Early this summer John Smith was
to pack up his Blaisdell data, bid a pleasant adieu to Hillerton, and
betake himself to South America. In due course, after a short trip to
some obscure Inca city, or down some little-known river, Mr. Stanley G.
Fulton would arrive at some South American hotel from the interior, and
would take immediate passage for the States, reaching Chicago long
before November first. There would be a slight flurry, of course, and a few annoying
interviews and write-ups; but Mr. Stanley G. Fulton always was known to
keep his affairs to himself pretty well, and the matter would soon be
put down as merely another of the multi-millionaire's eccentricities. The whole thing would then be all over, and well over. But--nowhere had
there been taken into consideration the possibilities of--a Maggie
Duff. And now, to me, that same Maggie Duff is the only thing worth
considering--anywhere. And even after all this, I haven't accomplished what I set out to
do--that is, find the future possessor of the Fulton millions (unless
Miss Maggie--bless her!--says "yes." And even then, some one will have
to have them after us). As
conditions are now, I should not want either Frank, or James, or Flora
to have them--not unless the millions could bring them more happiness
than these hundred thousand apiece have brought. Honest, Ned, that miserable money has made more--But, never mind. It's
too long a story to write. I'll tell you when I see you--if I ever do
see you. There's still the possibility, you know, that Mr. Stanley G.
Fulton is lost in darkest South America, and of course John Smith CAN
go to work! I believe I won't sign any name--I haven't got any name--that I feel
really belongs to me now. Still I might--yes, I will sign it

                                        "FRANKENSTEIN." CHAPTER XXI

SYMPATHIES MISPLACED


The first time Mr. Smith saw Frank Blaisdell, after Miss Maggie's news
of the forty-thousand-dollar loss, he tried, somewhat awkwardly, to
express his interest and sympathy. But Frank Blaisdell cut him short. "That's all right, and I thank you," he cried heartily. "And I know
most folks would think losing forty thousand dollars was about as bad
as it could be. Jane, now, is all worked up over it; can't sleep
nights, and has gone back to turning down the gas and eating sour cream
so's to save and help make it up. But me--I call it the best thing that
ever happened." Smith; "I'm sure that's a very delightful
way to look at it--if you can." "Well, I can; and I'll tell you why. It's put me back where I
belong--behind the counter of a grocery store. Oh, I had enough left for that, and more! Gorry, but I was glad to feel the old floor under my feet again!" "But I thought you--you were tired of work, and--wanted to enjoy
yourself," stammered Mr. "Tired of work--wanted to enjoy myself, indeed! Yes, I know I did say
something like that. But, let me tell you this, Mr. Talk about
work!--I never worked so hard in my life as I have the last ten months
trying to enjoy myself. How these folks can stand gadding 'round the
country week in and week out, feeding their stomachs on a French
dictionary instead of good United States meat and potatoes and squash,
and spending their days traipsing off to see things they ain't a mite
interested in, and their nights trying to get rested so they can go and
see some more the next day, I don't understand." "I'm afraid these touring agencies wouldn't like to have you write
their ads for them, Mr. "Well, they hadn't better ask me to," smiled the other grimly. Since I come back I've been working even harder trying
to enjoy myself here at home--knockin' silly little balls over a
ten-acre lot in a game a healthy ten-year-old boy would scorn to play." "Oh, yes, I enjoyed the riding well enough; but I didn't enjoy hunting
for punctures, putting on new tires, or burrowing into the inside of
the critter to find out why she didn't go! And that's what I was doing
most of the time. He paused a moment, then went on a little wistfully:--

"I suspect, Mr. Smith, there ain't anything in my line but groceries. If--if I had my life to
live over again, I'd do different, maybe. I'd see if I couldn't find
out what there was in a picture to make folks stand and stare at it an
hour at a time when you could see the whole thing in a minute--and it
wa'n't worth lookin' at, anyway, even for a minute. Now, I like a good tune what is a tune; but them caterwaulings and
dirges that that chap Gray plays on that fiddle of his--gorry, Mr. Smith, I'd rather hear the old barn door at home squeak any day. But if
I was younger I'd try to learn to like 'em. She can set by the hour in front of that phonygraph of hers, and
not know it!" "And there's books, too," resumed the other, still wistfully. "I'd read
books--if I could stay awake long enough to do it--and I'd find out
what there was in 'em to make a good sensible man like Jim Blaisdell
daft over 'em--and Maggie Duff, too. Why, that little woman used to go
hungry sometimes, when she was a girl, so she could buy a book she
wanted. Why, I'd 'a' given anything this last year if I
could 'a' got interested--really interested, readin'. I could 'a'
killed an awful lot of time that way. I bought a
lot of 'em, too, an' tried it; but I expect I didn't begin young
enough. Smith, I've about come to the conclusion that
there ain't a thing in the world so hard to kill as time. I've tried
it, and I know. Why, I got so I couldn't even kill it EATIN'--though I
'most killed myself TRYIN' to! A full
stomach ain't in it with bein' hungry an' knowing a good dinner's
coming. Why, there was whole weeks at a time back there that I didn't
know the meaning of the word 'hungry.' You'd oughter seen the jolt I
give one o' them waiter-chaps one day when he comes up with his paper
and his pencil and asks me what I wanted. 'There ain't
but one thing on this earth I want, and you can't give it to me. I'm tired of bein' so blamed satisfied all the
time!'" "And what did--Alphonso say to that?" Oh, the waiter-fellow, you mean? Oh, he just stared a
minute, then mumbled his usual 'Yes, sir, very good, sir,' and shoved
that confounded printed card of his a little nearer to my nose. I guess you've heard enough of this, Mr. It's only that I
was trying to tell you why I'm actually glad we lost that money. It's
give me back my man's job again." I won't waste any more sympathy on you,"
laughed Mr. I hope it'll give me
back a little of my old faith in my fellow-man." I won't suspect every man, woman, and child that says a
civil word to me now of having designs on my pocketbook. Smith, you wouldn't believe it, if I told you, the things that's been
done and said to get a little money out of me. Of course, the open
gold-brick schemes I knew enough to dodge,'most of 'em (unless you
count in that darn Benson mining stock), and I spotted the blackmailers
all right, most generally. But I WAS flabbergasted when a WOMAN tackled
the job and began to make love to me--actually make love to me!--one
day when Jane's back was turned. DO I look such a fool as that,
Mr. Well, anyhow, there won't be any more of that kind, nor
anybody after my money now, I guess," he finished with a sage wag of
his head as he turned away. Smith said, after recounting the
earlier portion of the conversation: "So you see you were right, after
all. Frank Blaisdell had plenty to
retire upon, but nothing to retire to. But I'm glad--if he's happy now." "And he isn't the only one that that forty-thousand-dollar loss has
done a good turn to," nodded Miss Maggie. "Mellicent has just been
here. It's the Easter vacation,
anyway, but she isn't going back. Miss Maggie spoke with studied casualness, but there was an added color
in her cheeks--Miss Maggie always flushed a little when she mentioned
Mellicent's name to Mr. Smith, in spite of her indignant efforts not to
do so. Well, the Pennocks had a dance last night, and Mellicent went. She said she had to laugh to see Mrs. Pennock's efforts to keep Carl
away from her--the loss of the money is known everywhere now, and has
been greatly exaggerated, I've heard. She said that even Hibbard
Gaylord had the air of one trying to let her down easy. He doesn't move in the Pennock crowd much. But
Mellicent sees him, and--and everything's all right there, now. That's
why Mellicent is so happy." "You mean--Has her mother given in?" You see, Jane was at the dance, too, and she saw Carl, and she
saw Hibbard Gaylord. She told Mellicent this
morning that she had her opinion of fellows who would show so plainly
as Carl Pennock and Hibbard Gaylord did that it was the money they were
after." Jane has changed her shoes again," murmured Mr. Miss Maggie's puzzled frown gave way to a laugh. "Well, yes, perhaps the shoe is on the other foot again. But, anyway,
she doesn't love Carl or Hibbard any more, and she does love Donald
Gray. He HASN'T let the loss of the money make any difference to him,
you see. He's been even more devoted, if anything. She told Mellicent
this morning that he was a very estimable young man, and she liked him
very much. Perhaps you see now why Mellicent is--happy." I'm glad to know it," cried Mr. "I'm glad--" His
face changed suddenly. "I'm glad the LOSS of the
money brought them some happiness--if the possession of it didn't," he
finished moodily, turning to go to his own room. At the hall door he
paused and looked back at Miss Maggie, standing by the table, gazing
after him with troubled eyes. "Did Mellicent say--whether Fred was
there?" He didn't come home for this vacation
at all. I suspect Mellicent doesn't know
anything about that wretched affair of his." So the young gentleman didn't show up at all?" Hattie didn't
go to the Pennocks' either. Hattie has--has been very different since
this affair of Fred's. I think it frightened her terribly--it was so
near a tragedy; the boy threatened to kill himself, you know, if his
father didn't help him out." "Yes, I know he did; and I'm afraid he found things in a pretty bad
mess--when he got there," sighed Miss Maggie. "It was a bad mess all
around." "It is, indeed, a bad mess all around," he growled as he
disappeared through the door. Behind him, Miss Maggie still stood motionless, looking after him with
troubled eyes. As the spring days grew warmer, Miss Maggie had occasion many times to
look after Mr. One day he would be the old delightful companion, genial,
cheery, generously donating a box of chocolates to the center-table
bonbon dish or a dozen hothouse roses to the mantel vase. The next, he
would be nervous, abstracted, almost irritable. Yet she could see no
possible reason for the change. Sometimes she wondered fearfully if Mellicent could have anything to do
with it. Was it possible that he had cared for Mellicent, and to see
her now so happy with Donald Gray was more than he could bear? There was his own statement that he had devoted
himself to her solely and only to help keep the undesirable lovers away
and give Donald Gray a chance. Besides, had he not said that he was not a marrying man, anyway? To be
sure, that seemed a pity--a man so kind and thoughtful and so
delightfully companionable! But then, it was nothing to her, of
course--only she did hope he was not feeling unhappy over Mellicent! Smith would not bring flowers and
candy so often. She felt as if he were spending too
much money--and she had got the impression in some way that he did not
have any too much money to spend. And there were the expensive motor
trips, too--she feared Mr. Yet she could not
tell him so, of course. He never seemed to realize the value of a
dollar, anyway, and he very obviously did not know how to get the most
out of it. Look at his foolish generosity in regard to the board he
paid her! Miss Maggie wondered sometimes if it might not be worry over money
matters that was making him so nervous and irritable on occasions now. Plainly he was very near the end of his work there in Hillerton. He was
not getting so many letters on Blaisdell matters from away, either. For
a month now he had done nothing but a useless repetition of old work;
and of late, a good deal of the time, he was not even making that
pretense of being busy. For days at a time he would not touch his
records. That could mean but one thing, of course; his work was done. Yet he seemed to be making no move toward departure. Not that she
wanted him to go. She should miss him very much when he went, of
course. But she did not like to feel that he was staying simply because
he had nowhere to go and nothing to do. Miss Maggie did not believe in
able-bodied men who had nowhere to go and nothing to do--and she wanted
very much to believe in Mr. She had been under the impression that he was getting the Blaisdell
material together for a book, and that he was intending to publish it
himself. His book must be ready, but he was making no move to
publish it. To Miss Maggie this could mean but one thing: some
financial reverses had made it impossible for him to carry out his
plans, and had left him stranded with no definite aim for the future. She was so sorry!--but there seemed to be nothing that she could do. She HAD tried to help by insisting that he pay less for his board; but
he had not only scouted that idea, but had brought her more chocolates
and flowers than ever--for all the world as if he had divined her
suspicions and wished to disprove them. Smith was trying to keep something from her, Miss Maggie was
sure. She was the more sure, perhaps, because she herself had something
that she was trying to keep from Mr. Smith--and she thought she
recognized the symptoms. Meanwhile April budded into May, and May blossomed into June; and June
brought all the Blaisdells together again in Hillerton. CHAPTER XXII

WITH EVERY JIM A JAMES


Two days after Fred Blaisdell had returned from college, his mother
came to see Miss Maggie. Smith was rearranging the books on Miss
Maggie's shelves and trying to make room for the new ones he had
brought her through the winter. Hattie came in, red-eyed and
flushed-faced, he ceased his work at once and would have left the room,
but she stopped him with a gesture. You know all about it, anyway,--and I'd just as soon you
knew the rest. I just came down to talk
things over with Maggie. I--I'm sure I don't know w-what I'm going to
do--when I can't." "But you always can, dear," soothed Miss Maggie cheerily, handing her
visitor a fan and taking a chair near her. Smith, after a moment's hesitation, turned quietly back to his
bookshelves. "Why, Hattie Blaisdell, where are you going?" I
guess we can still see each other. Now, tell me, what does all this
mean?" "Well, of course, it began with Fred--his trouble, you know." "But I thought Jim fixed that all up, dear." He paid the money, and nobody there at college knew a
thing about it. Fred told us some of them
night before last. He says he's ashamed of himself, but that he
believes there's enough left in him to make a man of him yet. But he
says he can't do it--there." "You mean--he doesn't want to go back to college?" Miss Maggie's voice
showed her disappointment. "Oh, he wants to go to college--but not there." "He says he's had too much money to spend--and that 't wouldn't be easy
not to spend it--if he was back there, in the old crowd. "Well, that's all right, isn't it?" He's awfully happy over it, and--and I
guess I am." But now, what is this about Plainville?" "Oh, that
grew out of it--all this. Hammond is going to open a new office in
Plainville and he's offered Jim--James--no, JIM--I'm not going to call
him 'James' any more!--the chance to manage it." "Well, that's fine, I'm sure." "Yes, of course that part is fine--splendid. He'll get a bigger salary,
and all that, and--and I guess I'm glad to go, anyway--I don't like
Hillerton any more. I haven't got any friends here, Maggie. Of course,
I wouldn't have anything to do with the Gaylords now, after what's
happened,--that boy getting my boy to drink and gamble, and--and
everything. And yet--YOU know how I've strained every nerve for years,
and worked and worked to get where my children could--COULD be with
them!" "It didn't pay, did it, Hattie?" They're perfectly horrid--every one of them, and I
hate them!" Look at what they've done to Fred, and Bessie, too! I
shan't let HER be with them any more, either. There aren't any folks
here we can be with now. That's why I don't mind going away. All our
friends that we used to know don't like us any more, they're so jealous
on account of the money. Oh, yes, I know you think I'm to blame for
that," she went on aggrievedly. "I can see you do, by your face. But it was just so I could get ahead. Miss Maggie looked as if she would like to say
something more--but she did not say it. Smith was abstractedly opening and shutting
the book in his hand. He had not
touched the books on the shelves for some time. "And look at how I've tried and see what it has come to--Bessie so
high-headed and airy she makes fun of us, and Fred a gambler and a
drunkard, and'most a thief. And it's all that horrid hundred thousand
dollars!" Smith's hand slipped to the floor with a bang; but no
one was noticing Mr. "Oh, Hattie, don't blame the hundred thousand dollars," cried Miss
Maggie. "Jim says it was, and Fred does, too. Fred said it
was all just the same kind of a way that I'd tried to make folks call
Jim 'James.' He said I'd been trying to make every single 'Jim' we had
into a 'James,' until I'd taken away all the fun of living. And I
suppose maybe he's right, too." "Well,
anyhow, I'm not going to do it any more. There isn't any fun in it,
anyway. It doesn't make any difference how hard I tried to get ahead, I
always found somebody else a little 'aheader' as Benny calls it. "There isn't any use--in that kind of trying, Hattie." Jim said I was like the little boy that
they asked what would make him the happiest of anything in the world,
and he answered, 'Everything that I haven't got.' And I suppose I have
been something like that. But I don't see as I'm any worse than other
folks. Everybody goes for money; but I'm sure I don't see why--if it
doesn't make them any happier than it has me! "We shall begin to pack the first of the
month. It looks like a mountain to me, but Jim and Fred say they'll
help, and--"

Mr. Smith did not hear any more, for Miss Maggie and her guest had
reached the hall and had closed the door behind them. But when Miss
Maggie returned, Mr. Smith was pacing up and down the room nervously. "Well," he demanded with visible irritation, as soon as she appeared,
"will you kindly tell me if there is anything--desirable--that that
confounded money has done?" "You mean--Jim Blaisdell's money?" "I mean all the money--I mean the three hundred thousand dollars that
those three people received. Has it ever brought any good or
happiness--anywhere?" "Oh, yes, I know," smiled Miss Maggie, a little sadly. "But--" Her
countenance changed abruptly. A passionate earnestness came to her
eyes. "Don't blame the money--blame the SPENDING of it! The dollar that will buy tickets to the movies will just as
quickly buy a good book; and if you're hungry, it's up to you whether
you put your money into chocolate eclairs or roast beef. Is the MONEY
to blame that goes for a whiskey bill or a gambling debt instead of for
shoes and stockings for the family?" Smith had apparently lost his own irritation in his
amazement at hers. "Why, Miss Maggie, you--you seem worked up over this
matter." It's been money,
money, money, ever since I could remember! We're all after it, and we
all want it, and we strain every nerve to get it. We think it's going
to bring us happiness. But it won't--unless we do our part. And there
are some things that even money can't buy. Besides, it isn't the money
that does the things, anyway,--it's the man behind the money. What do
you think money is good for, Mr. Smith, now thoroughly dazed, actually blinked his eyes at the
question, and at the vehemence with which it was hurled into his face. "Why, Miss Maggie, it--it--I--I--"

"It isn't good for anything unless we can exchange it for something we
want, is it?" "Why, I--I suppose we can GIVE it--"

"But even then we're exchanging it for something we want, aren't we? We
want to make the other fellow happy, don't we?" "But it doesn't
always work that way. Now, very likely
this--er--Mr. Fulton thought those three hundred thousand dollars were
going to make these people happy. Personification of happiness--that
woman was, a few minutes ago, wasn't she?" Smith had regained his
air of aggrieved irritation. She
didn't know how to spend it. And that's just what I mean when I say
we've got to do our part--money won't buy happiness, unless we exchange
it for the things that will bring happiness. If we don't know how to
get any happiness out of five dollars, we won't know how to get it out
of five hundred, or five thousand, or five hundred thousand, Mr. I don't mean that we'll get the same amount out of five dollars, of
course,--though I've seen even that happen sometimes!--but I mean that
we've got to know how to spend five dollars--and to make the most of
it." "I reckon--you're right, Miss Maggie." "I know I'm right, and 't isn't the money's fault when things go wrong. Oh, yes, I know--we're taught that the
love of money is the root of all evil. But I don't think it should be
so--necessarily. I think money's one of the most wonderful things in
the world. It's more than a trust and a gift--it's an opportunity, and
a test. It brings out what's strongest in us, every time. And it does
that whether it's five dollars or five hundred thousand dollars. If--if
we love chocolate eclairs and the movies better than roast beef and
good books, we're going to buy them, whether they're chocolate eclairs
and movies on five dollars, or or--champagne suppers and Paris gowns on
five hundred thousand dollars!" Miss Maggie gave a shamefaced laugh and sank back in her chair. "You don't know what to think of me, of course; and no wonder," she
sighed. "But I've felt so bad over this--this money business right here
under my eyes. I love them all, every one of them. And YOU know how
it's been, Mr. Hasn't it worked out to prove just what I say? She said that Fred declared she'd been
trying to make every one of her 'Jims' a 'James,' ever since the money
came. But he forgot that she did that very same thing before it came. All her life she's been trying to make five dollars look like ten; so
when she got the hundred thousand, it wasn't six months before she was
trying to make that look like two hundred thousand." Jane used to buy ingrain carpets and cheap
chairs and cover them with mats and tidies to save them." "They got on your nerves, too, didn't they? Such layers upon layers of
covers for everything! It brought me to such a pass that I went to the
other extreme. I wouldn't protect ANYTHING--which was very
reprehensible, of course. Well, now she has pretty dishes and solid
silver--but she hides them in bags and boxes, and never uses them
except for company. She doesn't take any more comfort with them than
she did with the ingrain carpets and cheap chairs. Of course, that's a
little thing. When you can't spend five
cents out of a hundred dollars for pleasure without wincing, you
needn't expect you're going to spend five dollars out of a hundred
thousand without feeling the pinch," laughed Miss Maggie. "Poor Flora--and when she tried so hard to quiet her conscience because
she had so much money! She told me yesterday that she
hardly ever gets a begging letter now." "No; and those she does get she investigates," asserted Mr. "So
the fakes don't bother her much these days. And she's doing a lot of
good, too, in a small way." "She is, and she's happy now," declared Miss Maggie, "except that she
still worries a little because she is so happy. She's dismissed the
maid and does her own work--I'm afraid Miss Flora never was cut out for
a fine-lady life of leisure, and she loves to putter in the kitchen. She says it's such a relief, too, not to keep dressed up in company
manners all the time, and not to have that horrid girl spying 'round
all day to see if she behaves proper. and I reckon it worked the best with her of any of them." "Er--that is, I mean, perhaps she's made the best use of the hundred
thousand," stammered Mr. "She's been--er--the happiest." "Why, y-yes, perhaps she has, when you come to look at it that way." "But you wouldn't--er--advise this Mr. Fulton to leave her--his twenty
millions?" "She'd faint dead
away at the mere thought of it." Smith turned on his heel and resumed
his restless pacing up and down the room. From time to time he glanced
furtively at Miss Maggie. Miss Maggie, her hands idly resting in her
lap, palms upward, was gazing fixedly at nothing. he demanded at last, coming to a
pause at her side. Stanley G. Fulton," she answered, not looking
up. The odd something had increased, but Miss Maggie's eyes
were still dreamily fixed on space. I was wondering what he had done with them." "Yes, in the letter, I mean." There was a letter--a second letter to be opened
in two years' time. They said that that was to dispose of the remainder
of the property--his last will and testament." "Oh, yes, I remember," assented Mr. Smith was very carefully not
meeting Miss Maggie's eyes. Miss Maggie turned back to her meditative
gazing at nothing. "The two years are nearly up, you know,--I was
talking with Jane the other day--just next November." The words were very near a groan, but at once Mr. Smith
hurriedly repeated, "I know--I know!" very lightly, indeed, with an
apprehensive glance at Miss Maggie. "So it seems to me if he were alive that he'd be back by this time. And
so I was wondering--about those millions," she went on musingly. "What
do YOU suppose he has done with them?" she asked, with sudden
animation, turning full upon him. "Why, I--I--How should I know?" Smith, a swift crimson
dyeing his face. "You wouldn't, of course--but that needn't make you look as if I'd
intimated that YOU had them! I was only asking for your opinion, Mr. Smith," she twinkled, with mischievous eyes. Smith laughed now, a little precipitately. "But,
indeed, Miss Maggie, you turned so suddenly and the question was so
unexpected that I felt like the small boy who, being always blamed for
everything at home that went wrong, answered tremblingly, when the
teacher sharply demanded, 'Who made the world?' 'Please, ma'am, I did;
but I'll never do it again!'" Smith, when Miss Maggie had done laughing at his
little story, "suppose I turn the tables on you? Miss Maggie shifted her position, her
face growing intently interested again. "I've been trying to remember
what I know of the man." "Yes, from the newspaper and magazine accounts of him. Of course, there
was quite a lot about him at the time the money came; and Flora let me
read some things she'd saved, in years gone. Flora was always
interested in him, you know." "Why, not much, really, about the man. Besides, very likely what I did
find wasn't true. But
I was trying to find out how he'd spent his money himself. I thought
that might give me a clue--about the will, I mean." "Yes; but I didn't find much. In spite of his reported eccentricities,
he seems to me to have done nothing very extraordinary." "He doesn't seem to have been very bad." "Nor very good either, for that matter." "Sort of a--nonentity, perhaps." "Perhaps--though I suppose he couldn't really be that--not very
well--with twenty millions, could he? But I mean, he wasn't very bad,
nor very good. He didn't seem to be dissipated, or mixed up in any
scandal, or to be recklessly extravagant, like so many rich men. On the
other hand, I couldn't find that he'd done any particular good in the
world. Some charities were mentioned, but they were perfunctory,
apparently, and I don't believe, from the accounts, that he ever really
INTERESTED himself in any one--that he ever really cared for--any one." If Miss Maggie had looked up, she would have met a
most disconcerting expression in the eyes bent upon her. But Miss
Maggie did not look up. "Why, he didn't even have a wife and
children to stir him from his selfishness. He had a secretary, of
course, and he probably never saw half his begging letters. I can
imagine his tossing them aside with a languid 'Fix them up,
James,--give the creatures what they want, only don't bother me.'" Smith; then, hastily: "I'm sure he never
did. "But when I think of what he might
do--Twenty millions! But he didn't
do--anything--worth while with them, so far as I can see, when he was
living, so that's why I can't imagine what his will may be. Probably
the same old perfunctory charities, however, with the Chicago law firm
instead of 'James' as disburser--unless, of course, Hattie's
expectations are fulfilled, and he divides them among the Blaisdells
here." "You think--there's something worth while he MIGHT have done with those
millions, then?" Smith, a sudden peculiar wistfulness in
his eyes. "Something he MIGHT have done with them!" "Why,
it seems to me there's no end to what he might have done--with twenty
millions." Smith came nearer, his face working with emotion. "Miss
Maggie, if a man with twenty millions--that is, could you love a man
with twenty millions, if--if Mr. Fulton should ask you--if _I_ were Mr. Fulton--if--" His countenance changed suddenly. He drew himself up with
a cry of dismay. "Oh, no--no--I've spoiled it all now. That isn't what
I meant to say first. I was going to find out--I mean, I was going to
tell--Oh, good Heavens, what a--That confounded money--again!" Smith, w-what--" Only the crisp shutting of the door answered
her. With a beseeching look and a despairing gesture Mr. Then, turning to sit down, she came face to face with her own
image in the mirror. "Well, now you've done it, Maggie Duff," she whispered wrathfully to
the reflection in the glass. He was--was
going to say something--I know he was. You've talked money,
money, MONEY to him for an hour. You said you LOVED money; and you told
what you'd do--if you had twenty millions of dollars. And you know--you
KNOW he's as poor as Job's turkey, and that just now he's more than
ever plagued over--money! As
if that counted against--"

With a little sobbing cry Miss Maggie covered her face with her hands
and sat down, helplessly, angrily. CHAPTER XXIII

REFLECTIONS--MIRRORED AND OTHERWISE


Miss Maggie was still sitting in the big chair with her face in her
hands when the door opened and Mr. Miss Maggie, dropping her hands and starting up at his entrance, caught
a glimpse of his face in the mirror in front of her. With a furtive,
angry dab of her fingers at her wet eyes, she fell to rearranging the
vases and photographs on the mantel. "Miss Maggie, I've got to face this thing out, of course. Even if I
had--made a botch of things at the very start, it didn't help any
to--to run away, as I did. It was only
because I--I--But never mind that. I'm coming now straight to the
point. Miss Maggie, will you--marry me?" The photograph in Miss Maggie's hand fell face down on the shelf. Miss
Maggie's fingers caught the edge of the mantel in a convulsive grip. A
swift glance in the mirror before her disclosed Mr. Smith's face just
over her shoulder, earnest, pleading, and still very white. She dropped
her gaze, and turned half away. She tried to speak, but only a half-choking little
breath came. "Miss Maggie, please don't say no--yet. Let me--explain--about how I
came here, and all that. But first, before I do that, let me tell you
how--how I love you--how I have loved you all these long months. I
THINK I loved you from the first time I saw you. Whatever comes, I want
you to know that. And if you could care for me a little--just a little,
I'm sure I could make it more--in time, so you would marry me. Don't you believe I'd try to make you happy--dear?" "Yes, oh, yes," murmured Miss Maggie, still with her head turned away. Then all you've got to say is that you'll let me try. Why, until I came here to this little house, I
didn't know what living, real living, was. And I HAVE been, just as
you said, a selfish old thing." Miss Maggie, with a start of surprise, faced the image in the mirror;
but Mr. Smith was looking at her, not at her reflection, so she did not
meet his ayes. "Why, I never--" she stammered. "Yes, you did, a minute ago. Oh, of course you
didn't realize--everything, and perhaps you wouldn't have said it if
you'd known. But you said it--and you meant it, and I'm glad you said
it. And, dear little woman, don't you see? That's only another reason
why you should say yes. You can show me how not to be selfish." Smith, I--I-" stammered Miss Maggie, still with puzzled eyes. You can show me how to make life really worth while, for
me, and for--for lots of others And NOW I have some one to care for. And, oh, little woman, I--I care so much, it can't be that you--you
don't care--any!" Miss Maggie caught her breath and turned away again. The red crept up Miss Maggie's neck to her forehead but still she was
silent. "If I could only see your eyes," pleaded the man. Then, suddenly, he
saw Miss Maggie's face in the mirror. The next moment Miss Maggie
herself turned a little, and in the mirror their eyes met--and in the
mirror Mr. "You DO care--a LITTLE!" he
breathed, as he took her in his arms. Miss Maggie shook her head vigorously against his
coat-collar. "I care--a GREAT DEAL," whispered Miss Maggie to the coat-collar, with
shameless emphasis. triumphed the man, bestowing a rapturous kiss on the
tip of a small pink ear--the nearest point to Miss Maggie's lips that
was available, until, with tender determination, he turned her face to
his. A moment later, blushing rosily, Miss Maggie drew herself away. "There, we've been quite silly enough--old folks like us." Love is never silly--not real love like ours. Besides,
we're only as old as we feel. I've
lost--YEARS since this morning. And you know I'm just beginning to
live--really live, anyway! "I'm afraid you act it," said Miss Maggie, with mock severity. "YOU would--if you'd been through what _I_ have," retorted Mr. "And when I think what a botch I made of it, to
begin with--You see, I didn't mean to start off with that, first thing;
and I was so afraid that--that even if you did care for John Smith, you
wouldn't for me--just at first. At arms' length he
held her off, his hands on her shoulders. His happy eyes searching her
face saw the dawn of the dazed, question. "Wouldn't care for YOU if I did for John Smith! she demanded, her eyes slowly sweeping him
from head to foot and back again. Instinctively his tongue went back to the old manner of
address, but his hands still held her shoulders. "You don't mean--you
can't mean that--that you didn't understand--that you DON'T understand
that I am--Oh, good Heavens! Well, I have made a mess of it this time,"
he groaned. Releasing his hold on her shoulders, he turned and began to
tramp up and down the room. "Nice little John-Alden-Miles-Standish
affair this is now, upon my word! Miss Maggie, have I got to--to
propose to you all over again for--for another man, now?" I--I don't think I understand you." "Then you don't know--you didn't understand a few minutes ago, when
I--I spoke first, when I asked you about--about those twenty millions--"

She lifted her hand quickly, pleadingly. Smith, please, don't let's bring money into it at all. I don't
care--I don't care a bit if you haven't got any money." "If I HAVEN'T got any money!" Oh, yes, I know, I said I loved money." The rich red came back to
her face in a flood. "But I didn't mean--And it's just as much of a
test and an opportunity when you DON'T have money--more so, if
anything. I never thought of--of how you
might take it--as if I WANTED it. Oh, can't
you--understand?" "And I
thought I'd given myself away! He came to her and stood
close, but he did not offer to touch her. "I thought, after I'd said
what I did about--about those twenty millions that you understood--that
you knew I was--Stanley Fulton himself." Miss Maggie stood motionless, her eyes looking
straight into his, amazed incredulous. Maggie, don't look at me
like that. She was backing away now, slowly, step by step. Anger, almost loathing,
had taken the place of the amazement and incredulity in her eyes. But--" "And you've been here all these months--yes,
years--under a false name, pretending to be what you weren't--talking
to us, eating at our tables, winning our confidence, letting us talk to
you about yourself, even pretending that--Oh, how could you?" "Maggie, dearest," he begged, springing toward her, "if you'll only let
me--"

But she stopped him peremptorily, drawing herself to her full height. "I am NOT your dearest," she flamed angrily. "I did not give my
love--to YOU." I gave it to John Smith--gentleman, I supposed. A man--poor, yes,
I believed him poor; but a man who at least had a right to his NAME! Stanley G. Fulton, spy, trickster, who makes life
itself a masquerade for SPORT! Stanley G. Fulton,
and--I do not wish to." The words ended in a sound very like a sob; but
Miss Maggie, with her head still high, turned her back and walked to
the window. The man, apparently stunned for a moment, stood watching her, his eyes
grieved, dismayed, hopeless. Then, white-faced, he turned and walked
toward the door. With his hand almost on the knob he slowly wheeled
about and faced the woman again. He hesitated visibly, then in a dull,
lifeless voice he began to speak. "Miss Maggie, before John Smith steps entirely out of your life, he
would like to say just this, please, not on justification, but on
explanation of----of Stanley G. Fulton. Fulton did not intend to be a
spy, or a trickster, or to make life a masquerade for--sport. He was a
lonely old man--he felt old. True, he had no
one to care for, but--he had no one to care for HIM, either. He did have a great deal of money--more than he knew what
to do with. Oh, he tried--various ways of spending it. They resulted, chiefly,
in showing him that he wasn't--as wise as he might be in that line,
perhaps." At the window Miss Maggie still stood,
with her back turned as before. "The time came, finally," resumed the man, "when Fulton began to wonder
what would become of his millions when he was done with them. He had a
feeling that he would like to will a good share of them to some of his
own kin; but he had no nearer relatives than some cousins back East,
in--Hillerton." Miss Maggie at the window drew in her breath, and held it suspended,
letting it out slowly. "He didn't know anything about these cousins," went on the man dully,
wearily, "and he got to wondering what they would do with the money. I
think he felt, as you said to-day that you feel, that one must know how
to spend five dollars if one would get the best out of five thousand. So Fulton felt that, before he gave a man fifteen or twenty millions,
he would like to know--what he would probably do with them. He had seen
so many cases where sudden great wealth had brought--great sorrow. "And so then he fixed up a little scheme; he would give each one of
these three cousins of his a hundred thousand dollars apiece, and then,
unknown to them, he would get acquainted with them, and see which of
them would be likely to make the best use of those twenty millions. It
was a silly scheme, of course,--a silly, absurd foolishness from
beginning to end. It--"

He did not finish his sentence. There was a rush of swift feet, a swish
of skirts, then full upon him there fell a whirlwind of sobs, clinging
arms, and incoherent ejaculations. "It wasn't silly--it wasn't silly. Oh, I think it was--WONDERFUL! And
I--I'm so ASHAMED!" Later--very much later, when something like lucid coherence had become
an attribute of their conversation, as they sat together upon the old
sofa, the man drew a long breath and said:--

"Then I'm quite forgiven?" "And you consider yourself engaged to BOTH John Smith and Stanley G. "It sounds pretty bad, but--yes," blushed Miss Maggie. "And you must love Stanley G. Fulton just exactly as well--no, a little
better, than you did John Smith." "I'll--try to--if he's as lovable." Miss Maggie's head was at a saucy
tilt. "He'll try to be; but--it won't be all play, you know, for you. You've
got to tell him what to do with those twenty millions. By the way, what
WILL you do with them?" Fulton, you HAVE got--And
I forgot all about--those twenty millions. "They belong to
Fulton, if you please. Furthermore, CAN'T you call me anything but that
abominable 'Mr. You might--er--abbreviate
it to--er--' Stan,' now." "Perhaps so--but I shan't," laughed Miss Maggie,--"not yet. You may be
thankful I have wits enough left to call you anything--after becoming
engaged to two men all at once." "And with having the responsibility of spending twenty millions, too." "Oh, we can do so much with that money! Why, only think what is
needed right HERE--better milk for the babies, and a community house,
and the streets cleaner, and a new carpet for the church, and a new
hospital with--"

"But, see here, aren't you going to spend some of that money on
yourself?" I'm going to Egypt, and China, and
Japan--with you, of course; and books--oh, you never saw such a lot of
books as I shall buy. And--oh, I'll spend heaps on just my selfish
self--you see if I don't! But, first,--oh, there are so many things
that I've so wanted to do, and it's just come over me this minute that
NOW I can do them! And you KNOW how Hillerton needs a new hospital." "And I want to build a store
and run it so the girls can LIVE, and a factory, too, and decent homes
for the workmen, and a big market, where they can get their food at
cost; and there's the playground for the children, and--"

But Mr. Smith was laughing, and lifting both hands in mock despair. "Look here," he challenged, "I THOUGHT you were marrying ME, but--ARE
you marrying me or that confounded money?" "Yes, I know; but you see--" She stopped short. Suddenly she laughed again, and threw into his eyes a look so merry, so
whimsical, so altogether challenging, that he demanded:--

"Well, what is it now?" "Oh, it's so good, I have--half a mind to tell you." Miss Maggie had left the sofa, and was standing, as if half-poised for
flight, midway to the door. "I think--yes, I will tell you," she nodded, her cheeks very pink; "but
I wanted to be--over here to tell it." Do you remember those letters I got awhile ago,
and the call from the Boston; lawyer, that I--I wouldn't tell you
about?" "Well; you know you--you thought they--they had something to do
with--my money; that I--I'd lost some." "Well, they--they did have something to do--with money." "Oh, why wouldn't you tell me
then--and let me help you some way?" She shook her head nervously and backed nearer the door. If you don't--I won't tell you." "Well, as I said, it did have something to do--with my money; but just
now, when you asked me if I--I was marrying you or your money--"

"But I was in fun--you know I was in fun!" "Oh, yes, I knew that," nodded Miss Maggie. "But it--it made me laugh
and remember--the letters. You see, they weren't as you thought. They
didn't tell me of--of money lost. That father's Cousin George in Alaska had died and left me--fifty
thousand dollars." "But, my dear woman, why in Heaven's name wouldn't you tell me that?" "You see, I thought
you were poor--very poor, and I--I wouldn't even own up to it myself,
but I knew, in my heart, that I was afraid, if you heard I had this
money, you wouldn't--you wouldn't--ask me to--to--"

She was blushing so adorably now that the man understood and leaped to
his feet. "Maggie, you--darling!" But the door had shut--Miss Maggie had fled. CHAPTER XXIV

THAT MISERABLE MONEY


In the evening, after the Martin girls had gone to their rooms, Miss
Maggie and Mr. "Of course," he began with a sigh, "I'm really not out of the woods at
all. Blissfully happy as I am, I'm really deeper in the woods than
ever, for now I've got you there with me, to look out for. However
successfully John Smith might dematerialize into nothingness--Maggie
Duff can't." "No, I know she can't," admitted Miss Maggie soberly. "Yet if she marries John Smith she'll have to--and if she doesn't marry
him, how's Stanley G. Fulton going to do his courting? Smith, you'll HAVE to tell them--who you are. You'll have to tell them
right away." The man made a playfully wry face. "I shall be glad," he observed, "when I shan't have to be held off at
the end of a 'Mr.'! However, we'll let that pass--until we settle the
other matter. Have you given any thought as to HOW I'm going to tell
Cousin Frank and Cousin James and Cousin Flora that I am Stanley G. "No--except that you must do it," she answered decidedly. "I don't
think you ought to deceive them another minute--not another minute." "And had you thought--as to
what would happen when I did tell them?" "Why, n-no, not particularly, except that--that they naturally wouldn't
like it, at first, and that you'd have to explain--just as you did to
me--why you did it." "And do you think they'll like it any better--when I do explain? Miss Maggie meditated; then, a little tremulously she drew in her
breath. "Why, you'd have to tell them that--that you did it for a test,
wouldn't you?" "And they'd know--they couldn't help knowing--that they had failed to
meet it adequately." And would that help matters any--make things any happier, all
around?" "No--oh, no," she frowned despairingly. "Would it do anybody any REAL good, now? "N-no," she admitted reluctantly, "except that--that you'd be doing
right." And another thing--aside from the
mortification, dismay, and anger of my good cousins, have you thought
what I'd be bringing on you?" In less than half a dozen hours after the Blaisdells knew that
Mr. John Smith was Stanley G. Fulton, Hillerton would know it. And in
less than half a dozen more hours, Boston, New York, Chicago,--to say
nothing of a dozen lesser cities,--would know it--if there didn't
happen to be anything bigger on foot. Headlines an inch high would
proclaim the discovery of the missing Stanley G. Fulton, and the fine
print below would tell everything that happened, and a great deal that
didn't happen, in the carrying-out of the eccentric multi-millionaire's
extraordinary scheme of testing his relatives with a hundred thousand
dollars apiece to find a suitable heir. Your picture would adorn the
front page of the yellowest of yellow journals, and--"

"MY picture! "Oh, yes, yes," smiled the man imperturbably. Aren't you the affianced bride of Mr. I can see them
now: 'In Search of an Heir and Finds a Wife.' --'Charming Miss Maggie
Duff Falls in Love with Plain John Smith,' and--"

"Oh, no, no," moaned Miss Maggie, shrinking back as if already the
lurid headlines were staring her in the face. "Oh, well, it might not be so bad as that, of course. Undoubtedly there are elements for a pretty good story in the
case, and some man, with nothing more important to write up, is bound
to make the most of it somewhere. There's
sure to be unpleasant publicity, my dear, if the truth once leaks out." "But what--what HAD you planned to do?" "Well, I HAD planned something like this: pretty quick, now, Mr. Smith
was to announce the completion of his Blaisdell data, and, with
properly grateful farewells, take his departure from Hillerton. There he would go inland on some sort of a
simple expedition with a few native guides and carriers, but no other
companion. Somewhere in the wilderness he would shed his beard and his
name, and would emerge in his proper person of Stanley G. Fulton and
promptly take passage for the States. Of course, upon the arrival in
Chicago of Mr. Stanley G. Fulton, there would be a slight flurry at his
appearance, and a few references to the hundred-thousand-dollar gifts
to the Eastern relatives, and sundry speculations as to the why and how
of the exploring trip. There would be various rumors and alleged
interviews; but Mr. Stanley G. Fulton never was noted for his
communicativeness, and, after a very short time, the whole thing would
be dismissed as probably another of the gentleman's well-known
eccentricities. "Oh, I see," murmured Miss Maggie, in very evident relief. "That would
be better--in some ways; only it does seem terrible not to--to tell
them who you are." "But we have just proved that to do that wouldn't bring happiness
anywhere, and would bring misery everywhere, haven't we?" "Then why do it?--particularly as by not doing it I am not defrauding
anybody in the least. No; that part isn't worrying me a bit now--but
there is one point that does worry me very much." My scheme gets Stanley G. Fulton back to life and Chicago
very nicely; but it doesn't get Maggie Duff there worth a cent! John Smith in Hillerton and arrive in Chicago as
the wife of Stanley G. Fulton, can she?" "N-no, but he--he can come back and get her--if he wants her." (Miss Maggie blushed all the more at the
method and the fervor of Mr. Smith, smiling at Miss
Maggie's hurried efforts to smooth her ruffled hair. He'd look altogether too much like--like Mr. "But your beard will be gone--I wonder how I shall like you without a
beard." Smith laughed and threw up his hands with a doleful shrug. "That's what comes of courting as one man and marrying as another," he
groaned. Then, sternly: "I'll warn you right now, Maggie Duff, that
Stanley G. Fulton is going to be awfully jealous of John Smith if you
don't look out." "He should have thought of that before," retorted Miss Maggie, her eyes
mischievous. "But, tell me, wouldn't you EVER dare to come--in your
proper person?" "Never!--or, at least, not for some time. The beard would be gone, to
be sure; but there'd be all the rest to tattle--eyes, voice, size,
manner, walk--everything; and smoked glasses couldn't cover all that,
you know. They'd only result
in making me look more like John Smith than ever. John Smith, you
remember, wore smoked glasses for some time to hide Mr. Stanley G.
Fulton from the ubiquitous reporter. Stanley G. Fulton can't
come to Hillerton. So, as Mahomet can't go to the mountain, the
mountain must come to Mahomet." Miss Maggie's eyes were growing dangerously mutinous. "That you will have to come to Chicago--yes." "I love you with your head tilted that way." (Miss Maggie promptly
tilted it the other.) "Or that, either, for that matter," continued Mr. "However, speaking of courting--Mr. Fulton will do
that, all right, and endeavor to leave nothing lacking, either as to
quantity or quality. Haven't you got some friend that you can visit?" Miss Maggie's answer was prompt and emphatic--too prompt and too
emphatic for unquestioning acceptance. "Oh, yes, you have," asserted the man cheerfully. "I don't know her
name--but she's there. She's Waving a red flag from your face this
minute! Well, turn your head away, if you like--if you can
listen better that way," he went on tranquilly paying no attention to
her little gasp. "Well, all you have to do is to write the lady you're
coming, and go. Stanley G. Fulton will find
a way to meet her. Then he'll call and meet
you--and be so pleased to see you! There'll be a
regular whirlwind courtship then--calls, dinners, theaters, candy,
books, flowers! You'll be immensely surprised, of course, but you'll accept. Then we'll
get married," he finished with a deep sigh of satisfaction. "Say, CAN'T you call me anything--" he began wrathfully, but
interrupted himself. "However, it's better that you don't, after all. But you wait
till you meet Mr. Now, what's her name,
and where does she live?" Miss Maggie laughed in spite of herself, as she said severely: "Her
name, indeed! Stanley G. Fulton is so in the habit of
having his own way that he forgets he is still Mr. However,
there IS an old schoolmate," she acknowledged demurely. Now, write her at once, and tell her you're
coming." "But she--she may not be there." I think you'd
better plan to go pretty soon after I go to South America. Stanley G. Fulton arrives in Chicago and can write
the news back here to Hillerton. Oh, they'll get it in the papers, in
time, of course; but I think it had better come from you first. You
see--the reappearance on this earth of Mr. Stanley G. Fulton is going
to be of--of some moment to them, you know. Hattie, for
instance, who is counting on the rest of the money next November." "Yes, I know, it will mean a good deal to them, of course. Still, I
don't believe Hattie is really expecting the money. At any rate, she
hasn't said anything about it very lately--perhaps because she's been
too busy bemoaning the pass the present money has brought them to." "No, no--I didn't mean to bring that up," apologized Miss Maggie
quickly, with an apprehensive glance into his face. "And it wasn't
miserable money a bit! Besides, Hattie has--has learned her lesson, I'm
sure, and she'll do altogether differently in the new home. Smith, am I never to--to come back here? "Indeed we can--some time, by and by, when all this has blown over, and
they've forgotten how Mr. Meanwhile, you can come alone--a VERY little. I shan't let you leave me
very much. But I understand; you'll have to come to see your friends. Besides, there are all those playgrounds for the babies and cleaner
milk for the streets, and--"

"Cleaner milk for the streets, indeed!" Oh, yes, it WAS the milk for the babies, wasn't it?" "Well, however that may be you'll have to come back to
superintend all those things you've been wanting to do so long. But"--his face grew a little wistful--"you don't want to spend too much
time here. You know--Chicago has a few babies that need cleaner milk." Her face grew softly luminous as it had grown
earlier in the afternoon. "So you can bestow some of your charity there; and--"

"It isn't charity," she interrupted with suddenly flashing eyes. "Oh,
how I hate that word--the way it's used, I mean. Of course, the real
charity means love. I suppose it was LOVE that made John
Daly give one hundred dollars to the Pension Fund Fair--after he'd
jewed it out of those poor girls behind his counters! Morse
went around everywhere telling how kind dear Mr. Daly was to give so
much to charity! Nobody wants charity--except a few lazy
rascals like those beggars of Flora's! And
if half the world gave the other half its rights there wouldn't BE any
charity, I believe." Smith
held up both hands in mock terror. "I shall be petitioning her for my
bread and butter, yet!" Smith, when I think of all that
money"--her eyes began to shine again--"and of what we can do with it,
I--I just can't believe it's so!" "But you aren't expecting that twenty millions are going to right all
the wrongs in the world, are you?" "No, oh, no; but we can help SOME that we know about. But it isn't that
I just want to GIVE, you know. We must get behind things--to the
causes. We must--"

"We must make the Mr. Dalys pay more to their girls before they pay
anything to pension funds, eh?" Smith, as Miss Maggie came
to a breathless pause. "Oh, can't you SEE what we can
do--with that twenty million dollars?" Smith, his gaze on Miss Maggie's flushed cheeks and shining eyes,
smiled tenderly. "I see--that I'm being married for my money--after all!" sniffed Miss Maggie, so altogether bewitchingly that Mr. Smith
gave her a rapturous kiss. CHAPTER XXV

EXIT MR. JOHN SMITH


Early in July Mr. He made a
farewell call upon each of the Blaisdell families, and thanked them
heartily for all their kindness in assisting him with his Blaisdell
book. The Blaisdells, one and all, said they were very sorry to have him go. Miss Flora frankly wiped her eyes, and told Mr. Smith she could never,
never thank him enough for what he had done for her. Mellicent, too,
with shy eyes averted, told him she should never forget what he had
done for her--and for Donald. James and Flora and Frank--and even Jane!--said that they would like to
have one of the Blaisdell books, when they were published, to hand down
in the family. Flora took out her purse and said that she would pay for
hers now; but Mr. Smith hastily, and with some evident embarrassment,
refused the money, saying that he could not tell yet what the price of
the book would be. All the Blaisdells, except Frank, Fred, and Bessie, went to the station
to see Mr. They told him he was
just like one of the family, anyway, and they declared they hoped he
would come back soon. Frank telephoned him that he would have gone,
too, if he had not had so much to do at the store. Smith seemed pleased at all this attention--he seemed, indeed,
quite touched; but he seemed also embarrassed--in fact, he seemed often
embarrassed during those last few days at Hillerton. Miss Maggie Duff did not go to the station to see Mr. Miss
Flora, on her way home, stopped at the Duff cottage and reproached Miss
Maggie for the delinquency. "All the rest of us did,
'most." You're Blaisdells--but I'm not, you know." "You're just as good as one, Maggie Duff! Besides, hasn't that man
boarded here for over a year, and paid you good money, too?" "Why, y-yes, of course." "Well, then, I don't think it would have hurt you any to show him this
last little attention. He'll think you don't like him, or--or are mad
about something, when all the rest of us went." "Well, then, if--Why, Maggie Duff, you're BLUSHING!" she broke off,
peering into Miss Maggie's face in a way that did not tend to lessen
the unmistakable color that was creeping to her forehead. I declare, if you were twenty years younger, and I didn't
know better, I should say that--" She stopped abruptly, then plunged
on, her countenance suddenly alight with a new idea. "NOW I know why
you didn't go to the station, Maggie Duff! That man proposed to you,
and you refused him!" Hattie always said it would be a match--from
the very first, when he came here to your house." gasped Miss Maggie again, looking about her very much as if
she were meditating flight. "Well, she did--but I didn't believe it. You refused
him--now, didn't you?" Miss Maggie caught her breath a little convulsively. "Well, I suppose you didn't,
then, if you say so. And I don't need to ask if you accepted him. You
didn't, of course, or you'd have been there to see him off. And he
wouldn't have gone then, anyway, probably. So he didn't ask you, I
suppose. Well, I never did believe, like Hattie did, that--"

"Flora," interrupted Miss Maggie desperately, "WILL you stop talking in
that absurd way? Listen, I did not care to go to the station to-day. I'm going to see my old classmate, Nellie
Maynard--Mrs. It's lovely, of course, only--only I--I'm so
surprised! "All the more reason why I should, then. It's time I did," smiled Miss
Maggie. And I do hope you can DO it, and
that it won't peter out at the last minute, same's most of your good
times do. And you've had such a hard life--and your
boarder leaving, too! That'll make a lot of difference in your
pocketbook, won't it? But, Maggie, you'll have to have some new
clothes." I've got to have--oh,
lots of things." And, Maggie,"--Miss Flora's face grew
eager,--"please, PLEASE, won't you let me help you a little--about
those clothes? And get some nice ones--some real nice ones, for once. Please, Maggie, there's a good girl!" "Thank you, no, dear," refused Miss Maggie, shaking her head with a
smile. "But I appreciate your kindness just the same--indeed, I do!" "If you wouldn't be so horrid proud," pouted Miss Flora. I was going to tell
you soon, anyway, and I'll tell it now. I HAVE money, dear,--lots of it
now." Father's Cousin George died two months ago." "Yes; and to father's daughter he left--fifty thousand dollars." But he loved father, you know, years ago,
and father loved him." "But had you ever heard from him--late years?" Father was very angry because he went to Alaska in the first
place, you know, and they haven't ever written very often." They sent me a thousand--just for pin money, they
said. The lawyer's written several times, and he's been here once. I
believe it's all to come next month." "Oh, I'm so glad, Maggie," breathed Flora. I don't know
of anybody I'd rather see take a little comfort in life than you!" At the door, fifteen minutes later, Miss Flora said again how glad she
was; but she added wistfully:--

"I'm sure I don't know, though, what I'm going to do all summer without
you. Just think how lonesome we'll be--you gone to Chicago, Hattie and
Jim and all their family moved to Plainville, and even Mr. And I think we're going to miss Mr. "Indeed, I do think he was a very nice man!" "Now, Flora, I shall want you to go shopping with me lots. And Miss Flora, eagerly entering into Miss Maggie's discussion of
frills and flounces, failed to notice that Miss Maggie had dropped the
subject of Mr. Hillerton had much to talk about during those summer days. Smith's
going had created a mild discussion--the "ancestor feller" was well
known and well liked in the town. But even his departure did not arouse
the interest that was bestowed upon the removal of the James Blaisdells
to Plainville; and this, in turn, did not cause so great an excitement
as did the news that Miss Maggie Duff had inherited fifty thousand
dollars and had gone to Chicago to spend it. And the fact that nearly
all who heard this promptly declared that they hoped she WOULD spend a
good share of it--in Chicago, or elsewhere--on herself, showed pretty
well just where Miss Maggie Duff stood in the hearts of Hillerton. It was early in September that Miss Flora had the letter from Miss
Maggie. Not but that she had received letters from Miss Maggie before,
but that the contents of this one made it at once, to all the
Blaisdells, "the letter." Miss Flora began to read it, gave a little cry, and sprang to her feet. Standing, her breath suspended, she finished it. Five minutes later,
gloves half on and hat askew, she was hurrying across the common to her
brother Frank's home. "Jane, Jane," she panted, as soon as she found her sister-in-law. "I've
had a letter from Maggie. She's just been living on having that money. And us, with all we've
lost, too! But, then, maybe we wouldn't have got it, anyway. And I never thought to bring it," ejaculated Miss Flora
vexedly. She said it would be in all the Eastern papers right away,
of course, but she wanted to tell us first, so we wouldn't be so
surprised. Walked into his lawyer's office without a
telegram, or anything. Tyndall
brought home the news that night in an 'Extra'; but that's all it
told--just that Mr. Stanley G. Fulton, the multi-millionaire who
disappeared nearly two years ago on an exploring trip to South America,
had come back alive and well. Then it told all about the two letters he
left, and the money he left to us, and all that, Maggie said; and it
talked a lot about how lucky it was that he got back just in time
before the other letter had to be opened next November. But it didn't
say any more about his trip, or anything. The morning papers will have
more, Maggie said, probably." "Yes, of course, of course," nodded Jane, rolling the corner of her
upper apron nervously. (Since the forty-thousand-dollar loss Jane had
gone back to her old habit of wearing two aprons.) "Where DO you
suppose he's been all this time? "Maggie said it wasn't known--that the paper didn't say. It was an
'Extra' anyway, and it just got in the bare news of his return. Besides, Maggie'll
write again about it, I'm sure. I'm so glad she's having
such a good time!" "Yes, of course, of course," nodded Jane again nervously. "Say, Flora,
I wonder--do you suppose WE'LL ever hear from him? He left us all that
money--he knows that, of course. He can't ask for it back--the lawyer
said he couldn't do that! But, I wonder--do you
suppose we ought to write him and--and thank him?" I'd be
scared to death to do such a thing as that. Oh, you don't think we've
got to do THAT?" We'd want to do what was right and proper, of course. But I don't see--" She paused helplessly. Miss Flora gave a sudden hysterical little laugh. "Well, I don't see how we're going to find out what's proper, in this
case," she giggled. "We can't write to a magazine, same as I did when I
wanted to know how to answer invitations and fix my knives and forks on
the table. We CAN'T write to them, 'cause nothing like this ever
happened before, and they wouldn't know what to say. How'd we look
writing, 'Please, dear Editor, when a man wills you a hundred thousand
dollars and then comes to life again, is it proper or not proper to
write and thank him?' They'd think we was crazy, and they'd have reason
to! For my part, I--"

The telephone bell rang sharply, and Jane rose to answer it. When she came back she was even more excited. she questioned, as Miss
Flora got hastily to her feet. I left everything just as it was and ran, when I got the
letter. I'll get a paper myself on the way home. I'm going to call up
Hattie, too, on the long distance. My, it's'most as exciting as it was
when it first came,--the money, I mean,--isn't it?" panted Miss Flora
as she hurried away. The Blaisdells bought many papers during the next few days. But even by
the time that the Stanley G. Fulton sensation had dwindled to a short
paragraph in an obscure corner of a middle page, they (and the public
in general) were really little the wiser, except for these bare facts:--

Stanley G. Fulton had arrived at a South American hotel, from the
interior, had registered as S. Fulton, frankly to avoid publicity, and
had taken immediate passage to New York. Arriving at New York, still to
avoid publicity, he had not telegraphed his attorneys, but had taken
the sleeper for Chicago, and had fortunately not met any one who
recognized him until his arrival in that city. He had brought home
several fine specimens of Incan textiles and potteries: and he declared
that he had had a very enjoyable and profitable trip. He did not care to talk of his experiences, he said. For a time, of course, his return was made much of. Fake interviews and
rumors of threatened death and disaster in impenetrable jungles made
frequent appearance; but in an incredibly short time the flame of
interest died from want of fuel to feed upon; and, as Mr. Stanley G.
Fulton himself had once predicted, the matter was soon dismissed as
merely another of the multi-millionaire's well-known eccentricities. All of this the Blaisdells heard from Miss Maggie in addition to seeing
it in the newspapers. But very soon, from Miss Maggie, they began to
learn more. Before a fortnight had passed, Miss Flora received another
letter from Chicago that sent her flying as before to her sister-in-law. "Jane, Jane, Maggie's MET HIM!" she cried, breathlessly bursting into
the kitchen where Jane was paring the apples that she would not trust
to the maid's more wasteful knife. With a hasty twirl of a now reckless knife, Jane finished the
last apple, set the pan on the table before the maid, and hurried her
visitor into the living-room. "Now, tell me quick--what did she say? "Yes--yes--everything," nodded Miss Flora, sinking into a chair. "She
liked him real well, she said and he knows all about that she belongs
to us. Oh, I hope she didn't
tell him about--Fred!" "And that awful gold-mine stock," moaned Jane. "But she wouldn't--I
know she wouldn't!" "Of course she wouldn't," cried Miss Flora. "'Tisn't like Maggie one
bit! She'd only tell the nice things, I'm sure. And, of course, she'd
tell him how pleased we were with the money!" And to think she's met him--really met
him!" She turned an excited face to her
daughter, who had just entered the room. Aunt
Flora's just had a letter from Aunt Maggie, and she's met Mr. Yes, he's real nice, your Aunt
Maggie says, and she likes him very much." Tyndall brought him home
one night and introduced him to his wife and Maggie; and since then
he's been very nice to them. He's taken them out in his automobile, and
taken them to the theater twice." "That's because she belongs to us, of course," nodded Jane wisely. "Yes, I suppose so," agreed Flora. "And I think it's very kind of him." "_I_ think he does it because he
WANTS to. I'll warrant she's
nicer and sweeter and--and, yes, PRETTIER than lots of those old
Chicago women. Aunt Maggie looked positively HANDSOME that day she left
here last July. Probably he LIKES
to take her to places. Anyhow, I'm glad she's having one good time
before she dies." "Yes, so am I, my dear. "I only wish he'd marry her and--and give her a good time all her
life," avowed Mellicent, lifting her chin. She's good enough for him," bridled Mellicent. "Aunt
Maggie's good enough for anybody!" "Maggie's a saint--if
ever there was one." "Yes, but I shouldn't call her a MARRYING saint," smiled Jane. "Well, I don't know about that," frowned Miss Flora thoughtfully. "Hattie always declared there'd be a match between her and Mr. "Well, then, I
shall stick to my original statement that Maggie Duff is a saint, all
right, but not a marrying one--unless some one marries her now for her
money, of course." "As if Aunt Maggie'd stand for that!" "Besides, she
wouldn't have to! Aunt Maggie's good enough to be married for herself." "There, there, child, just because you are a love-sick little piece of
romance just now, you needn't think everybody else is," her mother
reproved her a little sharply. But Mellicent only laughed merrily as she disappeared into her own room. Smith, I wonder where he is, and if he'll ever come
back here," mused Miss Flora, aloud. He was a very
nice man, and I liked him." "Goodness, Flora, YOU aren't, getting romantic, too, are you?" ejaculated Miss Flora sharply, buttoning up her coat. "I'm no more romantic than--than poor Maggie herself is!" Two weeks later, to a day, came Miss Maggie's letter announcing her
engagement to Mr. Stanley G. Fulton, and saying that she was to be
married in Chicago before Christmas. CHAPTER XXVI

REENTER MR. STANLEY G. FULTON


In the library of Mrs. Stanley G.
Fulton was impatiently awaiting the appearance of Miss Maggie Duff. In
a minute she came in, looking charmingly youthful in her new,
well-fitting frock. The man, quickly on his feet at her entrance, gave her a lover's ardent
kiss; but almost instantly he held her off at arms' length. "Why, dearest, what's the matter?" "You look as if--if something had happened--not exactly a bad
something, but--What is it?" "That's one of the very nicest things about you, Mr. Stanley-G.-Fulton-John-Smith," she sighed, nestling comfortably into
the curve of his arm, as they sat down on the divan;--"that you NOTICE
things so. And it seems so good to me to have somebody--NOTICE." And to think of all these years I've wasted!" "Oh, but I shan't be lonely any more now. And, listen--I'll tell you
what made me look so funny. You know I
wrote them--about my coming marriage." "I believe--I'll let you read the letter for yourself, Stanley. It
tells some things, toward the end that I think you'll like to know,"
she said, a little hesitatingly, as she held out the letter she had
brought into the room with her. I'd like to read it," cried Fulton, whisking the closely written
sheets from the envelope. MY DEAR MAGGIE (Flora had written): Well, mercy me, you have given us a
surprise this time, and no mistake! Yet we're all real glad, Maggie,
and we hope you'll be awfully happy. You've had such an awfully hard time all your life! Well, when your letter came, we were just going out to Jim's for an
old-fashioned Thanksgiving dinner, so I took it along with me and read
it to them all. I kept it till we were all together, too, though I most
bursted with the news all the way out. Well, you ought to have heard their tongues wag! They were all struck
dumb first, for a minute, all except Mellicent. She spoke up the very
first thing, and clapped her hands. I knew Aunt Maggie was good
enough for anybody!" To explain that I'll have to go back a little. We were talking one day
about you--Jane and Mellicent and me--and we said you were a saint,
only not a marrying saint. But Mellicent thought you were, and it seems
she was right. Oh, of course, we'd all thought once Mr. Smith might
take a fancy to you, but we never dreamed of such a thing as this--Mr. Sakes alive--I can hardly sense it yet! Jane, for a minute, forgot how rich he was, and spoke right up real
quick--"It's for her money, of course. I KNEW some one would marry her
for that fifty thousand dollars!" But she laughed then, right off, with
the rest of us, at the idea of a man worth twenty millions marrying
ANYBODY for fifty thousand dollars. Benny says there ain't any man alive good enough for his Aunt Maggie,
so if Mr. Fulton gets to being too highheaded sometimes, you can tell
him what Benny says. But we're all real pleased, honestly, Maggie, and of course we're
terribly excited. We're so sorry you're going to be married out there
in Chicago. Why can't you make him come to Hillerton? Jane says she'd
be glad to make a real nice wedding for you--and when Jane says a thing
like that, you can know how much she's really saying, for Jane's
feeling awfully poor these days, since they lost all that money, you
know. Fulton, too--"Cousin Stanley," as Hattie
always calls him. Please give him our congratulations--but there, that
sounds funny, doesn't it? (But the etiquette editors in the magazines
say we must always give best wishes to the bride and congratulations to
the groom.) Only it seems funny here, to congratulate that rich Mr. I didn't mean it that way, Maggie. I
declare, if that sentence wasn't 'way in the middle of this third page,
and so awfully hard for me to write, anyway, I'd tear up this sheet and
begin another. But, after all, you'll understand, I'm sure. You KNOW we
all think the world of you, Maggie, and that I didn't mean anything
against YOU. Fulton is--is such a big man, and
all--But you know what I meant. Well, anyway, if you can't come here to be married, we hope you'll
bring him here soon so we can see him, and see you, too. We miss you
awfully, Maggie,--truly we do, especially since Jim's folks went, and
with Mr. Smith gone, too, Jane and I are real lonesome. Jim and Hattie like real well where they are. They've got a real pretty
home, and they're the biggest folks in town, so Hattie doesn't have to
worry for fear she won't live quite so fine as her neighbors--though
really I think Hattie's got over that now a good deal. That awful thing
of Fred's sobered her a lot, and taught her who her real friends were,
and that money ain't everything. Fred is doing splendidly now, just as steady as a clock. It does my
soul good to see him and his father together. And Bessie--she isn't near so disagreeable and airy as she was. Hattie
took her out of that school and put her into another where she's
getting some real learning and less society and frills and dancing. Jim
is doing well, and I think Hattie's real happy. Oh, of course, when we
first heard that Mr. Fulton had got back, I think she was kind of
disappointed. You know she always did insist we were going to have the
rest of that money if he didn't show up. But she told me just
Thanksgiving Day that she didn't know but 't was just as well, after
all, that they didn't have the money, for maybe Fred'd go wrong again,
or it would strike Benny this time. Anyhow, however much money she had,
she said, she'd never let her children spend so much again, and she'd
found out money didn't bring happiness, always, anyway. Mellicent and Donald are going to be married next summer. Donald don't
get a very big salary yet, but Mellicent says she won't mind a bit
going back to economizing again, now that for once she's had all the
chocolates and pink dresses she wanted. What a funny girl she is--but
she's a dear girl, just the same, and she's settled down real sensible
now. She and Donald are as happy as can be, and even Jane likes Donald
real well now. Jane's gone back to her tidies and aprons and skimping on everything. She says she's got to, to make up that forty thousand dollars. But she
enjoys it, I believe. Honestly, she acts'most as happy trying to save
five cents as Frank does earning it in his old place behind the
counter. And that's saying a whole lot, as you know. Jane knows very
well she doesn't have to pinch that way. They've got lots of the money
left, and Frank's business is better than ever. You complain because I don't tell you anything about myself in my
letters, but there isn't anything to tell. I am well and happy, and
I've just thought up the nicest thing to do. Mary Hicks came home from
Boston sick last September, and she's been here at my house ever since. Her own home ain't no place for a sick person, you know, with all those
children, and they're awfully poor, too. She works in a department store and was all
played out, but she's picked up wonderfully here and is going back next
week. Well, she was telling me about a girl that works with her at the same
counter, and saying how she wished she had a place like this to go to
for a rest and change, so I'm going to do it--give them one, I mean,
she and the other girls. Mary says there are a dozen girls that she
knows right there that are half-sick, but would get well in a minute if
they only had a few weeks of rest and quiet and good food. So I'm going
to take them, two at a time, so they'll be company for each other. Mary
is going to fix it up for me down there, and pick out the girls, and
she says she knows the man who owns the store will be glad to let them
off, for they are all good help, and he's been afraid he'd lose them. He'd offered them a month off, besides their vacation, but they
couldn't take it, because they didn't have any place to go or money to
pay. Of course, that part will be all right now. And I'm so glad and
excited I don't know what to do. Oh, I do hope you'll tell Mr. Fulton
some time how happy he's made me, and how perfectly splendid that
money's been for me. Well, Maggie, this is a long letter, and I must close. Tell me all
about the new clothes you are getting, and I hope you will get a lot. Lovingly yours,

FLORA. Maggie Duff, for pity's sake, never, never tell that man
that I ever went into mourning for him and put flowers before his
picture. Fulton folded the letter and handed
it back to Miss Maggie. "I didn't feel that I was betraying confidences--under the
circumstances," murmured Miss Maggie. "And there was a good deal in the letter that I DID want you to see,"
added Miss Maggie. "Hm-m; the congratulations, for one thing, of course," twinkled the
man. "I wanted you to see how really, in the end, that money was not doing
so much harm, after all," asserted Miss Maggie, with some dignity,
shaking her head at him reprovingly. "I thought you'd be GLAD, sir!" I'm so glad that, when I come to make my will now, I
shouldn't wonder if I remembered them all again--a little--that is, if
I have anything left to will," he teased shamelessly. "Oh, by the way,
that makes me think. I've just been putting up a monument to John
Smith." "But, my dear Maggie, something was due the man," maintained Fulton,
reaching for a small flat parcel near him and placing it in Miss
Maggie's hands. "But--oh, Stanley, how could you?" she shivered, her eyes on the words
the millionaire had penciled on the brown paper covering of the parcel. With obvious reluctance Miss Maggie loosened the paper covers and
peered within. In her hands lay a handsome brown leather volume with gold letters,
reading:--

     The Blaisdell Family
           By
        John Smith

"And you--did that?" I shall send a copy each to Frank and Jim and Miss Flora, of
course. Poor
man, it's the least I can do for him--and the most--unless--" He
hesitated with an unmistakable look of embarrassment. "Well, unless--I let you take me to Hillerton one of these days and see
if--if Stanley G. Fulton, with your gracious help, can make peace for
John Smith with those--er--cousins of mine. You see, I still feel
confoundedly like that small boy at the keyhole, and I'd like--to open
that door! And, oh, Stanley, it's the one thing needed
to make me perfectly happy," she sighed blissfully. THE END









End of Project Gutenberg's Oh, Money! _Great grand sire_--Harold. _Great great grand sire_--Lincolnshire Lad II. _Great great great grand sire_--Lincolnshire Lad 1196 (Drews). The dam of Lockinge Forest King was The Forest Queen (by Royal Albert,
1885, a great sire in his day); she was first prize winner at the Royal
Show, Nottingham, 1888, first and champion, Peterborough, 1888, first
Bath and West, 1887 and 1888, and numerous other prizes. Her dam traced
back to (Dacks) Matchless (1509), a horse which no less an authority
than the late Mr. James Forshaw described as the sire of all time.

This accounts for the marvellous success of Lockinge Forest King as a
stud horse, although his success, unlike Jamesons, came rather late in
his life of ten years. We have already seen that he
has sired the highest priced Shire mare publicly sold. At the Newcastle
Royal of 1908, both of the gold medal winners were by him, so were
the two champions at the 1909 Shire Horse Show. His most illustrious
family was bred by a tenant farmer, Mr. John Bradley, Halstead, Tilton,
Leicester. The eldest member is Halstead Royal Duke, the London
Champion of 1909, Halstead Blue Blood, 3rd in London, 1910, both owned
by Lord Rothschild, and Halstead Royal Duchess, who won the junior cup
in London for her breeder in 1912. The dam of the trio is Halstead
Duchess III by Menestrel, by Hitchin Conqueror (London Champion, 1890). Two other matrons deserve to be mentioned, as they will always shine in
the history of the Shire breed. One is Lockington Beauty by Champion
457, who died at a good old age at Batsford Park, having produced
Prince William, the champion referred to more than once in these pages,
his sire being William the Conqueror. Then Marmion II (by Harold),
who was first in London in 1891, and realized 1400 guineas at Mr. Also a daughter, Blue Ruin, which won at London Show
of 1889 for Mr. R. N. Sutton-Nelthorpe, but, unfortunately, died from
foaling in that year. Another famous son was Mars Victor, a horse of
great size, and also a London winner, on more than one occasion. Freeman-Mitford (Lord
Redesdale) in the year of his sires--Hitchin Conquerors--championship
in 1890, for the sum of 1500. Blue Ruin was own sister to Prince William, but the other three were by
different sires. To look at--I saw her in 1890--Lockington Beauty was quite a common
mare with obviously small knees, and none too much weight and width,
her distinguishing feature being a mane of extraordinary length. The remaining dam to be mentioned as a great breeder is Nellie
Blacklegs by Bestwicks Prince, famous for having bred five sons--which
were all serving mares in the year 1891--and a daughter, all by
Premier. The first was Northwood, a horse used long and successfully by
Lord Middleton and the sire of Birdsall Darling, the dam of Birdsall
Menestrel, London champion of 1904. The second, Hydrometer, first
in London in 1889, then sold to the late Duke of Marlborough, and
purchased when his stud was dispersed in 1893 by the Warwick Shire
Horse Society for 600 guineas. A.
C. Duncombes sale in 1891 for 1100 guineas, a record in those days,
to Mr. F. Crisp, who let him to the Peterborough Society in 1892 for
500. Calwich Topsman, another son, realized 500 guineas when sold, and
Senator made 350. The daughter, rightly named Sensible, bred Mr. John
Smith of Ellastone, Ashbourne, a colt foal by Harold in 1893, which
turned out to be Markeaton Royal Harold, the champion stallion of 1897. This chapter was headed A few records, and surely this set up by
Premier and Nellie Blacklegs is one. The record show of the Shire Horse Society, as regards the number of
entries, was that of 1904, with a total of 862; the next for size was
the 1902 meeting when 860 were catalogued. Of course the smallest
show was the initial one of 1880, when 76 stallions and 34 mares made
a total of 110 entries. The highest figure yet made in the public
auction sales held at the London Show is 1175 guineas given by Mr. R. Heath, Biddulph Grange, Staffs., in 1911 for Rickford Coming
King, a three-year-old bred by the late Lord Winterstoke, and sold by
his executors, after having won fourth in his class, although first
and reserve for the junior cup as a two-year-old. He was sired by
Ravenspur, with which King Edward won first prize in London, 1906,
his price of 825 guineas to Lord Winterstoke at the Wolferton Sale
of February 8, 1907, being the highest at any sale of that year. The
lesson to be learned is that if you want to create a record with Shires
you must begin and continue with well-bred ones, or you will never
reach the desired end. CHAPTER XIII

JUDGES AT THE LONDON SHOWS, 1890-1915


The following are the Judges of a quarter of a centurys Shires in
London:--

    1890. Clark, A. H., Moulton Eaugate, Spalding, Lincs. Chapman, George, Radley, Hungerford, Berks. Morton, John, West Rudham, Swaffham, Norfolk. Nix, John, Alfreton, Derbyshire. Blundell, Peter, Ream Hills, Weeton Kirkham, Lancs. Hill, Joseph B., Smethwick Hall, Congleton, Cheshire. Morton, Joseph, Stow, Downham Market, Norfolk. Smith, Henry, The Grove, Cropwell Butler, Notts. Heaton, Captain, Worsley, Manchester. Morton, John, West Rudham, Swaffham, Norfolk. Nix, John, Alfreton, Derbyshire. Rowland, John W., Fishtoft, Boston, Lincs. Byron, A. W., Duckmanton Lodge, Chesterfield, Derbyshire. Crowther, James F., Knowl Grove, Mirfield, Yorks. Douglas, C. I., 34, Dalebury Road, Upper Tooting, London. Smith, Henry, The Grove, Cropwell Butler, Notts. Heaton, Captain, Worsley, Manchester. Chamberlain, C. R., Riddings Farm, Alfreton, Derbyshire. Tindall, C. W., Brocklesby Park, Lincs. Rowland, John W., Fishtoft, Boston, Lincs. Clark, A. H., Moulton Eaugate, Spalding, Lincs. Freshney, T. B., South Somercotes, Louth, Lincs. Rowell, John, Manor Farm, Bury, Huntingdon. Smith, Henry, The Grove, Cropwell Butler, Notts. Green, Edward, The Moors, Welshpool. Potter, W. H., Barberry House, Ullesthorpe, Rugby. Rowland, John W., Fishtoft, Boston, Lincs. Chamberlain, C. R., Riddings Farm, Alfreton, Derbyshire. Lewis, John, Trwstllewelyn, Garthmyl, Mont. Wainwright, Joseph, Corbar, Buxton, Derbyshire. Clark, A. H., Moulton Eaugate, Spalding, Lincs. Freshney, T. B., South Somercotes, Louth, Lincs. Richardson, Wm., London Road, Chatteris, Cambs. Green, Edward, The Moors, Welshpool. Griffin, F. W., Borough Fen, Peterborough. Welch, William, North Rauceby, Grantham, Lincs. Clark, A. H., Moulton Eaugate, Spalding, Lincs. Forshaw, James, Carlton-on-Trent, Newark, Notts. Paisley, Joseph, Waresley, Sandy, Beds. Eadie, J. T. C., Barrow Hall, Derby. Heaton, Captain, Worsley, Manchester. Freshney, T. B., South Somercotes, Louth, Lincs. Clark, A. H., Moulton Eaugate, Spalding, Lincs. Griffin, F. W., Borough Fen, Peterborough. Rowell, John, Manor Farm, Bury, Huntingdon. Nix, John, Alfreton, Derbyshire. Richardson, William, Eastmoor House, Doddington, Cambs. Grimes, Joseph, Highfield, Palterton, Chesterfield, Derbyshire. Freshney, T. B., South Somercotes, Louth, Lincs. Smith, Henry, The Grove, Cropwell Butler, Notts. Whinnerah, James, Warton Hall, Carnforth, Lancs. Clark, A. H., Moulton Eaugate, Spalding, Lincs. Blundell, John, Ream Hills, Weeton Kirkham, Lancs. Green, Edward, The Moors, Welshpool. Eadie, J. T. C., The Knowle, Hazelwood, Derby. Rowell, John, Bury, Huntingdon. Green, Thomas, The Bank, Pool Quay, Welshpool. Griffin, F. W., Borough Fen, Peterborough. Paisley, Joseph, Moresby House, Whitehaven. Whinnerah, Edward, Warton Hall, Carnforth, Lancs. Clark, A. H., Moulton Eaugate, Spalding, Lincs. Blundell, John, Lower Burrow, Scotforth, Lancs. Howkins, W., Hillmorton Grounds, Rugby. Eadie, J. T. C., The Rock, Newton Solney, Burton-on-Trent. Rowell, John, Bury, Huntingdon. Thompson, W., jun., Desford, Leicester. Blundell, John, Lower Burrow, Scotforth, Lancs. Cowing, G., Yatesbury, Calne, Wilts. Green, Edward, The Moors, Welshpool. Green, Thomas, The Bank, Pool Quay, Welshpool. Gould, James, Crouchley Lymm, Cheshire. Measures, John, Dunsby, Bourne, Lincs. Clark, A. H., Moulton Eaugate, Spalding, Lincs. Flowers, A. J., Beachendon, Aylesbury, Bucks. Whinnerah, Edward Warton, Carnforth, Lancs. Blundell, John, Lower Burrow, Scotforth, Lancs. Betts, E. W., Babingley, Kings Lynn, Norfolk. Griffin, F. W., Borough Fen, Peterborough. Forshaw, Thomas, Carlton-on-Trent, Newark, Notts. Keene, R. H., Westfield, Medmenham, Marlow, Bucks. Thompson, William, jun., Kibworth Beauchamp, Leicester. Eadie, J. T. C., Newton Solney, Burton-on-Trent. Green, Edward, The Moors, Welshpool. Mackereth, Henry Whittington, Kirkby Lonsdale, Lancs. This list is interesting for the reason that those who have awarded
the prizes at the Shire Horse Show have, to a great extent, fixed the
type to find favour at other important shows. Very often the same
judges have officiated at several important exhibitions during the
same season, which has tended towards uniformity in prize-winning
Shires. On looking down the list, it will be seen that four judges
were appointed till 1895, while the custom of the Society to get its
Council from as many counties as possible has not been followed in
the matter of judges selection. For instance, Warwickshire--a great
county for Shire breeding--has only provided two judges in twenty-six
years, and one of them--Mr. Potter--had recently come from Lockington
Grounds, Derby, where he bred the renowned Prince William. For many
years Hertfordshire has provided a string of winners, yet no judge has
hailed from that county, or from Surrey, which contains quite a number
of breeders of Shire horses. No fault whatever is being found with the
way the judging has been carried out. It is no light task, and nobody
but an expert could, or should, undertake it; but it is only fair to
point out that high-class Shires are, and have been, bred in Cornwall,
and Devonshire, Kent, and every other county, while the entries at the
show of 1914 included a stallion bred in the Isle of Man. In 1890, as elsewhere stated, the membership of the Society was 1615,
whereas the number of members given in the 1914 volume of the Stud Book
is 4200. The aim of each and all is to improve the Old English breed
of Cart Horses, many of which may now be truthfully described by their
old title of War Horses.




CHAPTER XIV

THE EXPORT TRADE


Among the first to recognize the enormous power and possibilities of
the Shire were the Americans. Very few London shows had been held
before they were looking out for fully-registered specimens to take
across the Atlantic. Towards the close of the eighties a great export
trade was done, the climax being reached in 1889, when the Shire Horse
Society granted 1264 export certificates. A society to safeguard the
interests of the breed was formed in America, these being the remarks
of Mr. A. Galbraith (President of the American Shire Horse Society) in
his introductory essay: At no time in the history of the breed have
first-class animals been so valuable as now, the praiseworthy endeavour
to secure the best specimens of the breed having the natural effect of
enhancing prices all round. Breeders of Shire horses both in England
and America have a hopeful and brilliant future before them, and by
exercising good judgment in their selections, and giving due regard to
pedigree and soundness, as well as individual merit, they will not only
reap a rich pecuniary reward, but prove a blessing and a benefit to
this country.

From the day that the Shire Horse Society was incorporated, on June
3, 1878, until now, America has been Britains best overseas customer
for Shire horses, a good second being our own colony, the Dominion of
Canada. Another stockbreeding country to make an early discovery of the
merits of The Great Horse was Argentina, to which destination many
good Shires have gone. In 1906 the number given in the Stud Book was
118. So much importance is attached to the breed both in the United
States and in the Argentine Republic that English judges have travelled
to each of those countrys shows to award the prizes in the Shire
Classes. Another great country with which a good and growing trade has been done
is Russia. In 1904 the number was eleven, in 1913 it had increased to
fifty-two, so there is evidently a market there which is certain to be
extended when peace has been restored and our powerful ally sets about
the stupendous, if peaceful, task of replenishing her horse stock. Our other allies have their own breeds of draught horses, therefore
they have not been customers for Shires, but with war raging in their
breeding grounds, the numbers must necessarily be reduced almost to
extinction, consequently the help of the Shire may be sought for
building up their breeds in days to come. German buyers have not fancied Shire horses to any extent--British-bred
re-mounts have been more in their line. In 1905, however, Germany was the destination of thirty-one. By 1910
the number had declined to eleven, and in 1913 to three, therefore, if
the export of trade in Shires to The Fatherland is altogether lost,
English breeders will scarcely feel it. Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa are parts of the British
Empire to which Shires have been shipped for several years. Substantial
prizes in the shape of Cups and Medals are now given by the Shire
Horse Society to the best specimens of the breed exhibited at Foreign
and Colonial Shows. ENCOURAGING THE EXPORT OF SHIRES

The following is reprinted from the Farmer and Stockbreeder Year Book
for 1906, and was written by S. H. L. (J. A. Frost):--

    The Old English breed of cart horse, or Shire, is
    universally admitted to be the best and most valuable animal
    for draught purposes in the world, and a visitor from America,
    Mr. Morrow, of the United States Department of Agriculture,
    speaking at Mr. John Rowells sale of Shires in 1889, said,
    Great as had been the business done in Shire horses in
    America, the trade is but in its infancy, for the more Shire
    horses became known, and the more they came into competition
    with other breeds, the more their merits for all heavy draught
    purposes were appreciated.

    These remarks are true to-day, for although sixteen years have
    elapsed since they were made (1906), the massive Shire has more
    than held his own, but in the interests of the breed, and of
    the nearly four thousand members of the Shire Horse Society,
    it is still doubtful whether the true worth of the Shire
    horse is properly known and appreciated in foreign countries
    and towns needing heavy horses, and whether the export trade
    in this essentially British breed is not capable of further
    development. The number of export certificates granted by the
    Shire Horse Society in 1889 was 1264, which takes a good deal
    of beating, but it must be remembered that since then Shire
    horse breeding at home has progressed by leaps and bounds,
    and tenant farmers, who could only look on in those days,
    are now members of the flourishing Shire Horse Society and
    owners of breeding studs, and such prices as 800 guineas for a
    two-year-old filly and 230 guineas for a nine-months-old colt,
    are less frequently obtainable than they were then; therefore,
    an increase in the demand from other countries would find more
    Shire breeders ready to supply it, although up to the present
    the home demand has been and is very good, and weighty geldings
    continue to be scarce and dear.


THE NUMBER EXPORTED

It may be true that the number of horses exported during the last year
or two has been higher than ever, but when the average value of those
that go to other countries than Holland, Belgium, and France, is
worked out, it does not allow of such specimens as would excite the
admiration of a foreign merchant or Colonial farmer being exported,
except in very isolated instances; then the tendency of American buyers
is to give preference to stallions which are on the quality rather than
on the weighty side, and as the mares to which they are eventually put
are also light boned, the typical English dray horse is not produced. During the past year (1905) foreign buyers have been giving very
high prices for Shorthorn cattle, and if they would buy in the same
spirited manner at the Shire sales, a much more creditable animal
could be obtained for shipment. As an advertisement for the Shire
it is obviously beneficial that the Shire Horse Society--which is
unquestionably the most successful breed society in existence--gives
prizes for breeding stock and also geldings at a few of the most
important horse shows in the United States. This tends to bring the
breed into prominence abroad, and it is certain that many Colonial
farmers would rejoice at being able to breed working geldings of a
similar type to those which may be seen shunting trucks on any large
railway station in England, or walking smartly along in front of a
binder in harvest. The writer has a relative farming in the North-West
Territory of Canada, and his last letter says, The only thing in
the stock line that there is much money in now is horses; they are
keeping high, and seem likely to for years, as so many new settlers are
coming in all the time, and others do not seem able to raise enough
for their own needs; and it may be mentioned that almost the only
kind of stallions available there are of the Percheron breed, which
is certainly not calculated to improve the size, or substance, of the
native draught horse stock. THE COST OF SHIPPING

The cost of shipping a horse from Liverpool to New York is about 11,
which is not prohibitive for such an indispensable animal as the Shire
horse, and if such specimens of the breed as the medal winners at shows
like Peterborough could be exhibited in the draught horse classes at
the best horse shows of America, it is more than probable that at least
some of the visitors would be impressed with their appearance, and an
increase in the export trade in Shires might thereby be brought about. A few years ago the price of high-class Shire stallions ran upwards of
a thousand pounds, which placed them beyond the reach of exporters;
but the reign of what may be called fancy prices appears to be
over, at least for a time, seeing that the general sale averages have
declined since that of Lord Llangattock in October, 1900, when the
record average of 226 1_s._ 8_d._ was made, although the best general
average for the sales of any single year was obtained in 1901, viz. 112 5_s._ 10_d._ for 633 animals, and it was during that year that the
highest price for Shires was obtained at an auction sale, the sum being
1550 guineas, given by Mr. Leopold Salomons, for the stallion Hendre
Champion, at the late Mr. Crisps sale at Girton. Other high-priced
stallions purchased by auction include Marmion II., 1400 guineas, and
Chancellor, 1100 guineas, both by Mr. Waresley Premier Duke,
1100 guineas, and Hendre Crown Prince, 1100 guineas, were two purchases
of Mr. These figures show that the
worth of a really good Shire stallion can hardly be estimated, and
it is certain that the market for this particular class of animal is
by no means glutted, but rather the reverse, as the number of males
offered at the stud sales is always limited, which proves that there
is room on the top for the stallion breeder, and with this fact in
view and the possible chance of an increased foreign trade in stallions
it behoves British breeders of Shires to see to it that there is no
falling off in the standard of the horses raised, to use the American
word, but rather that a continual improvement is aimed at, so that
visitors from horse-breeding countries may find what they want if they
come to the stud farm of the world.

The need to keep to the right lines and breed from good old stock
which has produced real stock-getting stallions cannot be too strongly
emphasised, for the reason that there is a possibility of the British
market being overstocked with females, with a corresponding dearth of
males, both stallions and geldings, and although this is a matter which
breeders cannot control they can at least patronise a strain of blood
famous for its males. The group of Premier--Nellie Blacklegs brothers,
Northwood, Hydrometer, Senator, and Calwich Topsman--may be quoted as
showing the advisability of continuing to use the same horse year after
year if colt foals are bred, and wanted, and the sire is a horse of
merit. With the number of breeders of Shire horses and the plentiful supply
of mares, together with the facilities offered by local stallion-hiring
societies, it ought not to be impossible to breed enough high-grade
sires to meet the home demand and leave a surplus for export as well,
and the latter of the class that will speak for themselves in other
countries, and lead to enquiries for more of the same sort. FEW HIGH PRICES FROM EXPORTERS

It is noteworthy that few, if any, of the high prices obtained for
Shires at public sales have come from exporters or buyers from abroad,
but from lovers of the heavy breed in England, who have been either
forming or replenishing studs, therefore, the almighty dollar has not
been responsible for the figures above quoted. Still it is probable
that with the opening up of the agricultural industry in Western
Canada, South Africa, and elsewhere, Shire stallions will be needed to
help the Colonial settlers to build up a breed of horses which will be
useful for both tillage and haulage purposes. The adaptability of the Shire horse to climate and country is well
known, and it is satisfactory for home breeders to hear that Mr. Martinez de Hoz has recently sold ten Shires, bred in Argentina, at an
average of 223 2_s._ 6_d._, one, a three-year-old, making 525. Meanwhile it might be a good investment if a syndicate of British
breeders placed a group of typical Shire horses in a few of the biggest
fairs or shows in countries where weighty horses are wanted, and thus
further the interests of the Shire abroad, and assist in developing the
export trade.

It may be added that during the summer of 1906, H.M. King Edward and
Lord Rothschild sent a consignment of Shires to the United States of
America for exhibition. CHAPTER XV

PROMINENT PRESENT-DAY STUDS


Seeing that Lord Rothschild has won the greatest number of challenge
cups and holds the record for having made the highest price, his name
is mentioned first among owners of famous studs. He joined the Shire Horse Society in February, 1891, and at the show
of 1892 made five entries for the London Show at which he purchased
the second prize three-year-old stallion Carbonite (by Carbon by
Lincolnshire Lad II.) He is
remembered by the writer as being a wide and weighty horse on short
legs which carried long hair in attendance, and this type has been
found at Tring Park ever since. In 1895 his lordship won first and
third with two chestnut fillies--Vulcans Flower by the Champion Vulcan
and Walkern Primrose by Hitchin Duke (by Bar None). The former won the
Filly Cup and was subsequently sold to help to found the famous stud
of Sir Walpole Greenwell at Marden Park, Surrey, the sum given being a
very high one for those days. The first championship was obtained with the mare Alston Rose in 1901,
which won like honours for Mr. R. W. Hudson in 1902, after costing him
750 guineas at the second sale at Tring Park, January 15, 1902. Solace, bred by King Edward, was the next champion mare from Lord
Rothschilds stud. Girton Charmer, winner of the Challenge Cup in
1905, was included in a select shipment of Shires sent to America (as
models of the breed) by our late lamented King and Lord Rothschild in
1906. Princess Beryl, Belle Cole, Chiltern Maid, were mares to win
highest honours for the stud, while a young mare which passed through
Lord Rothschilds hands, and realized a four-figure sum for him as
a two-year-old from the Devonshire enthusiasts, Messrs. W. and H.
Whitley, is Lorna Doone, the Champion mare of 1914. Champions Goalkeeper, the Tring record-breaker, has been mentioned,
so we can now refer to the successful stud of which he is the central
figure, viz. that owned by Sir Walpole Greenwell at Marden Park,
Woldingham, Surrey, who, as we have seen, bought a good filly from the
Tring Stud in 1895, the year in which he became a member of the Shire
Horse Society. At Lord Rothschilds first sale in 1898, he purchased
Windley Lily for 430 guineas, and Moorish Maiden, a three-year-old
filly, for 350, since when he has bid only for the best. At the
Tandridge dispersion sale he gave over a thousand pounds for the
Lockinge Forest King mare, Fuchsia of Tandridge, and her foal. Sir
Walpole was one of the first to profit by the Lockinge Forest King
blood, his filly, Marden Peach, by that sire having been a winner at
the Royal of 1908, while her daughter, Marden Constance, has had a
brilliant show career, so has Dunsmore Chessie, purchased from Mr. T.
Ewart as a yearling, twice London Champion mare. No sale has been held at Marden, but consignments have been sold at
Peterborough, so that the prefix is frequently met with. The stud owner who is willing to give 4305 for a two-year-old colt
deserves success. THE PRIMLEY STUD

At the Dunsmore Sale on February 14, 1907, Mr. W. Whitley purchased
Dunsmore Fuchsia (by Jameson), the London Cup winner of 1905 and 1906,
for 520 guineas, also Quality by the same sire, and these two won
second and third for him in London the same month, this being the first
show at which the Primley shires took honours. The purchase of Tatton Dray King, the Champion stallion of 1908, by
Messrs. W. and H. Whitley in the spring of 1909 for 3700 guineas
created quite a sensation, as it was an outstanding record, it stood so
for nearly four years. One of the most successful show mares in this--or any--stud is
Mollington Movement by Lockinge Forest King, but the reigning queen is
Lorna Doone, the London and Peterborough Champion of 1914, purchased
privately from the Tring Park Stud. Another built on the same lines
is Sussex Pride with which a Bucks tenant farmer, Mr. R. H. Keene,
won first and reserve champion at the London Show of 1913, afterwards
selling her to Messrs. Whitley, who again won with her in 1914. With
such animals as these Devonshire is likely to hold its own with Shires,
although they do not come from the district known to the law makers of
old as the breeding ground of the Great Horse.


THE PENDLEY FEMALES

One of the most successful exhibitors of mares, fillies, and foals, at
the shows of the past few seasons has been Mr. J. G. Williams, Pendley
Manor, Tring. Like other exhibitors already mentioned, the one under
notice owes much of his success to Lockinge Forest King. In 1908 Lord
Egertons Tatton May Queen was purchased for 420 guineas, she having
been first in London as a yearling and two-year-old; Bardon Forest
Princess, a reserve London Champion, and Barnfields Forest Queen, Cup
winner there, made a splendid team of winners by the sire named. At the
Tring Park sale of 1913 Mr. Williams gave the highest price made by
a female, 825 guineas, for Halstead Duchess VII., by Redlynch Forest
King. She won the Royal Championship at Bristol for him. One of the
later acquisitions is Snelston Lady, by Slipton King, Cup winner and
reserve Champion in London, 1914, as a three-year-old, first at the
Royal, and reserve Champion at Peterborough. Williams joined the
Shire Horse Society in 1906, since when he has won all but the London
Championship with his mares and fillies. A NEW STUD

After Champions Goalkeeper was knocked down Mr. Beck announced that
the disappointed bidder was Mr. C. R. H. Gresson, acting for the
Edgcote Shorthorn Company, Wardington, Banbury, his date of admission
to the Shire Horse Society being during that same month, February,
1913. Having failed to get the popular colt, his stable companion and
half brother, Stockman III., was purchased for 540 guineas, and shown
in London just after, where he won fourth prize. From this single entry
in 1913 the foundation of the stud was so rapid that seven entries
were made at the 1914 London Show. Fine Feathers was the first prize
yearling filly, Blackthorn Betty the second prize two-year-old filly,
the own bred Edgcote Monarch being the second prize yearling colt. After the show Lord Rothschilds first prize two-year colt, Orfold
Blue Blood, was bought, together with Normandy Jessie, the third prize
yearling colt; so with these two, Fine Feathers, Betty, Chirkenhill
Forest Queen, and Writtle Coming Queen, the Edgcote Shorthorn Co.,
Ltd., took a leading place at the shows of 1914. In future Edgcote
promises to be as famous for its Shires as it has hitherto been for its
Shorthorns. DUCAL STUDS

A very successful exhibitor of the past season has been his Grace
the Duke of Westminster, who owns a very good young sire in Eaton
Nunsuch--so good that he has been hired by the Peterborough Society. Shires have been bred on the Eaton Hall estate for many years, and the
stud contains many promising animals now. Mention must be made of the great interest taken in Shires by the Duke
of Devonshire who, as the Hon. Victor Cavendish, kept a first-class
stud at Holker, Lancs. At the Royal Show of 1909 (Gloucester) Holker
Mars was the Champion Shire stallion, Warton Draughtsman winning the
Norwich Royal Championship, and also that of the London Show of 1912
for his popular owner. OTHER STUDS

Among those who have done much to promote the breeding of the Old
English type of cart-horse, the name of Mr. At Blagdon, Malden, Surrey, he held a number of
stud sales in the eighties and nineties, to which buyers went for
massive-limbed Shires of the good old strains; those with a pedigree
which traced back to Honest Tom (_alias_ Little David), foaled in the
year 1769, to Wisemans Honest Tom, foaled in 1800, or to Samson a sire
weighing 1 ton 8 cwt. Later he had a stud at Billington, Beds, where
several sales were held, the last being in 1908, when Mr. Everard gave
860 guineas for the stallion, Lockinge Blagdon. Shortly before that he
sold Blagdon Benefactor for 1000 guineas. The prefix Birdsall has been seen in show catalogues for a number of
years, which mean that the animals holding it were bred, or owned, by
Lord Middleton, at Birdsall, York, he being one of the first noblemen
to found a stud, and he has ably filled the Presidential Chair of the
Shire Horse Society. As long ago as the 1892 London Show there were two
entries from Birdsall by Lord Middletons own sire, Northwood, to which
reference is made elsewhere. Another notable sire purchased by his lordship was Menestrel, first in
London, 1900 (by Hitchin Conqueror), his most famous son being Birdsall
Menestrel, dam Birdsall Darling by Northwood, sold to Lord Rothschild
as a yearling. As a two-year-old this colt was Cup winner and reserve
Champion, and at four he was Challenge Cup winner. A good bidder at
Shire sales, the breeder of a champion, and a consistent supporter of
the Shire breeding industry since 1883, it is regrettable that champion
honours have not fallen to Lord Middleton himself. Another stud, which was founded near Leeds, by Mr. A. Grandage, has
now been removed to Cheshire. Joining the Shire Horse Society in 1892,
his first entry in London was made in 1893, and four years later, in
1897, Queen of the Shires (by Harold) won the mare Championship for Mr. In 1909 the winning four-year-old stallion, Gaer Conqueror, of
Lincolnshire Lad descent, was bought from Mr. Edward Green for 825
guineas, which proved to be a real good investment for Mr. Grandage,
seeing that he won the championship of the Shire Horse Show for the two
following years, 1910 and 1911. Candidates from the Bramhope Stud, Monks Heath, Chelford, Cheshire, are
likely to give a very good account of themselves in the days to come. Among those who will have the best Shires is Sir Arthur Nicholson,
Highfield, Leek, Staffs. His first London success was third prize with
Rokeby Friar (by Harold) as a two-year-old in 1893, since which date he
has taken a keen personal interest in the breeding of Shire horses, and
has the honour of having purchased Pailton Sorais, the highest-priced
mare yet sold by auction. At the Tring sale of 1913 he gave the second
highest price of that day, viz., 1750 guineas for the three-year-old
stallion, Blacklands Kingmaker, who won first prize for him in London
ten days after, but, alas, was taken ill during his season, for the
Winslow Shire Horse Society, and died. Another bad loss to Sir Arthur
and to Shire breeders generally was the death of Redlynch Forest King,
seeing that he promised to rival his renowned sire, Lockinge Forest
King, for begetting show animals. Among the many good ones recently exhibited from the stud may be
mentioned Leek Dorothy, twice first in London, and Leek Challenger,
first as a yearling, second as a two-year-old, both of these being by
Redlynch Forest King. With such as these coming on there is a future
before the Shires of Sir Arthur Nicholson. The name of Muntz is familiar to all Shire breeders owing to the fame
achieved by the late Sir P. Albert Muntz. F. E. Muntz,
of Umberslade, Hockley Heath, Warwickshire, a nephew of the Dunsmore
Baronet, joined the Shire Horse Society, and has since been President. Quite a good share of prizes have fallen to him, including the Cup for
the best old stallion in London both in 1913 and 1914. The winner,
Danesfield Stonewall, was reserved for the absolute championship on
both occasions, and this typical Old English Black had a host of
admirers, while Jones--the Umberslade stud groom--will never forget his
parade before His Majesty King George at the 1913 show. It used to be said that Shires did not flourish south of London, but
Mr. Leopold Salomons, Norbury Park, Dorking, has helped to prove
otherwise. Beginning with one entry at the 1899 Show, he has entered
quite a string for several years, and the stud contains a number of
high-class stallions, notably Norbury Menestrel, winner of many prizes,
and a particularly well-bred and promising sire, and King of Tandridge
(by Lockinge Forest King), purchased by Mr. Salomons at the Tandridge
dispersion sale for 1600 guineas. At the sale during the London Show of
1914 Mr. Salomons realized the highest price with his own bred Norbury
Coronation, by Norbury Menestrel, who, after winning third prize in his
class, cost the Leigh Shire Horse Society 850 guineas, Norbury George,
by the same sire, winning fifth prize, and making 600 guineas, both
being three years old. This is the kind of advertisement for a stud,
no matter where its situation. Another Surrey enthusiast is Sir Edward Stern, Fan Court, Chertsey, who
has been a member of the Shire Horse Society since 1903. He purchased
Danesfield Stonewall from Mr. R. W. Hudson, and won several prizes
before re-selling him to Mr. His stud horses now includes
Marathon II., champion at the Oxford County Show of 1910. Mares and
fillies have also been successfully shown at the Royal Counties, and
other meetings in the south of England from the Fan Court establishment. A fine lot of Shires have been got together, at Tarnacre House,
Garstang, and the first prize yearling at the London Show of 1914,
Kings Choice, was bred by Messrs. J. E. and A. W. Potter, who also won
first with Monnow Drayman, the colt with which Mr. John Ferneyhough
took first prize as a three-year-old. With stallions of his type and
mares as wide, deep, and well-bred as Champions Choice (by Childwick
Champion), Shires full of character should be forthcoming from these
Lancashire breeders. The Carlton Stud continues to flourish, although its founder, the late
Mr. James Forshaw, departed this life in 1908. His business abilities
and keen judgment have been inherited by his sons, one of whom judged
in London last year (1914), as his father did in 1900. This being a
record in Shire Horse history for father and son to judge at the great
Show of the breed. Carlton has always been famous for its stallions. It has furnished
London winners from the first, including the Champions Stroxton Tom
(1902 and 1903), Present King II. (1906), and Stolen Duchess, the
Challenge Cup winning mare of 1907. Forshaw and his sons are too numerous
to mention in detail. Another very
impressive stallion was Whats Wanted, the sire of Mr. A. C. Duncombes
Premier (also mentioned in another chapter), and a large family of
celebrated sons. His great grandsire was (Dacks) Matchless 1509, a
great sire in the Fen country, which travelled through Moulton Eaugate
for thirteen consecutive seasons. Forshaws opinion
of him is given on another page. One of the most successful Carlton
sires of recent years has been Drayman XXIII., whose son, Tatton Dray
King, won highest honours in London, and realized 3700 guineas when
sold. Seeing that prizes were being won by stallions from this stud
through several decades of last century, and that a large number have
been travelled each season since, while a very large export trade has
been done by Messrs. Forshaw and Sons, it need hardly be said that the
influence of this stud has been world-wide. It is impossible to mention all the existing studs in a little book
like this, but three others will be now mentioned for the reason that
they are carried on by those who formerly managed successful studs,
therefore they have kept the ball rolling, viz. Thomas
Ewart, at Dunsmore, who made purchases on his own behalf when the stud
of the late Sir P. A. Muntz--which he had managed for so long--was
dispersed, and has since brought out many winners, the most famous of
which is Dunsmore Chessie. R. H. Keene, under whose care the Shires
of Mr. R. W. Hudson (Past-President of the Shire Horse Society) at
Danesfield attained to such prominence, although not actually taking
over the prefix, took a large portion of the land, and carries on Shire
breeding quite successfully on his own account. The other of this class to be named is Mr. C. E. McKenna, who took over
the Bardon stud from Mr. B. N. Everard when the latter decided to let
the Leicestershire stud farm where Lockinge Forest King spent his last
and worthiest years. Such enterprise gives farmers and men of moderate
means faith in the great and growing industry of Shire Horse breeding. Of stud owners who have climbed to prominence, although neither
landowners, merchant princes, nor erstwhile stud managers, may be
mentioned Mr. James Gould, Crouchley Lymm, Cheshire, whose Snowdon
Menestrel was first in his class and reserve for the Stallion Cup at
the 1914 London Show; Messrs. E. and J. Whinnerah, Warton, Carnforth,
who won seventh prize with Warton Draughtsman in 1910, afterwards
selling him to the Duke of Devonshire, who reached the top of the tree
with him two years later. Henry Mackereth, the new London judge of 1915, entered the
exhibitors list at the London Show of 1899. Perhaps his most notable
horse is Lunesdale Kingmaker, with which Lord Rothschild won fourth
prize in 1907, he being the sire of Messrs. Potters Kings Choice
above mentioned. Many other studs well meriting notice could be dealt with did time and
space permit, including that of a tenant farmer who named one of his
best colts Sign of Riches, which must be regarded as an advertisement
for the breed from a farmers point of view. Of past studs only one will be mentioned, that of the late Sir Walter
Gilbey, the dispersal having taken place on January 13, 1915. The first
Shire sale at Elsenham was held in 1885--thirty years ago--when the
late Lord Wantage gave the highest price, 475 guineas, for Glow, by
Spark, the average of 172 4_s._ 6_d._ being unbeaten till the Scawby
sale of 1891 (which was 198 17_s._ 3_d._). Sir Walter has been mentioned as one of the founders of the Shire Horse
Society; his services in aid of horse breeding were recognized by
presenting him with his portrait in oils, the subscribers numbering
1250. The presentation was made by King Edward (then Prince of Wales)
at the London Show of 1891. CHAPTER XVI

THE FUTURE OUTLOOK


This book is written when war, and all that pertains to it, is the
absorbing topic. In fact, no other will be listened to. What is
the good of talking about such a peaceful occupation as that of
agriculture while the nation is fighting for its very existence? To a
certain extent this can be understood, but stock breeding, and more
particularly horse breeding, cannot be suspended for two or three
seasons and then resumed without causing a gap in the supply of horses
coming along for future use. The cry of the army authorities is for more and more men, together
with a demand for a constant supply of horses of many types, including
the weight-moving War Horse, and if the supply is used up, with no
provision being made for a quantity of four-footed recruits to haul the
guns or baggage waggons in the days to come, the British Army, and
most others, will be faced with a problem not easily solved. The motor-mad mechanic may think that his chance has come, but generals
who have to lead an army over water-logged plains, or snow-covered
mountains, will demand horses, hitherto--and henceforth--indispensable
for mounting soldiers on, rushing their guns quickly into position, or
drawing their food supplies and munitions of war after them. When the mechanic has provided horseless vehicles to do all this,
horse breeding can be ignored by fighting men--not before. But horses,
particularly draft horses, are needed for commercial use. So far, coal
merchants are horse users, while brewers, millers, and other lorry
users have not altogether discarded the horse-drawn vehicle. For taking loads to and from the landing stage at Liverpool heavy
horses will be in great demand after the war--perhaps greater than they
have ever been. The railways will continue to exist, and, while they
do, powerful Shire geldings must be employed; no other can put the
necessary weight into the collar for shunting loaded trucks. During the autumn of 1914 no other kind of advice--although they got
plenty of it--was so freely and so frequently given to farmers as this,
grow more wheat.

If this has been acted upon, and there is no doubt that it has, at
least to some extent, it follows, as sure as the night follows the day,
that more horses will be required by those who grow the wheat. The land
has to be ploughed and cultivated, the crop drilled, cut, carted home
and delivered to mill, or railway truck, all meaning horse labour. It may happen that large farmers will use motor ploughs or steam
waggons, but these are beyond the reach of the average English farmer. Moreover, when bought they depreciate in value, whether working or
standing idle, which is exactly what the Shire gelding or brood mare
does not do. If properly cared for and used they appreciate in value
from the time they are put to work until they are six or seven years
old, and by that age most farmers have sold their non-breeders to make
room for younger animals. Horse power is therefore the cheapest and
most satisfactory power for most farmers to use in front of field
implements and farm waggons, a fact which is bound to tell in favour of
the Shire in the coming times of peace which we anticipate. When awarding prizes for the best managed farm, the judges appointed by
the Royal Agricultural Society of England are instructed to consider--

General Management with a view to profit, so that any breed of live
stock which leaves a profit would help a competitor. Only a short time ago a Warwickshire tenant farmer told his landlord
that Shire horses had enabled himself and many others to attend the
rent audit, with a smile on his face and the rent in his pocket.

Most landlords are prepared to welcome a tenant in that state,
therefore they should continue to encourage the industry as they have
done during the past twenty-five years. Wars come to an end--the Thirty Years War did--so let us remember
the Divine promise to Noah after the flood, While the earth remaineth
seedtime and harvest  shall not cease, Gen. As long as there is
sowing and reaping to be done horses--Shire horses--will be wanted. Far back in the ages
      The plough with wreaths was crowned;
    The hands of kings and sages
      Entwined the chaplet round;
    Till men of spoil disdained the toil
      By which the world was nourished,
    And dews of blood enriched the soil
      Where green their laurels flourished:
    Now the world her fault repairs--
      The guilt that stains her story;
    And weeps; her crimes amid the cares
      That formed her earliest glory. The glory, earned in deadly fray,
      Shall fade, decay and perish. Honour waits, oer all the Earth
      Through endless generations,
    The art that calls her harvests forth
      And feeds the expectant nations.




INDEX


    A

    Alston Rose, champion mare 1901  104

    Armour-clad warriors, 1, 7

    Army horses, 6

    Ashbourne Foal Show, 80

    Attention to feet, 42

    Aurea, champion mare, 18, 65

    Authors Preface, v

    Average prices, 76


    B

    Back breeding, value of, 11, 13, 39

    Bakewell, Robert, 2, 22, 54

    Bardon Extraordinary, champion gelding, 65, 78

    Bardon Stud, 118

    Bar None, 80

    Bearwardcote Blaze, 60

    Bedding, 35

    Birdsall Menestrel, 84, 111

    ---- stud, 110

    Black horses, Bakewells, 55

    Black horses from Flanders, 58

    Blagdon Stud, 110

    Blending Shire and Clydesdale breeds, 59

    Boiled barley, 36

    Bradley, Mr. John, 83

    Bramhope stud, 111

    Breeders, farmer, 27

    Breeders, prizes for, 65

    Breeding from fillies, 17

    Breeding, time for, 31

    Bury Victor Chief, champion in 1892  68, 69

    Buscot Harold, champion stallion, 17, 65


    C

    Calwich Stud, 61, 80

    Canada, 101

    Carbonite, 103

    Care of the feet, 42

    Carlton Stud, 116

    Cart-colts, 23

    Cart-horses, 54

    Castrating colts, 39

    Certificate of Soundness, 62

    Champions Goalkeeper, champion in 1913 and 1914  67, 104

    Champions bred at Sandringham, 3

    Cheap sires, 12

    Clark, Mr. A. H., 79

    Clydesdales, 58

    Coats of mail, 51

    Cokes, Hon. E., dispersion sale, 3

    Colonies, 94

    Colour, 38

    Composition of food, 33

    Condition and bloom, 36

    Cost of feeding, 33

    Cost of shipping Shires, 98

    Crisp, Mr. F., 63, 70

    Cross, Mr. J. P., 81

    Crushed oats and bran, 31


    D

    Dacks Matchless, 82, 116

    Danesfield Stonewall, 114

    Details of shows, 60

    Development grant, 14

    Devonshire, Duke of, 109

    Doubtful breeders, 37

    Draught horses, 23

    Drayman XXIII, 117

    Drew, Lawrence, of Merryton, 59

    Duncombe, Mr. A. C., 69, 80

    Dunsmore Chessie, 81, 105

    ---- Gloaming, 3, 72

    ---- Jameson, 80

    ---- Stud, 80


    E

    Eadie, Mr. James, 65, 78

    Early breeding, 17

    Eaton Hall Stud, 109

    Eaton Nunsuch, 109

    Edgcote Shorthorn Companys Stud, 108

    Effect of war on cost of feeding, 40

    Egerton of Tatton, Lord, 2, 77

    Ellesmere, Earl of, 2, 7, 70

    Elsenham Cup, 18, 79

    Elsenham Hall Stud, 119

    English cart-horse, 2

    Entries at London shows, 61

    Everard, Mr. B. N., 118

    Ewart, Mr. T., 117

    Exercise, 23, 27

    Export trade, 92, 95


    F

    Facts and figures, 61

    Fattening horses, 26

    Feet, care of, 42

    Fillies, breeding from, 17

    Flemish horses, 1, 53, 57

    Flora, by Lincolnshire Lad, 60

    Foals, time for, 31

    Foals, treatment of, 32

    Foods and feeding, 30

    Formation of Shire Horse Society, 13

    Forshaw, Mr. James, 80, 116

    Foundation stock, 9

    Founding a stud, 8

    Freeman-Mitford, Mr., now Lord Redesdale, 62

    Future outlook, 21


    G

    Gaer Conqueror, 112

    Galbraith, Mr. A., 92

    Geldings at the London Show, 64

    ----, demand for, 15, 24

    ----, production of, 15

    Gilbey, Sir Walter, 2, 14, 51, 54, 119

    Girton Charmer, champion in 1905  104

    Glow, famous mare, 16, 119

    Good workers, 23

    Gould, Mr. James, 118

    Grading up, 8

    Grandage, Mr. A., 111

    Green, Mr. E., 112

    Greenwell, Sir Walpole, 105

    Griffin, Mr. F. W., 79


    H

    Halstead Duchess VII., 107

    Halstead Royal Duke, champion in 1909  68, 83

    Haltering, 28

    Hamilton, Duke of, importations, 58

    Harold, 60

    Hastings, Battle of, 53

    Hay, 33

    Heath, Mr. R., 85

    Hendersons, Sir Alexander, successes in 1898  64

    Hendre Champion, 99

    Hendre Crown Prince, 70, 99

    Hereditary diseases, 76

    High prices, 69

    Highfield Stud, Leek, 112

    History of the Shire, 51

    Hitchin Conqueror, London champion, 1891, 62

    Honest Tom, 74

    Horse, population and the war, 18, 120

    Horse-power cheapest, 123

    Horses for the army, 6

    Horses at Bannockburn, 52

    How to show a Shire, 48

    Hubbard, Mr. Matthew, 79

    Huntingdon, Earl of, importations, 58


    I

    Importations from Flanders and Holland, 53, 57

    Inherited complaints, 10


    J

    Judges at London Shire Shows, 1890-1915  87


    K

    Keene, Mr. R. H., 117

    Keevil, Mr. Clement, 110

    King Edward VII., 3, 73, 86, 102

    King George, 114


    L

    Lady Victoria, Lord Wantages prize filly, 17

    Land suitable, 45

    Landlords and Shire breeding, 3, 15

    Leading, 28

    Lessons in showing, 50

    Letting out sires, 14

    Lincolnshire Lad 1196  59

    Linseed meal, 36

    Liverpool heavy horses 122

    Llangattock, Lord, 5, 77

    Local horse breeding societies, 15

    Lockinge Cup, 78

    Lockinge Forest King, 81

    Lockington Beauty, 83

    London Show, 61

    Longford Hall sale, 3

    Lorna Doone, 70, 104


    M

    McKenna, Mr. C. E., 118

    Mackereth, Mr. H., 119

    Management, 21, 23

    Manger feeding, 33

    Maple, Sir J. Blundell, 72

    Marden Park Stud, 105

    Mares, management of, 17

    ----, selection of, 8

    Markeaton Royal Harold, 17, 60, 65

    Marmion, 70

    Mating, 20, 22

    Members of Shire Horse Society, 63

    Menestrel, 111

    Michaelis, Mr. Max, 74

    Middleton, Lord, 84, 110

    Minnehaha, champion mare, 64

    Mollington Movement, 106

    Muntz, Mr. F. E., 113

    Muntz, Sir P. Albert, 5, 72, 80


    N

    Nellie Blacklegs, 84

    Nicholson, Sir Arthur, 74, 112

    Norbury Menestrel, 114

    Norbury Park Stud, 114

    Numbers exported, 96


    O

    Oats, 33

    Old English cart-horse, 2, 13, 51

    ---- ---- war horse, 1, 50, 57

    Origin and progress, 51

    Outlook for the breed, 120

    Over fattening, 26


    P

    Pailton Sorais, champion mare, 74, 112

    Pedigrees, 8

    Pendley Stud, 107

    Ploughing, 2, 22, 57

    Popular breed, a, 1

    Potter, Messrs. J. E. and H. W., 115

    Premier, 69, 84

    Preparing fillies for mating, 18

    Primley Stud, 106

    Prince Harold, 77

    Prince William, 69, 78

    Prizes at Shire shows, 63

    Prominent breeders, 103

    ---- Studs, 102

    Prospects of the breed, 121


    R

    Rearing and feeding, 30

    Records, a few, 77

    Redlynch Forest King, 113

    Registered sires, 13

    Rent-paying horses, vi, 11, 124

    Repository sales, 5

    Rickford Coming King, 85

    Rock salt, 35

    Rogers, Mr. A. C., 67

    Rokeby Harold, champion in 1893 and 1895  60, 66, 68

    Roman invasion, 51

    Rothschild, Lord, 68, 102, 103

    Rowell, Mr. John, 69, 95

    Russia, 93


    S

    Sales noted, 4, 76

    Salomons, Mr. Leopold, 99

    Sandringham Stud, 3, 73, 86

    Scawby sale, 63

    Select shipment to U.S.A., 102

    Selecting the dams, 9

    Selection of mares, 8

    ---- of sires, 12

    Separating colts and fillies, 39

    Sheds, 35

    Shire Horse Society, 2, 13, 91, 93

    Shire or war horse, 1, 51

    ---- sales, 69, 76

    Shires for war, 6, 121

    ---- as draught horses, 1

    ----, feeding, 30

    ---- feet, care of, 42

    ---- for farm work, 1, 22

    ---- for guns, 6

    ----, formation of society, 13, 93

    ----, judges, 81

    Shires, London Show, 61

    ----, management, 12

    ----, origin and progress of, 51

    ---- pedigrees kept, 8

    ----, prices, 69, 76

    ----, prominent studs, 103

    ----, sales of, 76

    ----, showing, 48

    ----, weight of, 6

    ----, working, 25

    Show condition, 26

    Show, London, 60

    Showing a Shire, 48

    Sires, selection of, 12

    Smith-Carington, Mr. H. H., 73

    Solace, champion mare, 3

    Soils suitable for horse breeding, 45

    Soundness, importance of, 9

    Spark, 69

    Stallions, 12

    Starlight, champion mare 1891  62, 78

    Stern, Sir E., 115

    Street, Mr. Frederick, 2

    Stroxton Tom, 116

    Stud Book, 2, 13, 91

    Stud, founding a, 8

    Studs, present day, 103

    ---- sales, 4, 76

    Stuffing show animals, 26, 37

    Suitable foods and system of feeding, 30

    Sutton-Nelthorpe, Mr. R. N., 63, 83

    System of feeding, 30


    T

    Tatton Dray King, 71

    ---- Herald, 71

    Team work, 23

    The Great Horse, Sir Walter Gilbeys book, 14, 51, 54

    Training for show, 48

    ---- for work, 27

    Treatment of foals, 32

    Tring Park Stud, 4, 103

    Two-year-old champion stallions, 67

    Two-year-old fillies, 17


    U

    United States, Shires in the, 3, 92

    Unsoundness, 10


    V

    Value of pedigrees, 8

    ---- of soundness, 10

    Veterinary inspection, 62

    Vulcan, champion in 1891  70, 79


    W

    Wantage, Lord, 2, 78

    War demand, 121

    War horse, vi, 51, 91

    War and breeding, 18

    Warton Draughtsman, 118

    Wealthy stud-owners, 14

    Weaning time, 33

    Weight of Armoured Knight, 51

    Weight of Shires, 6

    Welshpool Shire Horse Society, 70

    Westminster, Duke of, 109

    Whats Wanted, 116

    Whinnerah, Messrs. E. and J., 118

    Whitley, Messrs. W. and H., 106

    Williams, Mr. J. G., 107

    Wintering, 40

    ---- foals, 35

    Winterstoke, Lord, 86

    Work of Shire Horse Society, 13, 60

    Working stallions, 25

    Worlds war, v, 120

    Worsley Stud, 7


    Y

    Yards, 35

                                THE END

VINTON & COMPANY, LTD., 8, BREAMS BUILDINGS, CHANCERY LANE, LONDON, E.C. Till this more careful examination of the province shall have been
accomplished, our history of the style cannot be carried back beyond the
Hejira. Even then very great difficulty exists in arranging the
materials, and in assigning correct dates to the various examples. In
the works of Texier,[243] Dubois,[244] Brosset,[245] and Grimm[246] some
forty or fifty churches are described and figured in more or less
detail, but in most cases the dates assigned to them are derived from
written testimony only, the authors not having sufficient knowledge of
the style to be able to check the very fallacious evidence of the
_litera scripta_. In consequence of this, the dates usually given are
those of the building of the first church on the spot, whereas, in a
country so troubled by persecution as Armenia, the original church may
have been rebuilt several times, and what we now see is often very
modern indeed. Among the churches now existing in Armenia, the oldest seems to be that
in the village of Dighour near Ani. There are neither traditions nor
inscriptions to assist in fixing its date; but, from the simplicity of
its form and its quasi-classical details, it is evidently older than any
other known examples, and with the aid of the information conveyed in De
Vogs recent publications we can have little hesitation in assigning
it to the 7th century. [247] The church is not large, being only 95 ft. Internally its design is characterised by
extreme solidity and simplicity, and all the details are singularly
classical in outline. The dome is an ellipse, timidly constructed, with
far more than the requisite amount of abutment. One of its most marked
peculiarities is the existence of two external niches placed in
projecting wings and which were no doubt intended to receive altars. Its
flanks are ornamented by three-quarter columns of debased classical
design. These support an architrave which is bent over the heads of the
windows as in the churches of Northern Syria erected during the 6th
century. Its western and lateral doorways are ornamented by horse-shoe arches,
which are worth remarking here, as it is a feature which the Saracenic
architects used so currently and employed for almost every class of
opening. The oldest example of this form known is in the doorway of the
building called Takt-i-Gero on Mount Zagros. [248] In this little shrine,
all the other details are so purely and essentially classic that the
building must be dated before or about the time of Constantine. The
horse-shoe arch again occurs in the church at Dana on the Euphrates in
540. [249] At Dighour we find it used, not in construction but as an
ornamental feature. The stilting of the arch was evidently one of those
experiments which the architects of that time were making in order to
free themselves from the trammels of the Roman semi-circular arch. The
Saracens carried it much further and used it with marked success, but
this is probably the last occasion in which it was employed by a
Christian architect as a decorative expedient. The six buttresses, with their offsets, which adorn the faade, are
another curious feature in the archology of this church. If they are
integral parts of the original design, which there seems no reason to
doubt, they anticipate by several centuries the appearance of this form
in Western Europe. West Elevation of Church at Usunlar. One of the oldest and least altered of the Armenian churches seems to be
that of Usunlar, said to have been erected by the Catholicos Jean IV. In plan it looks like a peristylar
temple, but the verandahs which surround it are only low arcades, and
have very little affinity with classical forms. These are carried round
the front, but there pierced only by the doorway. The elevation, as here
exhibited, is simple, but sufficiently expresses the internal
arrangements, and, with an octagonal dome, forms, when seen in
perspective, a pleasing object from every point of view. Both plan and
design are, however, exceptional in the province. A far more usual
arrangement is that found at Pitzounda in Abkassia, which may be
considered as the typical form of an Armenian church. It is said to have
been erected by the Emperor Justinian, and there is nothing in the style
or ornamentation of the lower part that seems to gainsay its being his. But the plan is so like many that belong to a much later age, that we
must hesitate before we can feel sure that it has not been rebuilt at
some more modern date. Its cupola certainly belongs to a period long
after the erection of Sta. 327),
when the dome pierced with tall windows had become the fashionable form
of dome in the Byzantine school. Its interior, also, is unusually tall,
and the pointed arches under the dome look like integral parts of the
design, and when so employed belong certainly to a much more modern
date. On the whole, therefore, it seems that this church, as we now see
it, may have been rebuilt in the 9th or 10th century. Whatever its date, it is a pleasing example of the style. Externally it
is devoid of ornament except what is obtained by the insertion of tiles
between the courses of the stone, and a similar relief to the windows;
but even this little introduction of colour gives it a gay and cheerful
appearance, more than could easily be obtained by mouldings or carving
in stone. The upper galleries of the nave and the chapels of the choir are also
well expressed in the external design, and altogether, for a small
churchwhich it is (only 137 ft. by 75)it is as pleasing a composition
as could easily be found. The idea that the date of this church is considerably more modern than
Dubois and others are inclined to assign to it, is confirmed by a
comparison of its plan with that at Bedochwinta, which Brosset
determines from inscriptions to belong to the date 1556-1575; and the
knowledge lately acquired tends strongly to the conviction that this
plan of church belongs to a later period in the Middle Ages, though it
is difficult to determine when it was introduced, and it may be only a
continuation of a much earlier form. One other church of this part of the world seems to claim especial
mention, that of Mokwi, built in the 10th century, and painted as we
learn from inscriptions, between 1080 and 1125. It is a large and
handsome church, but its principal interest lies in the fact that in
dimensions and arrangement it is almost identical with the
contemporaneous church of Sta. Sophia at Novogorod, showing a connection
between the two countries which will be more particularly pointed out
hereafter. It is now very much ruined, and covered with a veil of
creepers which prevents its outward form from being easily
distinguished. [250]]

As will be perceived, its plan is only an extension of the two last
mentioned, having five aisles instead of three; but it is smaller in
scale and more timid in execution. The church which it most resembles is
that at Trabala in Syria (Woodcut No. 330), which is certainly of an
earlier date than any we are acquainted with further east. Practically
the same plan occurs at Athens (Woodcut No. 338), and at Mistra (Woodcut
No. 339), but these seem on a smaller scale than at Mokwi, so that it
may be considered as the typical form of a Neo-Byzantine church for four
or five centuries, and it would consequently be unsafe to attempt to fix
a date from its peculiarities. Plan of Church at Etchmiasdin. Interesting as these may be in an historical point of view, the most
important ecclesiastical establishment in this part of the world is that
of Etchmiasdin. Here are four churches built on the spots from which,
according to tradition, rose the two arches or rainbows, crossing one
another at right angles, on which our Saviour is said to have sat when
he appeared to St. They consequently ought to be at the four
angles of a square, or rectangle of some sort, but this is far from
being the case. The principal of these churches is that whose plan is
represented in Woodcut No. It stands in the centre of a large
square, surrounded by ecclesiastical buildings, and is on the whole
rather an imposing edifice. Its porch is modern; so also, comparatively
speaking, is its dome; but the plan, if not the greater part of the
substructure, is ancient, and exhibits the plainness and simplicity
characteristic of its age. The other three churches lay claim to as
remote a date of foundation as this, but all have been so altered in
modern times that they have now no title to antiquity. The idea that the churches at Pitzounda and Bedochwinta must be
comparatively modern is confirmed by comparing their plan with that of
Kouthais, a church which there seems no reasonable ground for doubting
was founded in 1007, and erected, pretty much as we now find it, in the
early part of the 11th century. It has neither coupled piers nor pointed
arches, but is adorned externally with reed-like pilasters and elaborate
frets, such as were certainly employed at Ani in the course of the 11th
century. 355) of one of its windows
exhibits the Armenian style of decoration of this age, but is such as
certainly was not employed before this time, though with various
modifications it became typical of the style at its period of greatest
development. Even Etchmiasdin, however, sinks into insignificance, in an
architectural point of view, when compared with Ani, which was the
capital of Armenia during its period of greatest unity and elevation,
and was adorned by the Bagratide dynasty with a series of buildings
which still strike the traveller with admiration, at least for the
beauty of their details; for, like all churches in this part of the
world, they are very small. If, however, the cathedral at Ani is
interesting to the architect from its style, it is still more so to the
archologist from its date, since there seems no reason to doubt that it
was built in the year 1010, as recorded in an inscription on its walls. This, perhaps, might be put on one side as a mistake, if it were not
that there are two beautiful inscriptions on the faade, one of which is
dated 1049, the other 1059. To this we must add our knowledge that the
city was sacked by Alp Arslan in 1064, and that the dynasty which alone
could erect such a monument was extinguished in 1080. With all this
evidence, it is startling to find a church not only with pointed arches
but with coupled piers and all the characteristics of a complete
pointed-arch style, such as might be found in Italy or Sicily not
earlier than the 13th century. This peculiarity is, however, confined to
the constructive parts of the interior. The plan is that of Pitzounda or
Bedochwinta, modified only by the superior constructive arrangement
which the pointed arch enabled the architects to introduce; and
externally the only pointed arch anywhere to be detected, is in the
transept, where the arch of the vault is simulated to pass through to
the exterior. In the plan and elevation of the building will be observed a peculiarity
which was afterwards almost universal in the style. It is the angular
recess which marks the form of the apses outside without breaking the
main lines of the building. In the lateral elevation of this cathedral
(Woodcut No. 358) they are introduced on each side of the portal where
the construction did not require them, in order to match those at the
east end. But in the Cathedral at Samthawis (Woodcut No. 359) they are
seen in their proper places on each side of the central apse. Though
this church was erected between the years 1050-1079, we find these
niches adorned with a foliation (Woodcut No. 360) very like what we are
accustomed to consider the invention of the 14th century in Europe,
though even more elegant than anything of its class used by the Gothic
architects. At Sandjerli, not far from Ani, is another church, which from
inscriptions translated by M. Brosset, and from sections given by him,
appears to belong to the same date (1033-1044), and to possess coupled
columns and pointed arches like those of the cathedral of Ani, which
indeed it resembles in many points, and which renders the date above
given highly probable. East Elevation of Chapel at Samthawis. The plans above quoted may probably be taken as those most typical of
the style, but in no part of the world are the arrangements of churches
so various. All being small, there were no constructive difficulties to
be encountered, and as no congregation was to be accommodated, the
architects apparently considered themselves at liberty to follow their
fancies in any manner that occurred to them. The consequence is that the
plans of Armenian churches defy classification; some are square, or
rectangles of every conceivable proportion of length to breadth, some
octagons or hexagons, and some of the most indescribable irregularity. Frequently two, three, or four are grouped and joined together. In some
instances the sacred number of seven are coupled together in one design,
though more generally each little church is an independent erection; but
they are all so small that their plans are of comparatively little
importance. No grandeur of effect or poetry of perspective can be
obtained without considerable dimensions, and these are not to be found
in Armenia. (From Layards Nineveh and
Babylon.)]

There are also some examples of circular churches, but these are far
from being numerous. Generally speaking they are tombs, or connected
with sepulchral rites, and are indeed mere amplifications of the usual
tombs of the natives of the country, which are generally little models
of the domes of Armenian churches placed on the ground, though perhaps
it would be more correct to say that the domes were copied from the
tombs than the reverse. The most elegant of all those hitherto made known is one found at Ani,
illustrated in Woodcuts Nos. Notwithstanding the smallness of
its dimensions, it is one of the most elegant sepulchral chapels known. Another on a larger scale (Woodcut No. This tomb shows all the peculiarities of the Armenian
style of the 11th or 12th century. Though so much larger, it is by no
means so beautiful as the last mentioned tomb at Ani. In its
ornamentation a further refinement is introduced, inasmuch as the
reed-like columns are tied together by true love-knots instead of
capitalsa freak not uncommon either in Europe at the same age, or in
the East at the present day, but by no means to be recommended as an
architectural expedient. With scarcely an exception, all the buildings in the Armenian provinces
are so small that they would hardly deserve a place in a history of
architecture were it not for the ingenuity of their plans and the
elegance of their details. The beauty of the latter is so remarkable
that, in order to convey a correct notion of the style, it would be
necessary to illustrate them to an extent incompatible with the scope of
this work. In them too will be found much that has hitherto been
ascribed to other sources. 364), for
instance, would generally be put down as Saracenic of the best age, but
it belongs, with a great deal more quite as elegant, to one of the
churches at Ani; and the capital from Gelathi (Woodcut No. 365) would
not excite attention if found in Ireland. The interlacing scrolls which
occupy its head are one of the most usual as well as one of the most
elegant modes of decoration employed in the province, and are applied
with a variety and complexity nowhere else found in stone, though they
may be equalled in some works illustrated by the pen. Besides, however, its beauty in an artistic point of view, this basket
pattern, as it is sometimes called, is still more so as an Ethnographic
indication which, when properly investigated, may lead to the most
important conclusions. 366, 367, and
368, taken from churches at a now deserted village called Ish Khan, will
serve to explain its more usual forms; but it occurs almost everywhere
in the Armenian architectural province, and with as infinite a variety
of details as are to be found with its employment in Irish manuscripts. Window in small Church at Ish Khan, Tortoom. Jamb of doorway at Ish Khan Church, Armenia. Out of Armenia it occurs in the church at Kurtea el Argyisch in
Wallachia (Woodcut No. 385), and is found in Hungary and Styria, and no
antiquary will probably fail to recognise it as the most usual and
beautiful pattern on Irish crosses and Scotch sculptured stones. On the
other hand it occurs frequently in the monolithic deepdans or lamp-posts
and in the temples on the Canarese or West Coast of India, and in all
these instances with so little change of form that it is almost
impossible that these examples should be independent inventions. Still
the gaps in the sequence are so great that it is very difficult to see
how they could emanate from one centre. Few, however, who know anything
of the early architecture of Ireland can fancy that it did come from
Rome across Great Britain, but that it must have had its origin further
east, among some people using groups of churches and small cells,
instead of congregational basilicas. So far, too, as we can yet see, it
is to the East we must look for the original design of the mysterious
round towers which form so characteristic a feature of Irish
architecture, and were afterwards so conspicuous as minars in the East,
and nowhere more so than in Armenia. Recent researches, too, are making
it more and more clear that Nestorian churches did exist all down the
West Coast of India from a very early period, so that it would not be
impossible that from Persia and Armenia they introduced the favourite
style of ornament. All this may seem idle speculation, and it may turn out that the
similarities are accidental, but at present it certainly does not look
as if they were, and if they do emanate from a common centre, tracing
them back to their original may lead to such curious ethnological and
historical conclusions that it is at all events worth while pointing
them out in order that others may pursue the investigation to its
legitimate conclusion. Taken altogether, Armenian architecture is far more remarkable for
elegance than for grandeur, and possesses none of that greatness of
conception or beauty of outline essential to an important architectural
style. It is still worthy of more attention than it has hitherto
received, even for its own sake. Its great title to interest will always
be its ethnological value, being the direct descendant of the Sassanian
style, and the immediate parent of that of Russia. At the same time,
standing on the eastern confines of the Byzantine Empire, it received
thence that impress of Christian art which distinguished it from the
former, and which it transmitted to the latter. It thus forms one of
those important links in the chain of architectural history which when
lost render the study of the subject so dark and perplexed, but when
appreciated add so immensely to its philosophical interest. Churches at Tchekerman, Inkerman, and SebastopolExcavations at Kieghart
  and Vardzie. Intermediate between the Armenian province which has just been described
and the Russian, which comes next in the series, lies a territory of
more than usual interest to the archologist, though hardly demanding
more than a passing notice in a work devoted to architecture. In the
neighbourhood of Kertch, which was originally colonised by a people of
Grecian or Pelasgic origin, are found numerous tumuli and sepulchres
belonging generally to the best age of Greek art, but which, barring
some slight local peculiarities, would hardly seem out of place in the
cemeteries of Etruria or Crete. At a later age it was from the shores of the Palus Motis and the
Caucasus that tradition makes Woden migrate to Scandinavia, bearing with
him that form of Buddhism[251] which down to the 11th century remained
the religion of the Northwhile, as if to mark the presence of some
strange people in the land, we find everywhere rock-cut excavations of a
character, to say the least of it, very unusual in the West. These have not yet been examined with the care necessary to enable us to
speak very positively regarding them;[252] but, from what we do know, it
seems that they were not in any instance tombs, like those in Italy and
many of those in Africa or Syria. Nor can we positively assert that any
of them were viharas or monasteries[253] like most of those in India. Generally they seem to have been ordinary dwellings, but in some
instances appropriated by the Christians and formed into churches. (From Dubois de Montpereux.)] One, apparently, of the oldest is a rectangular excavation at Tchekerman
in the Crimea. in length by 21 in width, with hardly any
decoration on its walls, but having in the centre a choir with four
pillars on each face, which there seems no doubt was originally devoted
to Christian purposes. The cross on the low screen that separates it
from the nave is too deeply cut and too evidently integral to have been
added. But for this it would seem to have been intended for a Buddhist
vihara. (From Dubois de
Montpereux.)] Under the fortress at Inkermanfacing the position held by our
armythere is an excavation undoubtedly of Christian origin. It is a
small church with side-aisles, apse, and all the necessary
accompaniments. Beyond this is a square excavation apparently intended
as a refectory, and other apartments devoted to the use of a monastic
establishment. These again are so like what we find among the Buddhist
excavations in India as to be quite startling. The one point in which
this church differs from a Buddhist chaitya is that the aisle does not
run round behind the altar. This is universally the case in Buddhist,
but only exceptionally so in Christian, churches. Close to Sebastopol is another small church cave with its accompanying
monastery. This one is said to be comparatively modern, and if its
paintings are parts of the original design it may be so, but no certain
data are given for fixing the age of the last two examples. That under
the fortress (Woodcut No. 371) seems, however, to be of considerable
antiquity. There is one which in plan is very like those just described at Vardzie,
said to belong to the 12th century, and another, almost absolutely
identical with a Buddhist vihara, at Kieghart in Armenia, which has a
date upon it, A.D. On the banks of the Kour, however, at Ouplous-Tsikhe and Vardzie, are
some excavations which are either temples or monasteries, and which
range from the Christian era downwards. These are generally assumed to
be residencesone is called the palace of Queen Thamarand they were
evidently intended for some stately purpose. Yet they were not temples
in any sense in which that term would be employed by the Greek or Roman
world. Whatever their destination, these rock-cut examples make, when
taken altogether, as curious a group of monuments as are to be found in
this corner of Asia, and which may lead afterwards to curious
archological inferences. At present we are hardly in a position to
speculate on the subject, and merely point to it here as one well
meriting further investigation. MEDIVAL ARCHITECTURE OF RUSSIA. Churches at KiefNovogorodMoscowTowers. Rurik the Varangian at Novogorod   A.D. 850
              Olga baptized at Constantinople         955
              St. Vladimir the Great             981-1015
              Yaroslaf died                          1054
              Sack of Kief                           1168
              Tartar invasion under Gengis Khan      1224
              Tartar wars and domination till        1480
              Ivan III. 1462-1505
              Basil III. 1505-1533
              Ivan IV., or the Terrible         1533-1584
              Boris                             1598-1605
              Peter the Great                   1689-1725


The long series of the architectural styles of the Christian world which
has been described in the preceding pages terminates most appropriately
with the description of the art of a people who had less knowledge of
architecture and less appreciation of its beauties than any other with
which we are acquainted. During the Middle Ages the Russians did not
erect one single building which is worthy of admiration, either from its
dimensions, its design, or the elegance of its details; nor did they
invent one single architectural feature which can be called their own. It is true the Tartars brought with them their bulbous form of dome, and
the Russians adopted it, and adhere to it to the present day,
unconscious that it is the symbol of their subjection to a race they
affect to despise; but excepting as regards this one feature, their
architecture is only a bad and debased copy of the style of the
Byzantine Empire. There is nothing, in fact, in the architecture of the
country to lead us to doubt that the mass of the population of Russia
was always of purely Aryan stock, speaking a language more nearly allied
to the Sanskrit than any of the other Medival tongues of Europe, and
that whatever amount of Tartar blood may have been imported, it was not
sufficient to cure the inartistic tendencies of the race. So much is
this felt to be the case, that the Russians themselves hardly lay claim
to the design of a single building in their country from the earliest
times to the present day. They admit that all the churches at Kief,
their earliest capital, were erected by Greek architects; those of
Moscow by Italians or Germans; while those of St. Petersburg, we know,
were, with hardly a single exception, erected by Italian, German, or
French architects. These last have perpetrated caricatures of revived
Roman architecture worse than are to be found anywhere else. Bad as are
some of the imitations of Roman art found in western Europe, they are
all the work of native artists; are, partially at least, adapted to the
climate, and common-sense peeps through their worst absurdities; but in
Russia only second-class foreigners have been employed, and the result
is a style that out-herods Herod in absurdity and bad taste. Architecture has languished not only in Russia, but wherever the
Sclavonic race predominates. In Poland, Hungary, Moldavia, Wallachia,
&c., although some of these countries have at times been rich and
prosperous, there is not a single original structure worthy to be placed
in comparison with even the second-class contemporary buildings of the
Celtic or Teutonic races. Besides the ethnographic inaptitude of the nation, however, there are
other causes which would lead us to anticipate, _ priori_, that nothing
either great or beautiful was likely to exist in the Medival
architecture of Russia. In the first place, from the conversion of Olga
(964) to the accession of Peter the Great (1689), with whom the national
style expired, the country hardly emerged from barbarism. Torn by
internal troubles, or devastated by incursions of the Tartars, the
Russians never enjoyed the repose necessary for the development of art,
and the country was too thinly peopled to admit of that concentration of
men necessary for the carrying out of any great architectural
undertaking. Another cause of bad architecture is found in the material used, which
is almost universally brick covered with plaster; and it is well known
that the tendency of plaster architecture is constantly to extravagance
in detail and bad taste in every form. It is also extremely
perishable,a fact which opens the way to repairs and alterations in
defiance of congruity and taste, and to the utter annihilation of
everything like archological value in the building. When the material was not brick it was wood, like most of the houses in
Russia of the present day; and the destroying hand of time, aided no
doubt by fire and the Tartar invasions, have swept away many buildings
which would serve to fill up gaps, now, it is feared, irremediable in
the history of the art. Notwithstanding all this, the history of architecture in Russia need not
be considered as entirely a blank, or as wholly devoid of interest. Locally we can follow the history of the style from the south to the
north. Springing originally from two rootsone at Constantinople, the
other in Armeniait gradually extended itself northward. It first
established itself at Cherson, then at Kief, and after these at Vladimir
and Moscow, whence it spread to the great commercial city of Novogorod. At all these places it maintained itself till supplanted by the rise of
St. Though the Princess Olga was baptised in 955, the general profession of
Christianity in Russia did not take place till the reign of Vladimir
(981-1015). He built the wooden cathedral at Cherson, which has
perished. At Kief the same monarch built the church of Dessiatinnaya,
the remains of which existed till within the last few years, when they
were removed to give place to a modern reproduction. Basil in the same city, which, notwithstanding modern
improvements, still retains its ancient plan, and is nearly identical in
arrangement and form with the Catholicon at Athens (Woodcut No. 372) gives a fair idea of the usual dimensions of
the older churches of Russia. The parts shaded lighter are subsequent
additions. A greater builder than Vladimir was Prince Yaroslaf (1019-1054). Irene at Kief (Woodcut No. 373), the ruins of
which still exist. It is a good specimen of the smaller class of
churches of that date. His great works were the cathedrals of Kief and Novogorod, both
dedicated to Sta. Sophia, and with the church at Mokwi quoted above
(Woodcut No. 352) forming the most interesting group of Russian churches
of that age. All three belong to the 11th century, and are so extremely
similar in plan, that, deducting the subsequent additions from the two
Russian examples, they may almost be said to be identical. They also
show so intimate a connection between the places on the great commercial
road from the Caucasus to the Baltic, that they point out at once the
line along which we must look for the origin of the style. Of the three, that at Kief[254] (Woodcut No. 374) is the largest; but it
is nearly certain that the two outer aisles are subsequent additions,
and that the original church was confined to the remaining seven aisles. As it now stands its dimensions are 185 ft. from north to south, and 136
from east to west. It consequently covers only about 25,000 ft., or not
half the usual dimensions of a Western cathedral of the same class. As
will be perceived, its plan is like that of the churches of Asia Minor,
so far as the central aisles are concerned. In lateral extension it
resembles a mosque, a form elsewhere very unusual in Christian churches,
but which here may be a Tartar peculiarity. At all events it is
generally found in Russian churches, which never adopt the long
basilican form of the West. If their length in an eastern and western
direction ever exceeds the breadth, it is only by taking in the narthex
with the body of the church. East End of the Church at Novogorod. Internally this church retains many of its original arrangements, and
many decorations which, if not original, are at least restorations or
copies of those which previously occupied their places. Externally it
has been so repaired and rebuilt that it is difficult to detect what
belongs to the original work. In this respect the church of Novogorod has been more fortunate. Owing
to the early decline of the town it has not been much modernised. The
interior retains many of its primitive features. Among other furniture
is a pair of bronze doors of Italian workmanship of the 12th century
closely resembling those of San Zenone at Verona. The part of the
exterior that retains most of its early features is the eastern end,
represented in the Woodcut No. It retains the long reed-like shafts
which the Armenians borrowed from the Sassanians, and which penetrated
even to this remote corner. Whether the two lower circular apses shown
in the view are old is by no means clear: but it is probable that they
are at least built on ancient foundations. The domes on the roof, and
indeed all the upper part of the building, belong to a more modern date
than the substructure. The cathedral of Tchernigow, near Kief, founded 1024, retains perhaps
more of its original appearance externally than any other church of its
age. Like almost all Russian churches it is square in plan, with a dome
in the centre surrounded by four smaller cupolas placed diagonally at
the corners. To the eastward are three apses, and the narthex is flanked
by two round towers, the upper parts of which, with the roofs, have been
modernised, but the whole of the walls remain as originally erected,
especially the end of the transept, which precisely resembles what we
find in Greek Churches of the period. (From Blasius, Reise in
Russland.)]

To the same age belong the convent of the Volkof (1100) and of Yourief
at Novogorod, the church of the Ascension, and several others at Kief. All these are so modernised as, except in their plans, to show but
slight traces of their origin. Another of the great buildings of the age was the cathedral of Vladimir
(1046). It is said to have been built, like the rest, by Greek artists. The richness and beauty of this building have been celebrated by early
travellers, but it has been entirely passed over by more modern writers. From this it is perhaps to be inferred that its ancient form is
completely disguised in modern alterations. The ascendency of Kief was of short duration. Early in the 13th century
the city suffered greatly from civil wars, fires, and devastations of
every description, which humbled her pride, and inflicted ruin upon her
from which she never wholly recovered. Vladimir was after this the residence of the grand dukes, and in the
beginning of the 14th century Moscow became the capital, which it
continued to be till the seat of empire was transferred by Peter the
Great to St. During these three centuries Moscow was no
doubt adorned with many important buildings, since almost every church
traces its foundation back to the 14th century; but as fires and Tartar
invasions have frequently swept over the city since then, few retain any
of the features of their original foundation, and it may therefore
perhaps be well to see what can be gleaned in the provinces before
describing the buildings of the capital. As far as can be gathered from the sketch-books of travellers or their
somewhat meagre notes, there are few towns of Russia of any importance
during the Middle Ages which do not possess churches said to have been
founded in the first centuries after its conversion to Christianity;
though whether the existing buildings are the originals, or how far they
may have been altered and modernised, will not be known till some
archologist visits the country, directing his attention to this
particular inquiry. Although the Russians probably built as great a
number of churches as any nation of Christendom, yet like the Greek
churches they were all undoubtedly small. Kief is said, even in the age
of Yaroslaf, to have contained 400 churches; Vladimir nearly as many. Moscow, in the year 1600, had 400 (thirty-seven of which were in the
Kremlin), and now possesses many more. Many of the village churches still retain their ancient features; the
example here given of one near Novogorod belongs probably to the 12th
century, and is not later than the 13th. It retains its shafted apse,
its bulb-shaped Tartar dome, and, as is always the case in Russia, a
square detached belfrythough in this instance apparently more modern
than the edifice itself. 378 is the type of a great number
of the old village churches, which, like the houses of the peasants, are
of wood, generally of logs laid one on the other, with their round ends
intersecting at the angles, like the log-huts of America at the present
day. As architectural objects they are of course insignificant, but
still they are characteristic and picturesque. Village Church near Tzarskoe Selo. Internally all the arrangements of the stone churches are such as are
appropriate for pictorial rather than for sculptural decoration. The
pillars are generally large cylinders covered with portraits of saints,
and the capitals are plain, cushion-like rolls with painted ornaments. The vaults are not relieved by ribs, or by any projections that could
interfere with the  decorations. In the wooden churches the
construction is plainly shown, and of course is far lighter. In them
also colour almost wholly supersedes carving. The peculiarities of these
two styles are well illustrated in the two Woodcuts, Nos. 379 and 380,
from churches near Kostroma in Eastern Russia. Both belong to the Middle
Ages, and both are favourable specimens of their respective classes. In
these examples, as indeed in every Greek church, the principal object of
ecclesiastical furniture is the _iconostasis_ or image-bearer,
corresponding to the rood-screen that separates the choir from the nave
in Latin churches. The rood-screen, however, never assumed in the West
the importance which the iconostasis always possessed in the East. There
it separates and hides from the church the sanctuary and the altar, from
which the laity are wholly excluded. Within it the elements are
consecrated, in the presence of the priests alone, and are then brought
forward to be displayed to the public. On this screen, as performing so
important a part, the Greek architects and artists have lavished the
greatest amount of care and design, and in every Greek church, from St. Marks at Venice to the extreme confines of Russia, it is the object
that first attracts attention on entering. It is, in fact, so important
that it must be regarded rather as an object of architecture than of
church furniture. The architectural details of these Russian churches must be pronounced
to be bad; for, even making every allowance for difference of taste,
there is neither beauty of form nor constructive elegance in any part. The most characteristic and pleasing features are the five domes that
generally ornament the roofs, and which, when they rise from the
_extrados_, or uncovered outside of the vaults, certainly look well. Too
frequently, however, the vault is covered by a wooden roof, through
which the domes then peer in a manner by no means to be admired. The
details of the lower part are generally bad. 381)
of a doorway of the Troitska monastery, near Moscow, is sufficiently
characteristic. Its most remarkable feature is the baluster-like
pillars, of which the Russians seem so fond. These support an arch with
a pendant in the middlea sort of architectural _tour de force_ which
the Russian architects practised everywhere and in every age, but which
is far from being beautiful in itself, or from possessing any
architectural propriety. The great roll over the door is also
unpleasant. Indeed, as a general rule, wherever in Russian architecture
the details are original, they must be condemned as ugly. At Moscow we find much that is at all events curious. It first became a
city of importance about the year 1304, and retained its prosperity
throughout that century. During that time it was adorned by many
sumptuous edifices. In the beginning of the 15th century it was taken
and destroyed by the Tartars, and it was not till the reign of Ivan III. (1462-1505) that the city and empire recovered the disasters of that
period. It is extremely doubtful if any edifice now found in Moscow can
date before the time of this monarch. In the year 1479 this king dedicated the new church of the Assumption of
the Virgin, said to have been built by Aristotile Fioravanti, of
Bologna, in Italy, who was brought to Russia expressly for the purpose. 382) gives a good idea of the arrangement of
a Russian church of this age. Small as are its dimensionsonly 74 ft. by
56 over all externally, which would be a very small parish church
anywhere elsethe two other cathedrals of Moscow, that of the Archangel
Michael and the Annunciation, are even smaller still in plan. Like true
Byzantine churches, they would all be exact squares, but that the
narthex being taken into the church gives it a somewhat oblong form. In
the Church of the Assumption there is, as is almost universally the
case, one large dome over the centre of the square, and four smaller
ones in the four angles. [255] The great iconostasis runs, as at Sta. Sophia at Kief, quite across the church; but the two lateral chapels
have smaller screens inside which hide their altars, so that the part
between the two becomes a sort of private chapel. This seems to be the
plan of the greater number of the Russian churches of this age. Doorway of the Troitzka Monastery, near Moscow.] Plan of the Church of the Assumption, Moscow.] View of the Church of Vassili Blanskenoy, Moscow.] But there is one church in Moscow, that of Vassili (St. Basil) Blajenny,
which is certainly the most remarkable, as it is the most
characteristic, of all the churches of Russia. It was built by Ivan the
Terrible (1534-1584), and its architect was a foreigner, generally
supposed to have come from the West, inasmuch as this monarch sent an
embassy to Germany under one Schlit, to procure artists, of whom he is
said to have collected 150 for his service. If, however, German workmen
erected this building, it certainly was from Tartar designs. Nothing
like it exists to the westward. It more resembles some Eastern pagoda of
modern date than any European structure, and in fact must be considered
as almost a pure Tartar building. Still, though strangely altered by
time, most of its forms can be traced back to the Byzantine style, as
certainly as the details of the cathedral of Cologne to the Romanesque. The central spire, for instance, is the form into which the Russians had
during five centuries been gradually changing the straight-lined dome of
the Armenians. The eight others are the Byzantine domes converted by
degrees into the bulb-like forms which the Tartars practised at Agra and
Delhi, as well as throughout Russia. The arrangement of these domes will
be understood by the plan (Woodcut No. 383), which shows it to consist
of one central octagon surrounded by eight smaller ones, raised on a
platform ascended by two flights of stairs. For the general appearance the reader must be referred to Woodcut
No. 384, for words would fail to convey any idea of so bizarre and
complicated a building. At the same time it must be imagined as painted
with the most brilliant colours; its domes gilt, and relieved by blue,
green, and red, and altogether a combination of as much barbarity as it
is possible to bring together in so small a space. To crown the whole,
according to the legend, Ivan ordered the eyes of the architect to be
put out, lest he should ever surpass his own handiwork; and we may feel
grateful that nothing so barbarous was afterwards attempted in Europe. View of Church at Kurtea dArgyisch. (From Jahrbuch
der Central Com.)]

[Illustration: 386. Plan of Church at Kurtea dArgyisch. Tower of Ivan Veliki, Moscow, with the Cathedrals of
the Assumption and the Archangel Gabriel.] Though not strictly speaking in Russia itself, there is at Kurtea
dArgyisch, in Wallachia, 90 miles north-west from Bucharest, a church
which is so remarkable, so typical of the style, that it cannot be
passed over. It was erected in the first years of the 16th century
(1517-1526) by a Prince Nyagon, and is, so far as is at present known,
the most elaborate example of the style. All its ornamental details are
identical with those found at Ani and other places in Armenia, but are
used here in greater profusion and with better judgment than are to be
found in any single example in that country. In outline it is not so
wild as the Vassili Blanskenoy, but the interior is wholly sacrificed to
the external effect, and no other example can well be quoted on which
ornamental construction is carried to so great an extent, and generally
speaking in such good taste. The twisted cupolas that flank the
entrances might as well have been omitted, but the two central domes and
the way the semi-domes are attached to them are quite unexceptionable,
and altogether, with larger dimensions, and if a little more spread out,
it would be difficult to find a more elegant exterior anywhere. long by 50 wide it is too small for architectural effect,
but barring this it is the most elegant example of the Armeno-Russian or
Neo-Byzantine architecture which is known to exist anywhere, and one of
the most suggestive, if the Russians knew how to use it. [256]


                                TOWERS. Next in importance to the churches themselves are the belfries which
always accompany them. The Russians seem never to have adopted separate
baptisteries, nor did they affect any sepulchral magnificence in their
tombs. From the time of Herodotus the Scythians were great casters of
metal, and famous for their bells. The specimens of casting of this sort
in Russia reduce all the great bells of Western Europe to comparative
insignificance. It of course became necessary to provide places in which
to hang these bells: and as nothing, either in Byzantine or Armenian
architecture, afforded a hint for amalgamating the belfry with the
church, they went to work in their own way, and constructed the towers
wholly independent of the churches. Of all those in Russia, that of Ivan
Veliki, erected by the Czar Boris, about the year 1600, is the finest. It is surmounted by a cross 18 ft. high, making a total height of 269
ft. from the ground to the top of the cross. It cannot be said to have
any great beauty, either of form or detail: but it rises boldly from the
ground, and towers over all the other buildings of the Kremlin. With
this tower for its principal object, the whole mass of building is at
least picturesque, if not architecturally beautiful. 388) the belfry is shown as it stood before it was blown up by the
French. It has since been rebuilt, and with the cathedrals on either
hand, makes up the best group in the Kremlin. Besides the belfries, the walls of the Kremlin are adorned with towers,
meant not merely for military defence, but as architectural ornaments,
and reminding us somewhat of those described by Josephus as erected by
Herod on the walls of Jerusalem. 389),
built by the same Czar Boris who erected that last described, is a good
specimen of its class. It is one of the principal of those which give
the walls of the Kremlin their peculiar and striking character. These towers, however, are not peculiar to the Kremlin of Moscow. Every
city in Russia had its Kremlin, as every one in Spain had its Alcazar,
and all were adorned with walls deeply machicolated, and interspersed
with towers. Within were enclosed five-domed churches and belfries, just
as at Moscow, though on a scale proportionate to the importance of the
city. It would be easy to select numerous illustrations of this. They
are, however, all very much like one another, nor have they sufficient
beauty to require us to dwell long on them. Their gateways, however, are
frequently important. Every city had its _porta sacra_, deriving its
importance either from some memorable event or from miracles said to
have been wrought there, and being the triumphal gateways through which
all processions pass on state occasions. The best known of these is that of Moscow, beneath whose sacred arch
even the Emperor himself must uncover his head as he passes through; and
which, from its sanctity as well as its architectural character, forms
an important feature among the antiquities of Russia. So numerous are the churches, and, generally speaking, the fragments of
antiquity in this country, that it would be easy to multiply examples to
almost any extent. Those quoted in the preceding pages are,
architecturally, the finest as well as the most interesting from an
antiquarian point of view, of those which have yet been visited and
drawn; and there is no reason to believe that others either more
magnificent or more beautiful still remain undescribed. This being the case, it is safe to assert that Russia contains nothing
that can at all compare with the cathedrals, or even the parish
churches, of Western Europe, either in dimensions or in beauty of
detail. Every chapter in the history of architecture must contain
something to interest the student: but there is none less worthy of
attention than that which describes the architecture of Russia,
especially when we take into account the extent of territory occupied by
its people, and the enormous amount of time and wealth which has been
lavished on the multitude of insignificant buildings to be found in
every corner of the empire. CHAPTER I.

                             INTRODUCTORY. Division and Classification of the Romanesque and Gothic Styles of
  Architecture in Italy. If a historian were to propose to himself the task of writing a
tolerably consecutive narrative of the events which occurred in Italy
during the Middle Ages, he would probably find such difficulties in his
way as would induce him to abandon the attempt. Venice and Genoa were as
distinct states as Spain and Portugal. Florence, the most essentially
Italian of the republics, requires a different treatment from the half
German Milan. Even such neighbouring cities as Mantua and Verona were
separate and independent states during the most important part of their
existence. Rome was, during the whole of the Middle Ages, more European
than Italian, and must have a narrative of her own; Southern Italy was a
foreign country to the states of the North; and Sicily has an
independent history. The same difficulties, though not perhaps to the same degree, beset the
historian of art, and, if it were proposed to describe in detail all the
varying forms of Italian art during the Middle Ages, it would be
necessary to map out Italy into provinces, and to treat each almost as a
separate kingdom by itself. In this, as in almost every instance,
however, the architecture forms a better guide-line through the tangled
mazes of the labyrinth than the written record of political events, and
those who can read her language have before them a more trustworthy and
vivid picture of the past than can be obtained by any other means. The great charm of the history of Medival art in England is its unity. It affords the picture of a people working out a style from chaos to
completeness, with only slight assistance from those in foreign
countries engaged in the same task. In France we have two elements, the
old Southern Romanesque long struggling with the Northern Celtic, and
unity only obtained by the suppression of the former, wherever they came
in contact. In Italy we have four elements,the Roman, the Byzantine,
the Lombardic, and the Gothic,sometimes existing nearly pure, at others
mixed, in the most varying proportions, the one with the other. In the North the Lombardic element prevailed; based on the one hand on
the traditions of Imperial Rome, and in consequence influenced in its
art by classical forms; and, on the other, inspired in all its details
by a vast accumulation of Byzantine work. In the 5th and 6th centuries
this work (chiefly confined to columns, screens, and altar pieces) was
executed by Greek artists sent on from Constantinople. The 7th century
seems to have been quite barren so far as architecture was concerned;
but in the 8th century, owing either to the Saracen invasion or to the
emigration caused by the persecution of the Iconoclasts in 788, the
Byzantine influence became again predominant, but no longer with that
same purity of design as we find in the earlier work of the 5th and 6th
centuries. In the South, the Byzantine forms prevailed, partly because the art was
there based on the traditions of Magna Grecia, and more, perhaps, from
the intimate connection that existed between Apulia and the Peloponnesus
during the Middle Ages. Between the two stood Rome, less changed than either North or Souththe
three terms, Roman, Romano-Byzantine, and Renaissance comprise all the
variation she submitted to. In vain the Gothic styles besieged her on
the north and the Byzantine on the south. Their waves spent themselves
on her rock without producing much impression, while her influence
extended more or less over the whole peninsula. It was distinctly felt
at Florence and at Pisa on the north and west, though these conquests
were nearly balanced by the Byzantine influence which is so distinctly
felt at Venice or Padua on the east coast. The great difficulty in the attempt to reconcile these architectural
varieties with the local and ethnographical peculiarities of the
peoplea difficulty which at first sight appears all but insuperableis,
that sometimes all three styles are found side by side in the same city. This, however, constitutes, in reality, the intrinsic merit of
architecture as a guide in these difficulties. What neither the language
of the people nor their histories tell us, their arts proclaim in a
manner not to be mistaken. Just in that ratio in which the Roman,
Byzantine, or Lombardic style prevails in their churches, to that extent
did either of these elements exist in the blood of the people. Once
thoroughly master the peculiarities of their art, and we can with
certainty pronounce when any particular race rose to power, how long its
prevalence lasted, and when it was obliterated or fused with some other
form. There is no great difficulty in distinguishing between the Byzantine and
the other two styles, so far as the form of dome is concerned. The
latter is almost always rounded externally, the former almost always
straight-lined. Again: the Byzantine architects never used intersecting
vaults for their naves. If forced to use a pointed arch, they did so
unwillingly, and it never fitted kindly to their favourite circular
forms; the style of their ornamentation was throughout peculiar, and
differed in many essential respects from the other two styles. It is less easy always to discriminate between the Gothic and Lombardic
in Italy. We frequently find churches of the two styles built side by
side in the same age, both using round arches, and with details not
differing essentially from one another. There is one test, however,
which is probably in all cases sufficient. Every Gothic church had, or
was intended to have, a vault over its central aisle. The importance of the distinction is apparent
throughout. The Gothic churches have clustered piers, tall
vaulting-shafts, external and internal buttresses, and are prepared
throughout for this necessity of Gothic art. The early Christian
churches, on the contrary, have only a range of columns, generally of a
pseudo-Corinthian order, between the central and side aisles; internally
no vaulting-shafts, and externally only pilasters. Had these architects
been competent, as the English were, to invent an ornamental wooden
roof, they would perhaps have acted wisely; but though they made several
attempts, especially at Verona, they failed signally to devise any mode
either of hiding the mere mechanical structure of their roofs or of
rendering them ornamental. Vaulting was, in fact, the real formative idea of the Gothic style, and
it continued to be its most marked characteristic during the continuance
of the style, not only in Italy, but throughout all Europe. As it is impossible to treat of these various styles in one sequence,
various modes of precedence might be adopted, for each of which good
reasons could be given; but the following will probably be found most
consonant with the arrangement elsewhere adopted in this work:

First, to treat of the early Christian style as it prevailed in Italy
down to the age of Charlemagne, and to trace out its history down to the
11th century, in order to include all that work executed by Greek
artists or copied from it by Lombardic artists; a phase which might
appropriately be termed the Byzantine-Lombardic style. Secondly, to follow the history of the formation of the round-arched
style in Lombardy and North Italy, which constitutes the real Lombardic
style. Thirdly, to take up the Byzantine-Romanesque style as it was practised
in the centre and South of Italy; because it follows chronologically
more closely the art of the North of Italy. Fourthly, to follow the changes which the influence of the Gothic style
exercised in the 13th and 14th centuries in Italy. Sicily will demand a chapter to herself; not only because a fourth
element is introduced there in the Saracenicwhich influenced her style
almost as much as it did that of the South of Spainbut because such
pointed Gothic as she possesses was not German, like that of Northern
Italy, but derived far more directly from France, under either the
Norman or Angiovine dynasties. Gothic architecture in Palestine also
requires a chapter, and is best described here owing to its close
resemblance to the style in the South of Italy. EARLY CHRISTIAN AND BYZANTINE-LOMBARDIC STYLES. PaulsRavennaSt. Marks,
  VeniceDalmatia and IstriaTorcello. Honorius                            A.D. 395
              Valentinian                          425-435
              Theodoric, King of the Ostrogoths    493-525
              Justinian                                527
              Alboin Longimanus, King of Lombardy      568
              Gregory I. 590
              Charlemagne                              768
              Conrad I. 911
              Henry the Fowler                         918
              Otho the Great                           936
              Otho II. 973
              Otho III. 983
              Henry II. 1002
              Conrad II. 1024
              Henry III. 1039
              Henry IV. 1056
              Henry V. 1106
              Lothaire II. 1125
              Conrad III. 1138
              Frederick Barbarossa                    1152
              Henry VI. 1190
              Frederick II. 1212
              Conradin                                1250


                               BASILICAS. Like the study of all modern history, that of Christian architecture
commences with Rome; and not, as is sometimes supposed, where the
history of Rome leaves off, but far back in the Empire, if not, indeed,
almost in the Republic. As has already been pointed out, the whole history of the art in
Imperial Rome is that of a style in course of transition, beginning with
a purely Pagan or Grecian style in the age of Augustus, and passing into
one almost wholly Christian in the age of Constantine. At the first epoch of the Empire the temple architecture of Rome
consisted in an external arrangement of columns, without arches or
vaults, and was wholly unsuited for the purposes of Christian worship. Towards the end of the period it had become an internal architecture,
making use of arches and vaults almost entirely to the exclusion of the
columnar orders, except as ornaments, and became so perfectly adapted to
Christian requirements, that little or no essential change in it has
taken place from that time to the present day. A basilica of the form
adopted in the first century after Constantine is as suited now as it
was then to the forms and ceremonies of the Christian ritual. The fact seems to be, that during the first three centuries after the
Christian era an immense change was silently but certainly working its
way in mens minds. The old religion was effete: the best men, the most
intellectual spirits of the age, had no faith in it; and the new
religion with all its important consequences was gradually supplying its
place in the minds of men long before it was generally accepted. There is thus no real distinction between the Emilian or Ulpian
basilicas and those which Constantine erected for the use of the early
Christian republic. Nor is it possible, in such a series as the
Pantheon, the Temple of Minerva Medica, and the Church of San Vitale at
Ravenna, to point out what part really belongs to Pagan and what to
Christian art. It is true that Constantine fixed the epoch of completed transition, and
gave it form and substance; but long before his time Paganism was
impossible and a reform inevitable. The feeling of the world had
changedits form of utterance followed as a matter of course. Viewed in this light, it is impossible to separate the early history of
Christian art from that of Imperial Rome. The sequence is so immediate
and the change so gradual, that a knowledge of the first is absolutely
indispensable to a right understanding of the second. One of the most remarkable facts connected with the early history of the
Christian religion is, that neither its Founder nor any of His more
immediate successors left any specific directions either as to the
liturgical forms of worship to be observed by His followers, nor laid
down any rules to be observed in the government of the newly established
Church. Under these circumstances it was left almost wholly to those to
whose care the infant congregation was entrusted to frame such
regulations for its guidance as the exigencies of the occasion might
dictate, and gradually to appoint such forms of worship as might seem
most suitable to express the purity of the new faith, but at the same
time with a dignity befitting its high mission. In Judea these ceremonies, as might naturally be expected, were strongly
tinctured with the forms of the Mosaic dispensation; but it appears to
have been in Africa, and more especially in the pomp-loving and
ceremonious Egypt, that fixed liturgies and rites first became an
integral part of the Christian religion. In those countries far from the
central seat of government, more liberty of conscience seems to have
been attained at an early period than would have been tolerated in the
capital. Before the time of Constantine they possessed not only
churches, but a regularly established hierarchy and a form of worship
similar to what afterwards obtained throughout the whole Christian
world. The form of the government of the Church, however, was long
unsettled. At first it seems merely to have been that the most respected
individuals of each isolated congregation were selected to form a
council to advise and direct their fellow-Christians, to receive and
dispense their alms, and, under the simple but revered title of
Presbyters, to act as fathers rather than as governors to the scattered
communities by which they were elected. The idea, however, of such a
council naturally includes that of a president to guide their
deliberations and give unity and force to their decisions; and such we
soon find springing up under the title of Bishops, or Presbyter Bishops,
as they were first called. During the course of the second century the
latter institution seems gradually to have gained strength at the
expense of the power of the Presbyters, whose delegate the Bishop was
assumed to be. In that capacity the Bishops not only took upon
themselves the general direction of the affairs of the Church, but
formed themselves into separate councils and synods, meeting in the
provincial capitals of the provinces where they were located. These
meetings took place under the presidency of the Bishop of the city in
which they met, who thus assumed to be the chief or metropolitan. These
formed a new presbytery above the older institution, which was thus
gradually supersededto be again surpassed by the great councils which,
after the age of Constantine, formed the supreme governing body of the
Church; performing the functions of the earlier provincial synods with
more extended authority, though with less unanimity and regularity than
had characterised the earlier institution. It was thus that during the first three centuries of its existence the
Christian community was formed into a vast federal republic, governed by
its own laws, administered by its own officers, acknowledging no
community with the heathen and no authority in the constituted secular
powers of the State. But at the same time the hierarchy admitted a
participation of rights to the general body of the faithful, from whom
they were chosen, and whose delegation was still admitted to be their
title to office. When, in the time of Constantine, this persecuted and scattered Church
emerged from the Catacombs to bask in the sunshine of Imperial favour,
there were no buildings in Rome, the plan of which was more suited to
their purposes than that of the basilicas of the ancient city. Though
designed and erected for the transaction of the affairs of the heathen
Empire, they happened to be, in consequence of their disposition and
immense size, eminently suited for the convenience of the Christian
Church, which then aspired to supersede its fallen rival and replace it
by a younger and better institution. [257]

In the basilica the whole congregation of the faithful could meet and
take part in the transaction of the business going on. The bishop
naturally took the place previously occupied by the prtor or qustor,
the presbyters those of the assessors. The altar in front of the apse,
where the pious heathen poured out libations at the commencement and
conclusion of all important business, served equally for the celebration
of Christian rites, and with the fewest possible changes, either in the
form of the ceremonies or in the nature of the business transacted
therein, the basilica of the heathen became the ecclesia or place of
assembly of the early Christian community. In addition, however, to the rectangular basilica, which was essentially
the place of meeting for the transaction of the business of the Church,
the Christian community early adopted a circular-formed edifice as a
ceremonial or sacramental adjunct to the basilica. These were copied
from the Roman tombs above described, and were in fact frequently built
for the sepulchres of distinguished persons; but they were also used at
a very early date as baptisteries, as well as for the performance of
funereal rites. It does not appear that baptism, the marriage rites, or
indeed any of the sacraments, were performed in the earliest ages in the
basilica, though in after ages a font was introduced even into
cathedrals. The rectangular church became ultimately the only form used. In the earlier ages, however, a complete ecclesiastical establishment
consisted of a basilica, and a baptistery, independent of one another
and seldom ranged symmetrically, though the tendency seems to have been
to place the round church opposite the western or principal entrance of
the basilica. Though this was the case in the capital and other great cities, it was
otherwise before the time of Constantine in the provinces. There the
Christian communities existed as members of a religious sect long before
they aspired to political power or dreamt of superseding the secular
form of government by combination among themselves. In the remote parts
of the Empire, in the earliest ages, they consequently built for
themselves churches which were temples, or, in other words, houses of
prayer, designed for and devoted wholly to the celebration of religious
rites, as in the Pagan temples, and without any reference to the
government of the community or the transaction of the business of the
assembly. If any such existed in Italy or any other part of Europe, they
either perished in the various persecutions to which the Christians were
exposed when located near the seat of government, or they became
hallowed by the memories of the times of martyrdom, and were rebuilt in
happier days with greater magnificence, so that little or no trace of
the original buildings now remains. So long, therefore, as our
researches were confined to European examples, the history of Christian
architecture began with Constantine; but recent researches in Africa
have shown that, when properly explored, we shall certainly be able to
carry the history of the early Christian style in that country back to a
date at least a century before his time. In Syria and Asia Minor so many
early examples have come to light that it seems probable that we may,
before long, carry the history of Byzantine art back to a date nearly
approaching that of the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus. It is,
however, only so recently that the attention of ecclesiologists has been
directed to the early examples of Christian architecture, that it is not
yet possible to grasp completely the whole bearing of the subject; but
enough is known to show how much the progress of research may modify the
views hitherto entertained on the subject. Meanwhile too much attention
can hardly be bestowed upon it, as it is by means of these early
specimens of architectural art that we shall probably be best able to
recover the primitive forms of the Christian liturgical observance. One of the most ancient as well as interesting of the African churches
which has yet been brought to light is that at Djemla. It is a simple
rectangle, internally 92 ft. by 52, divided longitudinally with three
aisles, the centre one of which terminates in a square cella or choir,
which seems to have been enclosed up to the roof; but the building is so
ruined that this cannot be known for a certainty. Though so exceptional,
it is not difficult to see whence the form was derived. If we take such
a plan, for instance, as that of the Maison Carr at Nmes (Woodcut No. 187), and build a wall round and put a roof over it, so as to make a
building which was originally appropriated to external worship suitable
for internal religious purposes, we should have exactly such a result as
this. The cella must be diminished in extent, the pillars more widely
spaced, and the front row converted into a wall in which the entrances
would be usually placed. In this instance the one entrance, for some
local reason, is lateral. The whole floor of the church is covered with
a mosaic so purely classical in style of execution as to leave no doubt
as to its early date. A more common form is shown in the annexed woodcut, representing a small
church at Announa, likewise in Algeria, about 45 ft. square, divided
into three aisles and with a projecting apse. If we turn to the plan of
the Temple of Mars Ultor (Woodcut No. 186), we see at once whence this
form was derived. It only requires the lateral columns to be brought
slightly forward to effect the requisite change. When the building was
to be used by a congregation, and not merely for display, the pillars
would require to be more widely spaced. A third form, from Ibrim in Nubia, shows the peculiarity of the apse
being internal, which became very fashionable in the Eastern, though not
so much so in the Western, churches, but still sufficiently so to make
its introduction at this early age worthy of notice. The building is
small, being only 57 ft. in length externally, but is remarkable for
being built with something of the solidity of the Egyptian edifices
among which it stands. The next example which it may be necessary to quote to make this early
form intelligible, is that of the church of St. Reparatus, near
Orleansvillethe ancient Castellum Tingitanum. According to an
inscription still existing, it was erected A.D. 252,[258] but the second
apse seems to have been added at a later date, to contain the grave of
the saint. As it now stands, it is a double-apsed basilica 80 ft. long
by 52 broad, divided into five aisles, and exhibiting on a miniature
scale all the peculiarities of plan which we have hitherto fancied were
not adopted until some centuries later. In this instance both the apses
are internal, so that the side-aisles are longer than the centre one, no
portion of them appearing to have been cut off for chalcidica or
vestries, as was very generally the case in this age. Another example, very much like this in arrangement, but on a larger
scale, is found at Ermet, the ancient Hermonthis in Egypt. by 90, and, if the plan in the great French work[259]
is to be depended upon, is one of the most complete examples of its
class. It has four ranges of columns, taken apparently from more ancient
examples, and two apses with all the usual appurtenances. Plan of Church at Ibrim in Nubia. Another two-aisled and single apse church, measuring 100 ft. by 65,
called Dyer Abou Taneh, is represented in the same work;[260] but
perhaps the most interesting of these churches is that known as the
White Convent, situated on the edge of the Libyan Desert, above Siout. by 122, and is enclosed in a solid wall,
surmounted by an Egyptian cornice, so that it looks much more like an
ancient temple than a Christian church. Originally it had six doors, but
all are now walled up, except one in the centre of the southern face;
and above, a series of small openings, like loopholes, admitted light to
apartments which apparently occupied the upper storey of lateral
corridors. Light to the church was, of course, admitted through the
clerestory, which could easily be done; and altogether as a fortified
and mysterious abode, and place of worship of ascetics, it would be
difficult to find a more appropriate example. The age of this church is not very well ascertained; popularly it is,
like so many others, ascribed to Sta. Helena, and the double aisles and
triapsal arrangements are so like her church at Bethlehem, that there is
no _ priori_ improbability in the assumption. The plan, however, is
more complicated and complete, and its external form bespeaks of
troublous times, so that altogether it is probably a century or two (the
monks say 140 years) more modern. Like other churches of its class,
ancient materials have been so used up with those prepared at the time,
that it is extremely difficult to ascertain the dates of such buildings. If, however, any one with sufficient knowledge would make a special
study of these Egyptian churches, he would add one of the most
interesting chapters to our history of early Christian Architecture, and
explain many ritual arrangements whose origin is now involved in
mystery; but for this we must wait. The materials are not at present
available, all travellers in Egypt being so attracted by the surpassing
interest of the Pagan remains of that country, as hardly to find time
for a glance at the Christian antiquities. [261]

[Illustration: 394. It was probably in a great measure owing to the influence of these
provincial examples that the arrangements of the metropolitan basilicas
were not long allowed to retain the form above described, though more
was probably due to the change which was gradually taking place in the
constitution of the governing body of the Church. The early arrangements
of the Christian basilica, as copied from the secular forms of the Pagan
places of assembly, soon became unsuited to the more exclusively
religious purposes to which they were to be appropriated. The now
dominant hierarchy of Rome soon began to repudiate the republicanism of
the early days of the Church, and to adopt from the East the convenient
doctrine of the absolute separation of the congregation into clergy and
laity. To accommodate the basilica to this new state of things, first
the apse was railed off and appropriated wholly to the use of the
clergy: then the whole of the dais, or raised part in front of the apse
on which the altar stood, was separated by pillars, called cancelli, and
in like manner given up wholly to the clergy, and was not allowed to be
profaned by the presence of the unordained multitude. The last great change was the introduction of a choir, or enclosed space
in the centre of the nave, attached to the bema or _presbytery_, as the
raised space came to be called. Round three sides of this choir the
faithful were allowed to congregate to hear the Gospels or Epistles read
from the two pulpits or _ambones_, which were built into its enclosure,
one on either side; or to hear the services which were read or sung by
the inferior order of clergy who occupied its precincts. The enclosure of the choir was kept low, so as not to hide the view of
the raised presbytery, or to prevent the congregation from witnessing
the more sacred mysteries of the faith which were there performed by the
higher order of clergy. Another important modification, though it entailed no architectural
change, was the introduction of the bodies of the saints in whose honour
the building was erected into the basilica itself, and depositing them
in a confessional or crypt below the high altar. There is every reason to believe that a separate circular building, or
proper tomb, was originally erected over the grave or place of
martyrdom, and the basilica was sanctified merely by its propinquity to
the sacred spot. Afterwards the practice of depositing the relics of the
saint beneath the floor became universally the rule. At about the same
time the baptistery was also absorbed into the basilica; and instead of
standing opposite the western entrance, a font placed within the western
doors supplied its place. This last change was made earlier at Rome than
elsewhere. It is not known at what exact period the alteration was
introduced, but it is probable that the whole was completed before the
age of Gregory the Great. It was thus that in the course of a few centuries the basilicas
aggregated within themselves all the offices of the Roman Church, and
became the only acknowledged ecclesiastical buildingseither as places
for the assembly of the clergy for the administration of the sacraments
and the performance of divine worship, or for the congregation of the
faithful. None of the basilican churches, either of Rome or the provinces, possess
these arrangements exactly as they were originally established in the
fourth or fifth century. The church of San Clemente, however, retains
them so nearly in their primitive form that a short description of it
may tend to make what follows more easily intelligible. This basilica
seems to have been erected in the fourth or fifth century over what was
supposed to be the house in which the saint of that name resided. Recently a subterranean church or crypt has been discovered, which must
of course be more ancient than the present remains. [262] Above this
subterranean church stands the edifice shown in the accompanying plan
(Woodcut No. 395), nearly one-third less in size, being only 65 ft. wide
internally, against 93 of the original church, though both were about
the same length. Plan of the Church of San Clemente at Rome. (From
Gutensohn and Knapp. to 1 in]

It is one of the few that still possesses an _atrium_ or courtyard in
front of the principal entrance, though there can be but little doubt
that this was considered at that early age a most important, if not
indeed an indispensable, attribute to the church itself. As a feature it
may have been derived from the East, where we know it was most common,
and where it afterwards became, with only the slightest possible
modifications, the mosque of the Moslems. It would seem even more
probable, however, that it is only a repetition of the _forum_, which
was always attached to the Pagan basilica, and through which it was
always entered; and for a sepulchral church at least nothing could be
more appropriate, as the original application of the word forum seems to
have been to the open area that existed in front of tombs as well as of
other important buildings. [264]

In the centre of this atrium there generally stood a fountain or tank of
water, not only as an emblem of purity, but that those who came to the
church might wash their hands before entering the holy placea custom
which seems to have given rise to the practice of dipping the fingers in
the holy water of the piscina, now universal in all Catholic countries. The colonnade next the church was frequently the only representative of
the atrium, and thenperhaps indeed alwayswas called the _narthex_, or
place for penitents or persons who had not yet acquired the right of
entering the church itself. From this narthex three doorways generally opened into the church,
corresponding with the three aisles; and if the building possessed a
font, it ought to have been placed in one of the chapels on either the
right or left hand of the principal entrance. The choir, with its two pulpits, is shown in the planthat on the
left-hand side being the pulpit of the Epistle, that on the right of the
Gospel. The railing of the _bema_ or presbytery is also marked, so is
the position of the altar with its canopy supported on four pillars, and
behind that the throne of the bishop, with the seats of the inferior
clergy surrounding the apse on either side. Besides the church of San Clemente there are at least thirty other
basilican churches in Rome, extending in date from the 4th to the 14th
century. Their names and dates, as far as they have been ascertained,
are set forth in the accompanying list, which, though not altogether
complete, is still the best we possess, and is sufficient for our
present purpose. [265]

                          BASILICAS OF ROME. PETERS               Constantine (5 aisled)           330

 W.     ST. JOHN LATERAN          Ditto                            330

 W.     ST. LORENZO (west end     Ditto                            335
        lower storey)

 N.W. S. PUDENTIANA             Ditto                            335

 E.     ST. PAULS                Theodosius and Honorius          380
                                  (5 aisled)

 N.W. S. MARIA MAGGIORE         Pope Sixtus III. 432

        ST. LORENZO (nave)        Ditto                         432-40

 E.     ST. PETER _ad Vincula_    Eudoxia (Greek Doric             442
                                  columns)

 N.W.W. QUATTRO CORONATI          Ditto                            450

 N.W. MARTIN _di Monti_                                      500

 W.     S. AGNES                                               500-514

 N.E. S. SABINA                                                  525

        ST. LORENZO (galleries to Pope Pelagius                    580
        west end)

 W.     S. BALBINA                Gregory the Great (no            600
                                  side-aisles)

        ST. VINCENT _alle tre     Honorius I. 626
        fontane_

 N.W.N. GIORGIO _in Velabro_  Leo II. CRISOGONUS            Gregory III. 731

        ST. JOHN _in porta        Adrian I. 772
        latina_

 S.E.E. S. MARIA _in Cosmedin_    Ditto                            782

 S.W.W. NEREUS AND ACHILLES   Leo III. PRAXEDE               Paschal I. S. CECILIA                Ditto                            821

 W.     S. MARIA _in Domenica_    Ditto                            823

 N.W.N. MARKS                                                 833

        ST. JOHN LATERAN          Rebuilt by Sergius III. CLEMENT               Paschal II. 1100-14

        ST. BARTHELEMY _in Isola_ Ditto                           1113

 W.     S. MARIA _in Trastevere_  Innocent II. 1139

        ST. LORENZO (the two      Honorius III. 1216
        churches thrown into one)

        S. MARIA _sopra Minerva_                                  1370

 (?) S. MARIA _in Ara Cli_    Gothic                    14th cent. AGOSTINO              Renaissance                     1483

Three of these, St. Pauls, and the Lateran church, have
five aisles, all the rest three, with only one insignificant exception,
Sta. Balbina, which has no side-aisles. Agnes and the old part
of St. Lorenzo, have their side-aisles in two storeys, all the rest are
only one storey in height, and the side-aisles generally are half the
width of the central aisle or nave. Some of the more modern churches
have the side-aisles vaulted, but of those in the list all except the
two last have flat wooden ceilings over the central compartment, and
generally speaking the plain ornamental construction of the roof is
exposed. It can scarcely be doubted that originally they were ceiled in
some more ornamental manner, as the art of ornamenting this new style of
open construction seems to have been introduced at a later date. (From Gutensohn and Knapp.) Maria sopra Minerva might perhaps be
more properly classed among the buildings belonging to the Italian
Gothic style; but as it is the only one in Rome that has any claim to
such a distinction, it is hardly worth while making it an exception to
the rest. The San Agostino might also be called a Renaissance specimen. It certainly is a transitional specimen between the pillared and
pilastered styles, which were then struggling for mastery. It may either
be regarded as the last of the old race or the first of the new style,
which was so soon destined to revolutionise the architectural world. Of the other examples the oldest was the finest. This great basilica was
erected in the reign of Constantine, close to the circus of Nero, where
tradition affirmed that St. It
unfortunately was entirely swept away to make room for the greatest of
Christian temples, which now occupies its site; but previous to its
destruction careful measurements and drawings were made of every part,
from which it is easy to understand all its arrangementseasier perhaps
than if it had remained to the present day, and four centuries more of
reform and improvements had assisted in altering and disfiguring its
venerable frame. As will be seen in the plan (Woodcut No. 396), drawn to the usual scale,
it possessed a noble atrium or forecourt, 212 ft. by 235, in front of
which were some bold masses of building, which, during the Middle Ages,
were surmounted by two belfry-towers. in
width by 380 in length, covering, without its adjuncts, an area of above
80,000 English feet, which, though less than half the size of the
present cathedral, is as large as that covered by any medival cathedral
except those of Milan and Seville. across (about twice the average width of a Gothic nave), and nearly the
same as that of the basilica of Maxentius and the principal halls of the
greater therm. For some reason or other this dimension seems to have
been a modulus very generally adopted. The bema or sanctuary, answering
to the Gothic transept, extended beyond the walls of the church either
way, which was unusual in early Christian buildings. The object here
seems to have been to connect it with the tombs on its north side. The
arrangement of the sanctuary was also peculiar, having been adorned with
twelve pillars supporting a gallery. These, when symbolism became the
fashion, were said to represent the twelve apostles. This certainly was
not their original intent, as at first only six were put upthe others
added afterwards. The sanctuary and choir were here singularly small and
contracted, as if arranged before the clergy became so numerous as they
afterwards were, and before the laity were excluded from this part of
the church. The general internal appearance of the building will be understood from
the following woodcut (No. 397), which presents at one view all the
peculiarities of the basilican buildings. The pillars separating the
central from the side aisles appear to have been of uniform dimensions,
and to have supported a horizontal entablature, above which rose a
double range of panels, each containing a picturethese panels thus
taking the place of what was the triforium in Gothic churches. Over
these was the clerestory, and again an ornamental belt gave sufficient
elevation for the roof, which in this instance showed the naked
construction. On the whole perhaps the ratio of height to width is
unexceptionable, but the height over the pillars is so great that they
are made to look utterly insignificant, which indeed is the great defect
in the architectural design of these buildings, and, though seldom so
offensive as here, is apparent in all. The ranges of columns dividing
the side-aisles were joined by arches, which is a more common as well as
a better arrangement, as it not only adds to the height of the pillars,
but gives them an apparent power of bearing the superstructure. At some
period during the Middle Ages the outer aisles were vaulted, and Gothic
windows introduced into them. This change seems to have necessitated the
closing of the intermediate range of clerestory windows, which probably
was by no means conducive to the general architectural effect of the
building. Peter, before its
destruction in the 15th century. Externally this basilica, like all those of its age, must have been
singularly deficient in beauty or in architectural design. The sides
were of plain unplastered brick, the windows were plain arch-headed
openings. The front alone was ornamented, and this only with two ranges
of windows somewhat larger than those at the sides, three in each tier,
into which tracery was inserted at some later period, and between and
above these, various figures and emblems were painted in fresco on
stucco laid on the brickwork. The whole was surmounted by that singular
coved cornice which seems to have been universal in Roman basilicas,
though not found anywhere else that I am aware of. The two most interesting adjuncts to this cathedral were the two tombs
standing to the northward. According to the medival tradition the one
was the tomb of Honorius and his wives, the other the church of St. Their position, however, carefully centred on the spina of the
circus of Nero, where the great apostle suffered martyrdom, seems to
point to a holier and more important origin. My own conviction is that
they were erected to mark the places where the apostle and his
companions suffered. It is besides extremely improbable that after the
erection of the basilica an emperor should choose the centre of a circus
for the burying-place of himself and his family, or that he should be
permitted to choose so hallowed a spot. They are of exactly the usual
tomb-form of the age of Constantine, and of the largest size, being each
100 ft. The first was destroyed by Michael Angelo, as it stood on the site
required for his northern tribune, the second by Pius VI., in 1776, to
make way for the present sacristy, and Rome thus lost, through pure
carelessness, the two oldest and most sacred edifices of the Christian
period which she possessed. The most eastern had been so altered and overlaid, having been long used
as a sacristy,[266] that it might have been difficult to restore it; but
its position and its antiquity certainly entitled it to a better fate. The church of San Paolo fuori le Mura was almost an exact counterpart of
St. Peters both in design and dimensions. The only important variations
were that the transept was made of the same width as the central nave,
or about 80 ft., and that the pillars separating the nave from the
side-aisles were joined by arches instead of by a horizontal architrave. Both these were undoubted improvements, the first giving space and
dignity to the bema, the latter not only adding height to the order, but
giving it, together with lightness, that apparent strength requisite to
support the high wall placed over the pillars. Pauls, at Rome, before
the fire.] The order too was finer and more important than at St. Peters,
twenty-four of the pillars being taken from some temple or building (it
is generally said the mausoleum of Hadrian) of the best age of Rome,
though the remaining sixteen were unfortunately only very bad copies of
them. in height, or one-third of the whole
height of the building to the roof. Peters they were only a
fourth, and if they had been spaced a little farther apart, and the arch
made more important, the most glaring defect of these buildings would in
a great measure have been avoided. Long before its destruction by fire in 1822 this church had been so
altered as to lose many of its most striking peculiarities. The bema or
presbytery was divided into two by a longitudinal wall. The greater
number of its clerestory windows were built up, its atrium gone, and
decay and whitewash had done much to efface its beauty, which
nevertheless seems to have struck all travellers with admiration, as
combining in itself the last reminiscence of Pagan Rome with the
earliest forms of the Christian world. It certainly was the most
interesting, if not quite the most beautiful, of the Christian
buildings, of that city. [267]

The third five-aisled basilica, that of St. John Lateran, differs in no
essential respect from those just described except in dimensions; it
covers about 60,000 ft., and consequently is inferior in this respect to
the other two. It has been so completely altered in modern times that
its primitive arrangements can now hardly be discerned, nor can their
effect be judged of, even assuming that they were peculiar to it, which,
however, is by no means certain. Like the other two, it appears to have been originally erected by
Constantine, who seems especially to have affected this five-aisled
form. The churches which he erected at Jerusalem and Bethlehem both have
this number of aisles. From the similarity which exists in the design of
all these churches we might easily restore this building, if it were
worth while. Its dimensions can easily be traced, but beyond this
nothing remains of the original erection. Of those with three aisles by far the finest and most beautiful is that
of S. Maria Maggiore, which, notwithstanding the comparative smallness
of its dimensions, is now perhaps the best specimen of its class
remaining. in width by 250 to the
front of the apse; the whole area being about 32,000 ft. : so that it is
little more than half the size of the Lateran church, and between
one-third and one-fourth of that of the other two five-aisled churches. Notwithstanding this, there is great beauty in its internal colonnade,
all the pillars of which are of one design, and bear a most pleasing
proportion to the superstructure. The clerestory too is ornamented with
pilasters and panels, making it a part of the general design; and with
the roof, which is panelled with constructive propriety and simplicity
combined with sufficient richness, serves to make up a whole which gives
a far better and more complete idea of what a basilica either was
originally, or at least might have been, than any other church at Rome. It is true that both the pilasters of the clerestory and the roof are
modern, and in modern times the colonnade has been broken through in two
places; but these defects must be overlooked in judging of the whole. Another defect is that the side-aisles have been vaulted in modern
times, and in such a manner as to destroy the harmony that should exist
between the different parts of the building. In striving to avoid the
defect of making the superstructure too high in proportion to the
columns, the architect has made the central roof too low either for the
width or length of the main aisle. Still the building, as a whole, isor
rather was before the completion of the rebuilding of St. Paulsthe
very best of the older wooden-roofed churches of Christendom, and the
best model from which to study the merits and defects of this style of
architecture. (From Gutensohn and
Knapp.)] (From Gutensohn and Knapp.) Another mode of getting over the great defect of high walls over the
pillars was adopted, as in St. Agnese, of using a
gallery corresponding with the triforium of Gothic churches. Lorenzo, where this feature first occurs, it would seem to have been
derived from the Eastern Empire, where the custom of providing galleries
for women had long been established; this is rendered probable by the
fact that the sculpture of the capitals carrying the arches of the
triforium is of pure Byzantine character, and by the adoption of what is
virtually a dosseret,[268] or projecting impost above the capital to
carry the arches, which at their springing are considerably wider and
deeper than the abacus of the capital. According to M. Cattaneo[269] the
earliest part of this church is the Eastern end, built by Constantine
(see plan, Woodcut No. 403), which first consisted of nave, aisles, and
a Western apse. In the Pontificate of Sixtus III. (432-440) an immense
basilica was added on the Western side with an Eastern apse built back
to back with the original apse; and later on, in 578-590, galleries were
added to the Western church by Pope Pelagius II. In 1226-1227, when Honorius III. restored the whole building, he removed
the two apses, continued the new arcade up to the early Western wall,
and raised the choir of the early church to its present elevation
(Woodcut No. Agnes the galleries may
have been suggested if not required by the peculiarity of the ground,
which was higher on one side than on the other; but whether this was the
true cause of its adoption or not, the effect was most satisfactory, and
had it been persevered in so as to bring the upper colonnade more into
harmony of proportion with the other, it would have been attended with
the happiest results on the style. Whether it was, however, that the
Romans felt the want of the broad plain space for their paintings, or
that they could not bring the upper arches into proportion with the
classical pillars which they made use of, the system was abandoned
almost as soon as adopted, and never came into general use. It should be observed that this arrangement contained the germs of much
that was afterwards reproduced in Gothic churches. The upper gallery,
after many modifications, at last settled into a triforium, and the
pierced stone slabs in the windows became tracerybut before these were
reached a vaulted roof was introduced, and with it all the features of
the style were to a great extent modified. Lorenzo (fuori le
Mura).] Pudentiana is one of the very oldest
and consequently one of the most interesting of those in Rome. It stands
on substructions of ancient Roman date, which probably formed part of
the Therm of Novatus or the house of the Senator Pudens, who is
mentioned by St. Paul at the end of his Second Epistle to Timothy, and
with whom he is traditionally said to have resided during his sojourn in
Rome. The vaults beneath the church certainly formed part of a Roman
mansion, so apparently do those buildings, shown on the plan, and placed
behind and on one side of the sanctuary; but whether these were used for
Christian purposes before the erection of the church in the fourth
century is by no means certain. In plan the church remains in all
probability very much as originally designed, its most striking
peculiarity being the segmental form of the apse, which may possibly
have arisen from some peculiar arrangement of the original building. It
was not, however, found to be pleasing in an architectural point of
view, and was not consequently again employed. The annexed section probably represents very nearly the original form of
the nave, though it has been so encrusted with modern accretions as to
render it difficult to ascertain what the first form really was. The
shafts of the pillars may have been borrowed from some older edifice,
but the capitals were clearly designed to support arches, and must
therefore be early Christian (fourth century? ), and are among the most
elegant and appropriate specimens of the class now extant. In some instances, as in San Clemente, above alluded to, in San Pietro
in Vincula, and Sta. Maria in Cosmedin, the colonnade is divided into
spaces of three or four intercolumniations by piers of solid masonry,
which give great apparent solidity and strength to the building, but at
the expense of breaking it up into compartments more than is agreeable,
and these destroy that beauty of perspective so pleasing in a continuous
colonnade. This defect seems to have been felt in the Santa Praxede,
where three of these piers are introduced in the length of the
nave,[271] and support each a bold arch thrown across the central aisle. The effect of this might have been most happy, as at San Miniato, near
Florence; but it has been so clumsily managed in the Roman example, as
to be most destructive of all beauty of proportion. Half Section, half Elevation, of the Church of San
Vincenzo alle Tre Fontane. (From Gutensohn and Knapp.) Some of the principal beauties as well as some of the most remarkable
defects of these basilican churches arise from the employment of columns
torn from ancient temples: where this has been done, the beauty of the
marble, and the exquisite sculpture of the capitals and friezes, give a
richness and elegance to the whole that go far to redeem or to hide the
rudeness of the building in which they are encased. But, on the other
hand, the discrepancy between the pillarsDoric, Ionic, and Corinthian
columns being sometimes used side by sidedestroys all uniformity, and
the fragmentary character of the entablatures they support is still more
prejudicial to the continuity of the perspective, which should be the
greatest charm of these churches. By degrees, the fertile quarries of
ancient Rome seem to have become entirely exhausted; and as the example
of St. Pauls proves, the Romans in the fourth century were incapable of
manufacturing even a bad imitation, and were at last forced to adopt
some new plan of supporting their arcades. Nereo ed
Achilleo is, perhaps, the most elegant example of this class, the piers
being light octagons; but the most characteristic, as well as the most
original, is the San Vincenzo alle Tre Fontane, shown in section and
elevation in Woodcut No. It so far deviates from the usual
basilican arrangements as to suggest a later date. It has the same
defect as all the restits pier arches being too low, and for which
there is no excuse herebut both internally and externally it shows a
uniformity of design and a desire to make every part ornamental that
produces a very pleasing effect, notwithstanding that the whole is
merely of brick, and that ornament is so sparingly applied as barely to
prevent the building sinking into the class of mere utilitarian
erections. Among the most pleasing architectural features, if they may be so
called, of these churches, are the mosaic pavements that adorn the
greater number. These were always original, being designed for the
buildings in which they are used, and following the arrangement of the
architecture surrounding them. The patterns too are always elegant, and
appropriate to the purpose; and as the colours are in like manner
generally harmoniously blended, they form not only a most appropriate
but most beautiful basement to the architecture. A still more important feature was the great mosaic picture that always
adorned the semi-dome of the apse, representing most generally the
Saviour seated in glory surrounded by saints, or else some scene from
the life of the holy personage to whom the church was dedicated. These mosaics were generally continued down to nearly the level of the
altar, and along the whole of the inner wall of the sanctuary in which
the apse was situated, and as far as the triumphal arch which separated
the nave from the sanctuary, at which point the mosaic blended with the
frescoes that adorned the upper walls of the central nave above the
arcades. All this made up an extent of polychromatic decoration which in
those dark ages, when few could read, the designers of these buildings
seem to have considered as virtually of more importance than the
architectural work to which it was attached. Any attempt to judge of the
one without taking into consideration the other, would be forming an
opinion on hearing but half the evidence; but taken in conjunction, the
paintings go far to explain, and also to redeem, many points in which
the architecture is most open to criticism. During the whole period of the development of early Christian
architecture in Rome, the city of Ravenna, owing to her close connection
with the Eastern empire, almost rivalled in importance the old capital
of the world, and her churches were consequently hardly less important
either in number or in richness than those we have just been describing. It is true she had none so large as the great metropolitan basilicas of
St. The one five-aisled church she possessedthe
cathedralhas been entirely destroyed, to make way for a very
contemptible modern erection. From the plans, however, which we possess
of it, it seems to have differed very considerably from the Roman
examples, most especially in having no trace of a transept, the building
being a perfectly regular parallelogram, half as long again as its
breadth, and with merely one great apse added at the end of the central
nave. Its loss is the more to be regretted, as it was, besides being the
largest, the oldest church in the city, having been erected about the
year 400, by Archbishop Ursus. The baptistery that belonged to it has
been fortunately preserved, and will be described hereafter. Besides a considerable number of other churches which have either been
lost or destroyed by repair, Ravenna still possesses two first-class
three-aisled basilicasthe San Apollinare Nuovo,[272] originally an
Arian church, built by Theodoric, king of the Goths (A.D. 493-525); and
the S. Apollinare in Classe, at the Port of Ravenna, situated about
three miles from the city, commenced A.D. 538, and dedicated 549 A.D. Of
the two, the first-named is by far the more considerable, being 315 ft. long by 115 in width externally, while the other only measures 216 ft. As will be seen by the plan, S. Apollinare in Classe
is a perfectly regular basilica with twelve pillars on each side of the
nave, which is 50 ft. The apse is raised to allow of a crypt
underneath, and externally it is polygonal, like the Byzantine apse. Arches in Church of San Apollinare Nuovo. [273])]

The great merit of these two basilicas, as compared with those of Rome,
arises from the circumstance of Ravenna having possessed no ruined
temples whose spoils could be used in the construction of new buildings. On the other hand the Goths had no architectural forms of their own; the
architects and workmen therefore who were brought over from
Constantinople reproduced the style with which they were best acquainted
in the East, with such alterations in plan as the liturgies of the
church required, such modifications in construction as the materials of
the country necessitated, and such ideas in architectural design as were
suggested by the examples in Rome with which Theodoric was well
acquainted, having not only restored some of the churches there, but
insisted that the primitive style should be adhered to. The simple
basilican form of church with nave, and aisles without galleries over,
and a single apse, was based on numerous examples existing in Rome, to
which source may be ascribed the external blind arcades of the aisle and
nave walls. [274] From Woodcut 410, representing the arches of the nave
of St. Apollinare Nuovo, it will be seen that an elegance of proportion
is revealed and a beauty of design shown in the details of the
capitals[275] and the dosserets which surmount them, which are quite
foreign to any Roman examples. The great triforium frieze above the
arches, and the wall space above them between the clerestory windows,
covered with mosaics, executed 570 A.D. by Greek artists from
Constantinople, suggest a completeness of design which had not been
reached in Rome. All this is still more apparent in Woodcut No. 411,
taken from the arcade where the nave joins the apse in St. Apollinare in
Classe, which shows a further advance in the working out of a new style,
based partially on Roman work, but carried out by Byzantine artists. Part of Apse in S. Apollinare in Classe, Ravenna. S. Apollinare in Classe, Ravenna. Externally these buildings appear to have remained to the present hour
almost wholly without architectural embellishment. It was considered
sufficient for ornamental purposes to make the brick arches necessary
for the construction slightly more prominent and important than was
actually required. As if impelled by some feeling of antagonism to the
practice of the heathens, the early Christians seem to have tried to
make the external appearance of their buildings as unlike those of their
predecessors as was possible. Whether this was the cause or not, it is
certain that nothing can well be less ornamental than these exteriors;
and even the _narthex_,[276] which in the Apollinare in Classe afforded
an excellent opportunity for embellishment, could not be less ornamental
if it were the entrance to a barn instead of to a church of such
richness and beauty as this in all its internal arrangements. The restoration of portions of the Cathedral of St. Mark during the past
twenty years, and the careful examination of various documents in the
archives of that city have led to the discovery that the work attributed
to Doge Pietro Orseolo, 976-78, consisted mainly in the re-construction
of the basilican church erected by the Doge Jean Participazio in 829-32,
and burnt in 976. Mark the
Evangelist, brought from Alexandria in 828 (when the Mohametans pulled
down the church of St. Mark in that town), determined Jeans brother
Justinian to build a church which should be worthy of their reception. He died, however, before the work was commenced, but left a large sum of
money for the purpose. This church was built on the old site situated
between the Ducal Palace and the church of St. Theodore, which, up to
that time, had served as the Ducal chapel. The width of the church would
seem to have been the same as that of the present nave and aisles. Its
west end formed part of the existing wall behind the present vestibule,
but some difference of opinion seems to exist as to its eastern end, and
whether it coincided with the actual apses. Though nominally built in
976-78 the decoration of Orseolos church was probably carried on in
succeeding years, and much of the sculptural work in the present
building dates from the first half of the 11th century. In 1063, under
the Doge Domenico Contarini, the church of St. Theodore, according to M.
Cattaneo,[277] was pulled down and some of its materials used in the new
cathedral. Portions also of the Ducal Palace were destroyed to give
increased space on the south side for the Transept, the portion known as
the Treasury only being preserved. [278] The record of the new church
states that it was built similar in its artistic construction to that at
Constantinople erected in honour of the twelve apostles. [279] The
arrangement and the design of the church thus extended were probably due
to a Greek architect, though much of the work, according to M. Cattaneo,
was afterwards carried out by a Lombard sculptor, Mazulo, who designed
the atrium and tower of the abbey of Pomposa (about 30 miles from
Venice), where the carving is of the same character or style as that in
St. across the transepts; externally these dimensions are increased
to 260  215, and the whole area to about 46,000 square ft., so that
although of respectable dimensions it is by no means a large church. The
central and western dome are 42 ft. They are carried on spherical pendentives resting on circular
barrel vaults about 15 ft. extends under
the eastern dome and apses, the vault being supported by fifty-six
monolithic columns 5 ft. high: the whole height from floor to the
crown of the arch being under 9 ft. The construction of this crypt
probably followed the erection of the church, which was not consecrated
till 1111, when Ordelapo Faliero was Doge. Externally this apse is
polygonal, as in Byzantine churches, the upper storey being set back to
allow of a passage round. The narthex or vestibule in front of the
church, which extends also on north and south of the nave aisles up to
the transepts, and the rooms over the north narthex and over part of the
baptistery, must have followed the erection of the church; in fact, the
principal front could not have been completed without them. (From Chiesi
Principali di Europa.)]

Externally the original construction was in brick, with blind arcades,
niches, and a simple brick cornice such as is found in Lombardic work. It was not till the commencement of the 13th century that the decoration
of the front and sides with marble was undertaken; the arches were
encased with marble slabs carried on ranges of columns, those of the
narthex being placed one above the other. The shafts, capitals and bases
were brought from other buildings, having been imported from Altinum,
Aquileia, Heraclea, Ravenna, and from other places in Dalmatia, Syria,
and the East. It is possible that the porches of the churches of St. Trophime at Arles may have suggested this method of
decoration, of which no prototype exists in the East. The capitals are
of all periods, from the 4th to the 11th centuries, the entablature
blocks and the stylobates being specially worked for the building. The
rose window of the south transept and others of similar style were
inserted about the commencement of the 14th century, the baptistery and
the chapel of St. Isidore[280] being encased with marbles in the middle
of the same century, and the decoration of the upper part of the arches
of the west, towards the end of the 14th century. As will be seen by the
north and south fronts section (Woodcut No. 416) the original brick
domes were surmounted by timber domes covered with lead, and of
considerable height. These were probably added in the middle of the 13th
century. [281] The rood loft dates from the end of the same century. The
earlier mosaics in the domes date from the 12th century, and the marble
casing of the lower portion of the walls and the richly decorated
pavement from the 12th and 13th centuries. The work of decoration was
carried on through succeeding centuries with occasional restorations, so
that the church itself constitutes a museum with almost every phase of
work in mosaic from the 12th to the 18th centuries. Though from a strictly architectural point of view the disposition of
the design is not equal to those of some of our northern cathedrals
(except perhaps for the greater beauty of Byzantine domical
construction), it is impossible to find fault with plain surfaces when
they are covered with such exquisite gold mosaics as those of St. Marks, or with the want of accentuation in the lines of the roof, when
every part of it is more richly adorned in this manner than any other
church of the Western world. Then too the rood screens, the pulpit, the
pala doro and the whole furniture of the choir are so rich, so
venerable, and on the whole so beautiful, and seen in so exquisitely
subdued a light, that it is impossible to deny that it is perhaps the
most impressive interior in Western Europe. Front at Prigueux, with
almost identical dimensions and design (Woodcut No. 562), is cold,
scattered, and unmeaning, because but a structural skeleton of St. Marks without its adornments. The interior of a 13th-century Gothic
church is beautiful, even when whitewashed; but these early attempts had
not yet reached that balance between construction and ornament, which is
necessary to real architectural effect. The same is true of the exterior; if stripped of its ornament and
erected in plain stone it would hardly be tolerable, and the mixture of
florid 14th-century foliage and bad Italian Gothic details with the
older work, would be all but unendurable. But marble, mosaic, sculpture,
and the all-hallowing touch of age and association, disarm the critic,
and force him to worship when his reason tells him he ought to blame. Marks must have been admired in the days of its freshness,
the Gothic feeling seems to have been so strong in Northern Italy in the
11th and 12th centuries as to prevent its being used as a model. The one
prominent exception is San Antonio, Padua (1237-1307), which is
evidently a copy of St. Marks, but with so much Gothic design mixed up
with it as to spoil both. Length was sought to be obtained by using
seven domes instead of five, and running an aisle round the apse. The
side-aisles were covered with intersecting vaults, and pointed arches
were occasionally introduced when circular would have harmonised better
with the general design. Externally the enveloping porch was omittednot even the Pisan
modification of it introduced, though it might have been employed with
the happiest effect. The consequence of all this jumble is, that San
Antonio is externally one of the most unsatisfactory churches in Europe,
though possessing a quaint Oriental look from the grouping of its dome
with the minaret-like spires which adorn it. The inside is not so bad,
though a roof of only five bays over a quasi-Gothic church, 200 ft. in
length, distorts the proportion, and with the ill-understood details of
the whole, spoils what narrowly escaped being one of the most successful
interiors of that part of Italy. Both Dalmatia and Istria formed part of the Gothic kingdom of Theodoric:
we find therefore the same Byzantine influence exerted as in Ravenna; an
influence which increased when the first-named country was retaken by
Justinian in 535, and the second in 539 A.D. At Parenzo in Istria there is a basilica, built in the year 543 A.D. by
the Bishop Euphrasius, and consequently contemporary with the examples
at Ravenna already described. This church still retains its atrium,
baptistery, and other accompaniments, which those at Ravenna have lost. It consists of a basilica in three aisles, with an apse at the end of
each, and an atrium in front, beyond which is situated the baptistery;
and in front of this again a tower, though this latter feature seems to
be of more modern date. On one side at the east end is a chapel or
crypt; this, Mr. Jackson[282] suggests, may have been the martyrium or
confessio of the basilica where the remains of the saintly patrons of
the church were preserved and venerated. According to strict rule,
Mr. Jackson observes, the confessio should be in a crypt under the
choir as at Aquileja and Zara, but Parenzo lies so low that excavation
would be difficult, and here as in other cases the martyrium may have
been placed in an adjoining building.[283]

Internally the church is 121 ft. in length by 32 in width, and possesses
all the usual arrangements of a church of that date. The columns are
borrowed from some earlier edifice, but the capitals are all original,
and were carved for the church. They are all of pure Byzantine type, and
are surmounted by that essentially Byzantine feature the dosseret. The
central apse, though circular inside, is polygonal outside, which is
another characteristic of Byzantine work. Like Torcello it has still
preserved its semicircle of marble seats for the clergy, with the
episcopal throne in the middle. Externally the faade retains portions
of the ancient mosaics with which it was decorated, and although
internally the nave has lost its early decorations, the lofty dado of
the apse inlaid with slabs of porphyry and serpentine interspersed with
mosaics of opaque glass, onyx and mother-of-pearl, bears witness to its
original splendour, the cypher of Euphrasius denoting its execution to
be coeval with the building of the church, and therefore some centuries
earlier than the mosaics of the baldachino, which are dated 1277. Church at Parenzo in Istria. Jackson for the description of two churches
at Grado: the Duomo and St. Maria delle Grazie; the former a fine
basilican church with nave and aisles and a deep central apse, circular
inside and polygonal externally. [284] The twenty columns of the nave are
all taken from earlier edifices, and of the capitals which surmount them
five are Roman and twelve of pure Byzantine workmanship, based on the
Roman composite capital, but treated in a quite original way. The
capitals are not surmounted by the dosseret, but in the other church of
St. Maria delle Grazie some have the dosseret and others are without it,
though all of the same period. The chief glory of the church, however,
lies in its magnificent marble pavement (measured and illustrated in Mr. Jacksons work), the greater portion of which is still preserved. Maria delle Grazie is a small basilican church of six bays
with fragments of similar pavement to those in the Duomo. The apse here
is masked on the exterior by two sacristies on each side which entirely
enclose it; similar examples are found in De Vogs work of Central
Syria (Woodcuts Nos. The churches of Parenzo and Grado appear to be the only examples
remaining of early Romano-Byzantine work on this side of the Adriatic. Maria de Canneto at Pola, consecrated in 546 A.D., was destroyed in
the 14th and 15th centuries and its materials carried off to Venice for
the adornment of the churches there. As edifices of the age of
Justinian, and as showing the relative position of the various parts
that made up an ecclesiastical establishment in those early times, the
churches of Parenzo and Grado are singularly deserving of the attention
of those to whom the history of art is a matter of interest. The church at Torcello, in the Venetian Lagune, is the last example it
will be necessary to quote in order to make the arrangements of the
early basilicas intelligible. It was originally erected in the seventh
century; of this church, according to M. Cattaneo, the only portion
remaining, if we except a fragment of the ancient baptistery, is the
central apse. In 864, the church would seem to have been reconstructed,
and to this period belong the two side apses, the apsidal crypt with new
windows pierced through the old wall and the external walls: it is
possible that the original nave of the seventh century was retained till
1008, when it was rebuilt by the Doge Pietro Orseolo, on the occasion of
his son being raised to the Bishopric of Torcello. Thirteen of the
capitals of the nave date from this period, one may be earlier, and five
belong to the second half of the 12th century. The whole width of the
church is 71 ft. A screen of six pillars
divides the nave from the sanctuary. Perhaps, however, the most
interesting part of this church is the interior of its apse, which still
retains the bishops throne, surrounded by six ranges of seats for his
presbytery, arranged like those of an ancient theatre. It presents one
of the most extensive and best preserved examples of the fittings of the
apse, and gives a better idea of the mode in which the apses of churches
were originally arranged than anything that is to be found in any other
church, either of its age or of an earlier period. 404), this church possesses a small
side chapel, a vestry or sanctuary, on the Gospel side of the altar, and
the remains of the ancient baptistery may still be traced in front of
the west door. This was a square block, externally, measuring 37 ft. each way; internally an octagon, with the angles cut into hemispherical
niches. A portion of its eastern side only remains, and this is now
hidden behind the modern baptistery, in which, under a board in the
pavement, can be seen the foundations of the second baptistery of the
12th century. In the rear of the church stood the campanile, and across
a narrow passage the conventual buildings; in front of which now stands
the beautiful little church of Sta. Fosca, the whole making up a group
of nearly unrivalled interest considering its small dimensions. Other examples might be quoted differing in some slight respect from
those just given, but the above are probably sufficient to explain the
general arrangements of the early basilican churches and the style of
their architecture, so long as this worked on the old tradition of the
Romano-Byzantine style; in other words, so long as it continued in Italy
to be a distinction from the Roman style without any foreign admixture
beyond that introduced direct from Byzantium. It might be instructive to
speculate on what the style might have become if left alone to develope
itself on its native soil, but it would be extremely difficult to make
the subject clear without a much larger amount of illustration than is
admissible, and which in such a history as this would be out of place. Simultaneously with the elaboration of the rectangular form of church by
the Italians, the Byzantines were occupied with the same task; but,
being freer from the trammels of tradition and less influenced by
examples, they early arrived at forms much more divergent from those of
the classical period than those of Italy, and their style, reacting on
the Italian, produced that very beautiful combination of which Pisa
Cathedral is a type, and St. Marks at Venice an extreme example. This
style generally pervaded the whole south of Italy, with the exception of
Rome; and, from the elements of which it was composed, may fairly be
designated Byzantine Italian. Apse of Basilica at Torcello.] While this was going on in the south, the Longobards, and other
Barbarians who invaded the north of Italy, seized on this type and
worked it out in their own fashion. They, however, conceived the desire
to give a more permanent character to their churches by covering them
over with stone vaulted roofs, which led to most important modifications
of the style. It may probably be correct to assert that no
Romano-Byzantine or early Romanesque church has, or ever had, a vaulted
nave. On the other hand, there is hardly a Barbarian church which the
builders did not aspire to vault, though they were frequently unable to
accomplish it. It was this vaulting mania which led to the invention of
compound piers, pointed arches, buttresses, pinnacles, and all the
numerous peculiarities of the Gothic style; and which, reacting on
northern Italy, produced the Ghibelline or Italian-Gothic style. No exact boundary can be drawn between these two: modifications of style
varied, as Byzantine or Gothic influences ebbed or flowed, during the
Middle Ages. Venice and Pisa, and all Calabria, were generally
influenced by their intercourse with the East, while the whole of the
north of Italy and away from the coast as far down as Sienna and Orvieto
the strong hand of the Teuton made itself felt. Yet Italy cannot be said to have been successful in either style. Her
superior civilisation enabled her to introduce and use an elegance of
detail unknown north of the Alps; but she did not work out the basilican
type for herself: she left it to others to do that for her, and
consequently never perfectly understood what she undertook, or why it
was done. The result is that, though great elegance is found in parts,
Italy can hardly produce a single church which is satisfactory as a
design; or which would be intelligible without first explaining the
basework of those true styles from which its principal features have
been borrowed. CostanzaChurches at Perugia, Nocera,
  Ravenna, MilanSecular Buildings. In addition to the Pagan basilicas and temples, from which the
arrangements of so many of the Christian edifices were obtained, the
tombs of the Romans formed a third type, from which the forms of a very
important class of churches were derived. The form which these buildings retained, so long as they remained mere
sepulchres appropriated to Pagan uses, has been already described (pp. That of Ccilia Metella and those of Augustus and Hadrian
were what would now be called chambered tumuli; originally the
sepulchral chamber was infinitesimally small as compared with the mass,
but we find these being gradually enlarged till we approach the age of
Constantine, when, as in the tombs of the Tossia Family, that called the
Tomb of Helena (Woodcut No. 227) and many others of the same age, they
became miniature Pantheons. The central apartment was all in all; the
exterior was not thought of. Still they were appropriated to sepulchral
rites, and these only, so long as they belonged to Pagan Rome. The case
was different when they were erected by the Christians. No association
could be more appropriate than that of these sepulchral edifices, to a
religion nursed in persecution, and the apostles of which had sealed
their faith with their blood as martyrs; and when the Sacrament for the
dying and the burial service were employed, it was in these circular
churches that it was performed. But besides the viaticum for the
departing Christian, the Church provided the admission sacrament of
baptism for those who were entering into communion, and this was, in
early days at least, always performed in a building separate from the
basilica. It would depend on whether marriage was then considered as a
sacrament or a civil contract, whether it was celebrated in the basilica
or the church; but it seems certain that the one was used almost
exclusively as the business place of the community, the other as the
sacramental temple of the sect. This appears always to have been the
case, at least when the two forms existed together, as they almost
always did in the great ecclesiastical establishments of Italy. When the
church was copied from a temple, as in the African examples above
described, it is probable it may have served both purposes. But too
little is known of the architecture of this early age, and its
liturgies, to speak positively on the subject. The uses and derivation of these three forms of churches are so distinct
that it would be extremely convenient if we could appropriate names to
distinguish them. The first retains most appropriately the name of
basilica, and with sufficient limitation to make it generally
applicable. The word _ecclesia_, or _glise_, would equally suffice for
the second but that it is not English, and has been so indiscriminately
applied that it could not now be used in a restricted sense. The word
kirk, or as we soften it into church, would be appropriate to the
third,[286] but again it has been so employed as to be inapplicable. We
therefore content ourselves with employing the words Basilica, Church,
and Round Church, to designate the three, employing some expletive when
any confusion is likely to arise between the first two of the series. The most interesting feature of the early Romanesque circular buildings
is that they show the same transitional progress from an external to an
internal columnar style of architecture which marked the change from the
Pagan to the Christian form of sacred edifice. It is perhaps not too
much to assert that no ancient classic building of circular form has any
pillars used constructively in its interior. [287] Even the Pantheon,
though 143 ft. in diameter, derives no assistance from the pillars
that surround it internallythey are mere decorative features. The same
is true of the last Pagan example we are acquainted withthe temple or
tomb which Diocletian erected in his palace at Spalato (Woodcut No. The pillars do fill up the angles there, but the building would be
stable without them. The Byzantine architects also generally declined to
avail themselves of pillars to support their domes, but the Romanesque
architects used them almost as universally as in their basilicas. Another very striking peculiarity is the entire abandonment of all
external decoration. Roman circular temples had peristyles, like those
at Tivoli (Woodcut No. 193) and that of Vesta in Rome. Even the Pantheon
is as remarkable for its portico as its dome, so is that known as the
Torre dei Schiavi,[288] but it is only in the very earliest of the
Christian edifices that we find a trace of the portico, and even in them
hardly any attempt at external decoration. The temples of the Christians
were no longer shrines to contain statues and to which worship might be
addressed by people outside, but had become halls to contain the
worshippers themselves while engaged in acts of devotion. The tomb of the Empress Helena (Woodcut No. 227) is one of the earliest
examples of its class. It has no pillars internally, it is true, but it
likewise has none on the exteriorthe transition was not then complete. The same is the case with the two tombs on the Spina of the Circus of
Nero (Woodcut No. They too were astylar, and their external
appearance was utterly neglected. When from these we turn to the Tomb or Baptistery of Constantine, built
some time afterwards (Woodcut No. 422), we find the roof supported by a
screen of eight columns, two storeys in height, and through all its
alterations can detect the effort to make the interior ornamental. It
has, however, a portico, but this again is practically an interior, both
ends being closed with apsidal terminations, so that it really forms a
second apartment, rather than a portico. In both these respects it is in
advance of the building next to it in age that we know ofthe Octagon at
Spalatowhich it otherwise very much resembles. The eight internal
pillars instead of being mere ornaments have become essential parts of
the construction, and the external peristyle has disappeared, leaving
only the fragment of a porch. (From
Isabelle, difices Circulaires.) Scale 100 ft. The tomb which the same Emperor erected to contain the remains of his
daughter Constantia, is another example of the same transitional style. The interior in this instance is vaulted, but so timidly that
twenty-four pillars are employed to sustain a weight for which half that
number would have been amply sufficient. In the square niche opposite
the entrance stood the sarcophagus of the princess, now in the Vatican. The roof of the aisle is adorned with paintings of the vintage and
scenes of rural life, which, like all those on the tombs of Pagan Rome,
have no reference to the sepulchral uses to which the building was
dedicated. The whole internal diameter of the tomb is 73 ft., that of
the dome 35. In front of the building is a small crypto-porticus similar in
arrangement to that of her fathers tomb, and beyond this is an oblong
space with circular ends, and surrounded on all sides by arcades; its
dimensions were 535 ft. by 130, and, though so ruined as hardly to allow
of its arrangements being restored, it is interesting as being perhaps
the only instance of the _forum_, which it is probable was left before
all tombs in those times, and traces of which may perhaps be found
elsewhere, though as yet they have not been looked for. (From Gutensohn and
Knapp.) The only other important circular building within the walls of Rome of
this early age is that known as S. Stefano Rotondo. Though there is
nothing to fix its date with any precision, it is almost certain that it
belongs to the fifth century of the Christian era. in
diameter, and its roof was supported by two ranges of columns,
circularly disposed in its interior; and on the first or inner range
rested a horizontal architrave like that of St. In the outer
one the pillars support arches like those of St. [290] All the
pillars are taken from older buildings. The outer aisle was divided into
eight compartments; but in what manner, and for what purpose, it is not
now easy to ascertain, owing to the ruined state of the building, and to
its having been so much and so frequently altered since it was first
erected. Nor can it be determined exactly how it was roofed; though it
is probable that its arrangements were identical with those of the great
five-aisled basilicas, which it closely resembles, except in its
circular shape. This is more clear in another church of the same age, that of Sti. Angeli, at Perugia, which is very similar in its disposition. Of this
building a section is here shown, as given by M. Isabelleperhaps not
quite to be depended upon in every respect, but still affording a very
fair representation of what the arrangements of the circular wooden
roofed churches were. Its dimensions are much less than those of San
Stefano, being only 115 ft. in diameter; but it is more regular, the
greater part of its materials being apparently original, and made for
the place they occupy. In the church of San Stefano, the tomb-shaped
circular form was probably used as symbolical of his martyrdom. That at
Perugia was most likely originally a baptistery, or it may also have
been dedicated to some martyr; but in the heart of Etruria this form may
have been adopted for other reasons, the force of which we are hardly
able at the present day to appreciate, though in all cases locality is
one of the strongest influencing powers in so far as architectural forms
are concerned. (From Isabelle,
difices Circulaires.) No scale.] Plan of Baptistery at Nocera dei Pagani. Double the
usual scale, or 50 ft. At Nocera dei Pagani, on the road between Naples and Salerno, there is
an extremely beautiful circular church, built undoubtedly for the
purpose of a baptistery, and very similar in plan and general
arrangement to the tomb of Constantia, now known as the Baptistery of
Sta. Agnese, though somewhat larger being 80 ft. Its
principal merit is the form of its dome, which is not only correct in a
scientific point of view, but singularly graceful internally. Externally
this building for the first time introduces us to a peculiarity which
had as much influence on the western styles as any of those pointed out
above. 540), the early Romanesque architects
never attempted to vault their rectangular buildings, but they did
frequently construct domes over their circular edifices. But here again
they did not make the outside of the dome the outline of their
buildings, as the Romans had always done before the time of Constantine,
and as the Byzantines and Saracens invariably did afterwards; but they
employed their vault only as a ceiling internally, and covered it, as in
this instance, with a false wooden roof externally. It may be difficult
to determine how far this was a judicious innovation; but this at least
is certain, that it had as much influence on the development of the
Gothic style as the vaulting mania itself. In the 10th and 11th
centuries many attempts were made to construct true roofs of stone, but
unsuccessfully; and from various causes, which will be pointed out
hereafter, the idea was abandoned, and the architects were forced to
content themselves with a stone ceiling, covered by a wooden roof,
though this became one of the radical defects of the style, and one of
the principal causes of the decay and destruction of so many beautiful
buildings. Section of Baptistery at Nocera dei Pagani. (From
Isabelle, difices Circulaires.) No scale.] Ravenna possesses several circular buildings, almost as interesting as
those of the capital; the first being the baptistery of St. John
belonging to the original basilica, and consequently one of the oldest
Christian buildings of the place. Externally it is a plain octagonal
building, 40 ft. Internally it still retains its mosaic and
other internal features added in the 5th century, which are singularly
elegant and pleasing. Its design is somewhat like that of the temple at
Spalato, but with arcades substituted everywhere for horizontal
architraves; the century that elapsed between these two epochs having
sufficed to complete the transition between the two styles. Far more interesting than this is the great church of St. Vitale, the
most complicated, and at the same time, perhaps, the most beautiful, of
the circular churches of that age. In design it is nearly identical with
the church of St. Sergius at Constantinople (see Woodcut No. 311), from
which it was undoubtedly copied, and probably by Greek artists from that
town. It was built in the reign of Justinian by St. Ecclesius,
archbishop of the see, and was consecrated in 547, eight years after the
taking of Ravenna by Justinians generals. The principal difference of
the plan lies in its being enclosed within an octagon instead of a
square, as in St. Sergius, probably to mask the irregularity of the main
entrance from a street which did not run in the direction of any of the
cardinal points. The recesses are loftier in proportion than those of
St. Sergius, and in the lower storey arcades take the place of beams. The aisles being covered with timber roofs, it was necessary to raise
the walls of the octagon higher than those of St. Sergius, and small
arches take the place of the usual pendentives: the springing of the
dome, which is 50 ft. in diameter, is on the level of the sill of the
windows the arches of which therefore form penetrations into the dome. The church is built in bricks with thick mortar joints, the dome being
constructed in an ingenious manner with hollow pots fitted the end of
one into the mouth of the other; the lightness of this vault has enabled
the builders to dispense with the immense arches and buttresses found in
St. Similar construction with pots had been
employed in the East for domes and roofs,[291] and they form as
permanent a method as stone itself, in addition to the stability,
facility of construction, and lightness which such an expedient affords. Internally a good deal has been done in modern times to destroy the
simplicity of the original effect of the building; but still there is a
pleasing result produced by alternating the piers with circular columns,
and a lightness and elegance about the whole design that render it
unrivalled in the western world among churches of its class. This seems
to have been admitted by its contemporaries as much as it is in modern
times. Charlemagne at all events copied it for his own tomb at
Aix-la-Chapelle, and the architects of many other circular buildings of
that age appear to have derived their inspiration from this one. The church of San Lorenzo at Milan, had it not been so much altered in
modern times, would take precedence of San Vitale in almost every
respect. The date of its erection is not known, though it certainly must
be as early as, if not earlier than, the time of Justinian. Down to the
8th century it was the cathedral of the city. It was burnt to the ground
in 1071, and restored in 1119; the dome then erected fell in 1571, on
which it underwent its last transformation from the hands of Martino
Bassi and Pellegrini, who so disfigured its ancient details as to lead
many modern inquirers to doubt whether it was really so old as it was
said to be. Its plan, however, seems to have remained unchanged, and shows a further
progress towards what afterwards became the Byzantine style than is to
be found either in St. It is in fact the
earliest attempt to amalgamate the circular church with one of a square
shape; and except that the four lateral colonnades are flat segments of
circles, and that there is a little clumsiness in the angles (due
possibly to the additions made in 1119 and 1571, when the plan of the
dome was changed to an octagon, the original dome being probably
circular, and carried on four spherical pendentives), it is one of the
most successful designs handed down from that early age. The dome as it now stands is octagonal, which the first dome certainly
could not have been. Its diameter is 70 ft., nearly equal to that of the
Minerva Medica, and the whole diameter of the building is internally 142
ft. (From Quast,
Altchristlichen, &c.) In front of the church, in the street, is a handsome colonnade of
pillars, borrowed from some ancient templeit is said from one dedicated
to Hercules; this leads to a square atrium, now wholly deprived of its
lateral arcades; and this again to a faade, which has been strangely
altered in modern times. Opposite this, to the eastward of the church,
is an octagonal building, apparently intended as a tomb-house; and on
the north side a similar one, though smaller. On the south is the
baptistery, about 45 ft. in diameter, approached by a vestibule in the
same manner as that of Constantine at Rome, and as in the tomb of his
daughter Constantia: all these, however, have been so painfully altered,
that little remains besides the bare plan of the building; still there
is enough to show that this is one of the oldest and most interesting of
the Christian churches of Italy. The building now known as the baptistery at Florence is an octagon, 108
ft. Like the last-mentioned church, it was
originally the cathedral of the city, and was erected to serve as such
apparently in the time of Theodelinda, queen of the Lombards. If this
was so, it certainly had not originally its present form, and most
probably those columns which now stand ranged round the walls at that
time stood in the centre, as in the Roman examples. If the original roof
was of wood, it was probably in two storeys, like that of the baptistery
of Constantine, or it may have been a dome of more solid materials, like
that of the Sta. At the same time when the new cathedral was built, the older edifice
appears to have been remodelled both internally and externally by
Arnolpho da Lapo, and both its form and decoration so completely
changed, that it must now be considered rather as a building of the 13th
century than of the 6th, in which it seems originally to have been
erected. [292]

[Illustration: 433. Half Section, half Elevation, of the Baptistery at
Novara. The baptistery of Novara, which may date from the time of Charlemagne,
is interesting in that it contains the germ of those external galleries
under the roof which form not only one of the most common but also one
of the most beautiful features of the later Lombard and Rhenish
churches. 433) it will easily be seen
what was the motive and use of this arrangement, the first trace of
which dates perhaps as far back as the baptistery of Nocera (Woodcut No. 428); for wherever a wooden roof was placed over a circular vault, it is
evident that the external walls must be carried up higher than the
springing of the arch. But it was by no means necessary that this
additional wall should be so solid as that below it, and it was
necessary to introduce light and air into the space between the stone
and the wooden roofs. Add to this the incongruity of effect in placing a
light tiled wooden roof on a massive solid wall, and it will be evident
that not only did the exigencies of the building, but the true
principles of taste, demand that this part should be made as light as
possible. Such openings as those found in the baptistery at Novara
suggested an expedient which provided for these objects. This was
afterwards carried to a much greater extent. At first, however, it seems
only to have been used under the roofs of the domes with which the
Italians almost universally crowned the intervention of naves and
transepts, and round the semidomes of the apses; but so enamoured did
they afterwards become of this feature, that it is frequently carried
along the sides of the churches under the roof of the nave and of the
aisles, and alsowhere it is of more questionable tasteunder the
sloping naves of the roof of the principal faade. There is nothing in the Lombardian and Rhenish styles so common or so
beautiful as these galleries, the arcades of which have all the shadow
given by a cornice without its inconvenient projection, while the little
shafts with their elegant capitals and light archivolts have a sparkle
and brilliancy which no cornice ever possessed. Indeed so beautiful are
they, that we are not surprised to find them universally adopted; and
their discontinuance on the introduction of the pointed style was one of
the greatest losses sustained by architectural art in those days. It is
true they would have been quite incompatible with the thin walls and
light piers of pointed architecture, but it may be safely asserted that
no feature which these new styles introduced was equally beautiful with
those galleries which they superseded. Tomb of Galla Placidia, Ravenna. There can be little doubt that many other similar buildings belonging to
this age still exist in various parts of Italy; for it is more than
probable that, at a time when the city was not of sufficient importance,
or the congregation so numerous as to require the more extended
accommodation of the basilica, almost all the earlier churches were
circular. They either, however, have perished from lapse of time, or
have been so altered as to be nearly unrecognisable. We here, in
consequence, come again to a break in the chain of our sequence; and
when we again meet with any circular buildings in Italy, their features
are so distinctly Gothic or Byzantine, that they must be classed with
one or other of these modifications. The true Romano-Byzantine style had
nearly come to an end when Alboin the Lombard had made himself master of
the greater part of Italy about the year 575. Before leaving this branch of the subject there are two small buildings
at Ravenna which it is impossible to pass over, though their direct
bearing on the history of this subject is not so apparent as it is in
the case of other buildings just described. The first and earliest is
the tomb of Galla Placidia (Woodcut No. 302), now known as the church of
SS. Nazario and Celso, and must have been erected before the year 450. It is singular among all the tombs of that age from the abandonment in
it of the circular for a cruciform plan. Such forms, it is true, are
common in the chambers of tumuli and also among the catacombs, while the
church which Constantine built in Constantinople and dedicated to the
Apostles, meaning it however as a sepulchral church, was something also
on this plan. Notwithstanding, however, these examples, this must be
considered as an exceptional form, though its diminutiveness (it being
only 35 ft. by 30 internally) might perhaps account for any caprice. Its
great interest to us consists in its retaining not only its primitive
architectural form (which is that of a dome carried on pendentives, and
one of the few instances in which both dome and pendentives form part of
one sphere), but its polychromatic decorations nearly in their original
state of completeness (Woodcut 302). The three arms of the cross forming
the receptacles for the three sarcophagi is certainly a pleasing
arrangement, but is only practicable on a small scale. Capital of Pillars forming peristyle round
Theodorics Tomb. Elevation of Tomb of Theodoric, Ravenna. (From
Isabelle, difices Circulaires.)]

Far more interesting than thisarchitecturally at leastis the tomb of
Theodoric, the Gothic king, now known as Santa Maria Rotunda. The lower
storey is a decagon externally, enclosing a cruciform crypt. in diameter, each face being ornamented by a deep niche. These
support a flat terrace, on which originally stood a range of small
pillars supporting arches which surrounded the upper storey. These have
all been removed, though their form can be restored from fragments
found, and as shown in Woodcut No. On the face of the tomb itself
are the sinkings for the architraves and vaults which they supported. The most singular part of the building is the roof, which is formed of
one great slab hollowed out into the form of a flat domeinternally 30
ft. in diameterand which certainly forms one of
the most unique and appropriate coverings for a tomb perhaps anywhere to
be found. Near the edge are a series of projecting bosses, which
evidently were originally used as handles, by means of which the immense
mass was raised to its present position. In the centre of the dome is a
small square pedestal, on which, it is said, once stood the urn which
contained the ashes of its founder. The model of this building seems probably to have been the Mole of
Hadrian, which Theodoric saw, and must have admired, during his
celebrated visit to Rome. The polygonal arrangements of the exterior,
and the substitution of arcades for horizontal architraves, were only
such changes as the lapse of time had rendered indispensable. But the
building of the ancient world which it most resembles is the Tour Magne
at Nmes. In both cases we have the polygonal basement containing a
great chamber, and above this externally the narrow ledge, approached by
flying flights of steps. We cannot now tell what crowned the French
example, though the fact of an urn crowning the tomb at Ravenna points
to an identical origin, but we must obtain a greater number of examples
before we can draw any positive conclusions as to the origin of such
forms. Meanwhile, however, whether we consider the appropriateness of
the forms, the solidity of its construction, or the simplicity of its
ornaments and details, this tomb at Ravenna is not surpassed by any
building of its class and age. Though the investigation of the early history of these circular forms of
churches is not so important as that of the rectangular basilicas, it is
extremely interesting from the influence they had on the subsequent
development of the style. In Italy it is probable that one-half of the
early churches were circular in plan; and one such is still generally
retained attached to each cathedral as a baptistery. Except for this
purpose, however, the form has generally been superseded: the
rectangular being much easier to construct, more capable of extension,
and altogether more appropriate to the ritual of the Christian
community. In France the circular form was early absorbed into the
basilica, forming the Chevet or apse. In Germany its fate was much the
same as in Italy, but its supersession was earlier and more complete. In
England some half-dozen examples are known to exist, and in Spain they
have yet to be discovered. Had the Gothic architects applied themselves to the extension and
elaboration of the circular form with the same zeal and skill as was
displayed in that task by their Byzantine brethren, they might probably
have produced something far more beautiful than even the best of our
medival cathedrals; but when the Barbarians began to build, they found
the square form with its straight lines simpler and easier to construct. It thus happened that, long before they became as civilised and expert
as the Easterns were when they commenced the task, the Westerns had
worked the rectangular form into one of considerable beauty, and had
adapted it to their ritual, and their ritual to it. It thus became the
sacred and appropriate form, and the circular or domical forms were
consequently never allowed a fair trial in Western Europe. Very few remains of secular buildings in the early Christian style are
now to be found in Italy. The palace of Theodoric at Ravenna, though
sadly mutilated, is perhaps the best and most perfect. In all its
details it shows a close resemblance to that of Diocletian at Spalato,
but more especially so to the Porta Aurea and the most richly and least
classically decorated parts of that edifice, but much intermixed with
mouldings and details which would seem to belong to a later style. Another building, though perhaps of earlier date, is that which is now
called the Palazzo delle Torre at Turin, and which still retains the
architectural ordinance of the exterior of a Roman amphitheatre, but so
modified by common sense that the pilasters are frankly accepted as
purely decorative features, having only a slight projection. A similar
style of work is found at Bordeaux in what is known as the Palais
Gallien, but which in reality is a fragment of an amphitheatre built by
the Emperor Gallienus (260-268 A.D.). The example at Turin is built with
brick of large dimensions 15 in. by 11 in., which, coupled with its
character and style, has led M. Cattaneo to ascribe it to the 3rd or 4th
century of our era; the paucity of contemporary examples, however,
renders it extremely difficult to trace the exact history of the style
at this age. Palazzo delle Torre, Turin. (From Ostens Bauwerke
in der Lombardei.)]

In so progressive an art as architecture it is always very difficult,
sometimes impossible, to fix the exact date when one style ends and
another begins. In an art so pre-eminently ecclesiastical as
architecture was in those days, it will probably be safer to look in the
annals of the Church rather than in those of the State for a date when
the debased-Roman expired, giving birth, phnix-like, to the Romanesque. Viewed from this point there can be little doubt but that the reign of
Gregory the Great (A.D. 590 to 603) must be regarded as that in which
the Latin language and the Roman style of architecture both ceased to be
generally or even commonly employed. After this date we wander on through five centuries of tentative efforts
to form a new style, and in the age of another Gregorythe VII.we find
at last the Romanesque style emancipated from former traditions, and
marching steadily forward with a well-defined aim. What had been
commenced under the gentle influence of a Theodelinda at Florence in the
year 600, was completed in the year 1077 under the firmer guidance of a
Matilda at Canossa. LOMBARD AND ROUND-ARCHED GOTHIC. Chapel at FriuliChurches at Piacenza and NovaraSt. Ambrogio, MilanCathedral, PiacenzaChurches at VeronaChurches at
  ToscanellaCircular ChurchesTowers. When, in the early centuries of the Christian era, the great mass of
Gothic barbarism moved up the Valley of the Danube towards the west, one
great division followed that river to its source, and thence penetrated
into and settled in the Valley of the Rhine. Though sufficiently
numerous to be able almost wholly to obliterate all traces of former
civilisation, they had virtually no style of their own, and it seems
probable that the edifices left by the Romans sufficed for the early
wants of the people. The other great division of the horde turned to the Smmering Alps and,
penetrating into Italy by way of Udine and Conegliano, settled in the
Valley of the Po. They may have been as numerous as the others; but
Italy in those days was far more densely peopled than Germany, and the
inhabitants were consequently able to resist obliteration far more
successfully than on the north of the Alps, and even where the new
element prevailed most strongly its influence was far less felt than in
the more sparsely-peopled Rhenish provinces. This was generally more
apparent along the coast than in the interior. Venice did not exist, and
Ravenna, though overwhelmed, became the great centre of Romano-Byzantine
art. The
Barbarian influence was strongly felt at Siena, more feebly at Orvieto;
but there it was stopped by the influence of Rome, which throughout the
Middle Ages remained nearly uncontaminated. Notwithstanding the almost insuperable barrier of the Alps which
stretched between them and the different influences to which they were
subjected, the connection between the northern and southern hordes
remained intimate during the whole of the Middle Ages. Milan was as much
German as Italian; and, indeed, except from a slightly superior degree
of elegance in the southern examples, it is sometimes extremely
difficult to distinguish between the designs of Lombard and of Rhenish
churches. As the Middle Ages wore on, however, the breach between the
two styles widened; and there is no difficulty, in the later pointed
schools, in seeing how Italy was gradually working itself free from
German influence, till at last they became distinct and antagonistic
nationalities, practising two styles of art, which had very little in
common the one with the other. Whoever the Barbarians were who in the 5th and 6th centuries swarmed
into ItalyAustro-Goths, Visi-Goths, or Lombardsthey certainly did not
belong to any of the great building races of the world. Few people ever
had better opportunities than they of employing their easily-acquired
plunder in architectural magnificence, if they had any taste that way;
but, though we hear everywhere of the foundation of churches and the
endowment of ecclesiastical establishments during the Carlovingian
period, not one important edifice of that age has come down to our time. The monumental history of the early Romanesque style is as essentially a
blank in Italy as it is in Saxon England. One or two circular buildings
remain tolerably entire; some small chapels let us into the secrets of
the style, but not one important edifice of any sort attests the
splendour of the Lombard kingdom of Northern Italy. Aryans they must
have been, and it was not till the beginning of the 11th century, when
their blood was thoroughly mixed with that of the indigenous inhabitants
and a complete fusion of races had taken place, that we find buildings
of a monumental character erected, which have come down to the present
day. Among the smaller monuments of the age none has been preserved more
complete and less altered than the little chapel at Friuli; which,
though extremely small (only 18 ft. by 30 inside the walls), is
interesting, as retaining all its decorations almost exactly as they
were left by Gertrude, duchess of Friuli, who erected it in the 8th
century. It shows considerable elegance in its details, and the
sculpture is far better than it afterwards became, though perhaps its
most remarkable peculiarity is the intersecting vault that covers
it_pulchre testudinatum_, as the old chronicle terms it. This is one
proof among many, how early that feature was introduced which afterwards
became the formative principle of the whole Gothic style, and was as
essentially its characteristic as the pillars and entablatures of the
five orders were the characteristics of the classical styles of Greece
and Rome. As before remarked, it is this necessity for a stone roof that
was the problem to be solved by the architects, and to accomplish which
the style took almost all those forms which are so much admired in it. From this example of the Carlovingian era we are obliged to pass to the
11th and 12th centuries, the first great building age of the Lombards. It is true that there is scarcely a single important church in Pavia, in
Verona, or indeed in any of the cities of Lombardy, the original
foundation of which cannot be traced back to a much earlier period. Before the canons of architectural criticism were properly understood,
antiquaries were inclined to believe that in the buildings now existing
they saw the identical edifices erected during the period of the Lombard
sway. Either, however, in consequence of the rude construction of the
earlier buildings, or because they were too small or too poor for the
increased population and wealth of the cities at a later period, every
one of the original churches has disappeared and been replaced by a
larger and better-constructed edifice, adorned with all the improvements
which the experience of centuries had introduced into the construction
of religious edifices. Judging from the rudeness of the earliest churches which we know to have
been erected in the 11th century, it is evident that the progress made,
up to that period, was by no means equal to what was accomplished during
the next two centuries. [294]]

This will appear from the plan and section of St. Antonio at Piacenza
(Woodcuts Nos. 440 and 440a), built in the first years of the 11th
century, and dedicated in 1014 by Bishop Siegfried. Section of Church of San Antonio at Piacenza. Plan and section of Baptistry at Asti. Its arrangement is somewhat peculiar; the transepts are near the west
end, and the octagonal tower rising from the intersection is supported
on eight pillars, the square being completed by four polygonal piers. The principal point, however, to observe is, how completely the style
has emancipated itself from all Roman tradition. A new style has grown
up as essentially different from the early Christian as the style of
Cologne or of York Cathedral. The architect is once more at liberty to
work out his own designs without reference to anything beyond the
exigencies of the edifices themselves. The plan, indeed, is still a
reminiscence of the Basilica; but so are all the plans of Medival
cathedrals, and we may trace back the forms of the pillars, the piers,
and the arches they support, to the preceding style. All these were
derived from Roman art, but the originals are forgotten, and the new
style is wholly independent of the old one. The whole of the church too
is roofed with intersecting vaults, which have become an integral part
of the design, giving it an essentially different character. On the
outside buttresses are introducedtimidly, it is true, but so
frequently, as to make it evident that already there existed no
insuperable objection to increase either their number or depth, as soon
as additional abutment was required for wider arches. The windows, as in all Italian churches, are small, for the Italians
never patronised the art of painting on glass, always preferring
frescoes or paintings on opaque grounds. In their bright climate, very
small openings alone were requisite to admit a sufficiency of light
without disturbing that shadowy effect which is so favourable to
architectural grandeur. Being a parochial church, this building had no baptistery attached to
it; but there is one at Asti (Woodcut No. 441) so similar in style and
age, that its plan and section, if examined with those of San Antonio,
will give a very complete idea of Lombard architecture in the beginning
of the 11th century, when it had completely shaken off the Roman
influence, but had not yet begun to combine the newly-invented forms
with that grace and beauty which mark its more finished examples. One
peculiarity of this building is the gloom that reigns within, there
being absolutely no windows in the dome, and those in the aisles are so
small, that even in Italy the interior must always have been in
comparative darkness. The cathedral of Novara, which in its present state is one of the most
important buildings of the 11th century in the North of Italy, shows the
style still further advanced. The coupling and grouping of piers are
here fully understood, and the divisions of the chapels which form the
outer aisle are, in fact, concealed buttresses. The Italians were never
able to divest themselves of their partiality for flat walls, and never
liked the bold external projections so universally admired on the other
side of the Alps. They therefore gladly had recourse to this expedient
to conceal them; and when this was not available they used metallic ties
to resist the thrust of the archesan expedient which is found even in
this example. As will be seen from the annexed plan, the atrium
connecting the basilica with the baptistery is retained, which seems to
have been an arrangement almost universal in those early times. The half
section, half elevation of the front (Woodcut No. 443) shows very
distinctly how far the invention of the new style had then gone; for
except some Corinthian pillars, borrowed from an older edifice, no trace
of debased-Roman architecture is to be found in it. The design of the
faade explains what it was that suggested to the Pisan architects the
form to which they adapted their Romanesque details. In both styles the
arcade was the original model of the whole system of ornamentation. In
this case it is used first as a discharging arch, then as a mere
repetition of a useful member, and lastly without pillars, as a mere
ornamental string-course, which afterwards became the most favourite
ornament, not only in Italy, but throughout all Germany. Elevation and Section of the Faade of the Cathedral
at Novara. Interesting as such an example is to the architectural antiquary who is
tracing back and trying to understand the forms of a new style, it would
be difficult to conceive anything much uglier and less artistic than
such a faade as this of Novara or that of San Antonio, last quoted. Their sole merit is their history and their expression of rude energy,
so characteristic of the people who erected them. The church of San Michele at Pavia, which took its present form either
at the end of the 11th or beginning of the 12th century, is one of the
most interesting of this age, and presents in itself all the
characteristics of a perfect round-arched Gothic church. Indeed there is
hardly any feature worth mentioning which was invented after this date
except the pointed archa very doubtful improvementand window tracery,
which the Italians never cordially adopted or understood. 444) shows the general arrangement of San Michele in its
present state. The researches of M. de Dartein,[295] however, have shown
that, when first built, the nave was covered over with two square
quadripartite vaults, as might in fact have been divined from the
difference in size[296] of the centre and two other piers. The existing
oblong vaulted compartments date from the 15th century, when secondary
shafts were carried up above the ground storey shafts of piers 1 and 3. The section, however, shows that well-marked vaulting shafts spring from
floor to roof, that the pier arches in the wall are probably distinct
and well understood, and that the angles of these piers are softened and
ornamented by shafts and other subordinate members. Altogether, it is
evident that that subdivision of labour (if the expression may be used)
which was so characteristic of the true Gothic style had here been
perfectly understood, every part having its own function and telling its
own story. To complete the style only required a little experience to
decide on the best and most agreeable proportions in size and solidity. In a century from the date of this church the required progress had been
made; a century later it had been carried too far, and the artistic
value of the style was lost in mere masonic excellence. San Michele and
the other churches of its age fail principally from over-heaviness of
parts and a certain clumsiness of construction, which, though not
without its value as an expression of power, wants the refinement
necessary for a true work of art. Externally, one of the most pleasing
features of this church is the apse with its circular gallery. In
Italian churches the gallery is usually a simple range of similar
arcades; here, however, it is broken into three great divisions by
coupled shafts springing from the ground, and these again subdivided by
single shafts running in like manner through the whole height of the
apse. The gallery thus not only becomes a part of the whole design,
instead of looking like a possible afterthought, but an agreeable
variety is also given, which adds not a little to the pleasing effect of
the building. View of the Apse of San Michele, Pavia. (From Du
Somerard, Les Arts au Moyen-Age.)]

There are at least two other churches in Pavia, which, though altered in
many parts, retain their apsidal arrangements tolerably perfect. One of
these, that of San Teodoro (1150), may be somewhat later than the San
Michele, and has its gallery divided into triplets of arcades by bold
flat buttresses springing from the ground. In the other, San Pietro in
Cielo dOro, dating from 1132, the arcade is omitted round the apse,
though introduced in the central dome. It has besides two subordinate
apses of graceful design, but inferior to the other examples. Though Milan must have been rich in churches of this age, the only one
now remaining tolerably entire is San Ambrogio, which is so interesting
as almost to make amends for its singularity. Historical evidence shows
that a church existed here from a very early age. It was rebuilt in the
9th century by Bishop Angelbert, aided by the munificence of Louis the
Pious, and an atrium was added by Bishop Anspertus; but except the apse
and the canons tower, nothing remains of even that church, all the
rest having been rebuilt in the 11th or 12th century. During the late
restoration the bases of some of the columns of the 9th-century church
were discovered, and one of them is now visible in the pulpit enclosure. The disposition of the building will be understood from the annexed
plan, which shows both the atrium and the church. The former is
virtually the nave; in other words, had the church been erected on the
colder and stormier side of the Alps, a clerestory would have been added
to the atrium, and it would have been roofed over; and then the plan
would have been nearly identical with that of a Northern cathedral. The third (sexpartite) bay was revaulted in the 14th century with two
oblong quadripartite vaults, but these are now replaced by sexpartite
vaulting. The dome is probably an addition of the end of the 12th
century, and it is raised over what would otherwise have been the fourth
bay of the church. As it is, the atrium (Woodcut No. 446) is a highly
pleasing adjunct to the faade, removing the church back from the noisy
world outside, and by its quiet seclusion tending to produce that
devotional feeling so suitable to the entrance of a place of worship. The faade of the building itself, though, like the atrium, only in
brick, is one of the best designs of its age; the upper loggia, or open
gallery, of five bold but unequal arches, producing more shadow than the
faade at Pisa, without the multitude of small parts there crowded
together, and with far more architectural propriety and grace. As seen
from the atrium, with its two towers, one on either flank, it forms a
composition scarcely surpassed by any other in this style. As now restored, the simplicity and line effect of the vaulted interior
is remarkable, and it is also a museum of ecclesiological antiquities of
the best class. The silver altar of Angilbertus (A.D. 835) is unrivalled
either for richness or beauty of design by anything of the kind known to
exist elsewhere, and the _baldacchino_ that surmounts it is also of
singular beauty: so are some of its old tombs, of the earliest Christian
workmanship. Its mosaics, its pulpit, and the bronze doors, not to
mention the brazen serpentsaid to be the very one erected by Moses in
the wildernessand innumerable other relics, make this church one of the
most interesting of Italy, if not indeed of all Europe. Atrium of San Ambrogio, Milan. [297])]

Generally speaking, the most beautiful part of a Lombard church is its
eastern end. The apse with its gallery, the transepts, and above all the
dome that almost invariably surmounts their intersection with the choir,
constitute a group which always has a pleasing effect, and is very often
highly artistic and beautiful. The sides of the nave, too, are often
well designed and appropriate; but, with scarcely a single exception,
the west end, or entrance front, is comparatively mean. The building
seems to be cut off at a certain length without any appropriate finish,
or anything to balance the bold projections towards the east. The French
cathedrals, on the contrary, while they entirely escape this defect by
means of their bold western towers, are generally deficient in the
eastern parts, and almost always lack the central dome or tower. The
English Gothic architects alone understood the proper combination of the
three parts. The Italians, when they introduced a tower, almost always
used it as a detached object, and not as a part of the design of the
church. In consequence of this the faades of their churches are
frequently the least happy parts of the composition, notwithstanding the
pains and amount of ornament lavished upon them. Faade of the Cathedral at Piacenza. (From Chapuy,
Moyen-ge Monumental.)]

The elevation of the cathedral at Piacenza is a fair illustration of the
general mode of treating the western front of the building, not only in
the 11th and 12th centuries, but afterwards, when a church had a faade
at allfor the Italians seem to have been seldom able to satisfy
themselves with this part of their designs, and a great many of their
most important churches have, in consequence, not even now been
completed in this respect. Instead of recessing their doors, as was the practice on this side of
the Alps, the Italians added projecting porches, often of considerable
depth, and supported by two or more slight columns, generally resting on
the backs of symbolical animals. No part of these porches, as an
architectural arrangement, can be deemed worthy of any commendation;
for, in the first place, a column planted on an animals back is an
anomaly and an absurdity, and the extreme tenuity of the pillars, as
compared with the mass they support, is so glaring that even its
universality fails in reconciling the eye to the disproportion. In the
present instance the porch is two storeys in height, the upper being a
niche for sculpture. Its almost exact resemblance to the entrance porch
below is therefore a defect. Above there is generally a gallery,
sometimes only in the centre; sometimes, as in this instance, at the
sides, though often carried quite across; and in the centre above this
there is almost invariably a circular window, the tracery of which is
frequently not only elaborately but beautifully ornamented with foliage
and various sculptural devices. Above this there is generally one of those open galleries mentioned
before, following the <DW72> of the roof, though frequently, as in this
instance, this is replaced by a mere belt of semicircular arches,
suggesting an arcade, but in reality only an ornament. Almost every important city in Lombardy shows local peculiarities in its
style, arising from some distinction of race or tradition. The greater
number of these must necessarily be passed over in a work like the
present, but some are so marked as to demand particular mention. Among
these that of Verona seems the most marked and interesting. This Roman
city became the favourite capital of Theodoric the GothDietrich of
Berne, as the old Germans called himand was by him adorned with many
noble buildings which have either perished or been overlooked. There is
a passage in the writings of his friend Cassiodorus which has hitherto
been a stumbling-block to commentators, but seems to find an explanation
in the buildings here, and to point to the origin of a mode of
decoration worth remarking upon. In talking of the architecture of his
day he speaks of the reed-like tenuity of the columns making it appear
as if lofty masses of building were supported on upright spears, which
in regard to substance look like hollow tubes.[298] It might be
supposed that this referred exclusively to the metal architecture of the
use of which we find traces in the paintings at Pompeii and
elsewhere. [299] But the context hardly bears this out, and he is
probably alluding to a stone or marble architecture, which in the
decline of true art had aspired to a certain extent to imitate the
lightness which the metallic form had rendered a favourite. To return to Verona:The apse of the cathedral seems to have belonged to
an older edifice than that to which it is now attached, as was often the
case, that being the most solid as well as the most sacred part of the
building. 449) it is ornamented with
pilasters, classical in design, but more attenuated than any found
elsewhere; so that I cannot but believe that this is either one of the
identical buildings to which Cassiodorus refers, or at least an early
copy from one of them. (From Hopes History
of Architecture.)]

At a far later age, in the 12th century, the beautiful church of San
Zenone shows traces of the same style of decoration (Woodcut No. 450),
pilasters being used here almost as slight as those at the cathedral,
but so elegant and so gracefully applied as to form one of the most
beautiful decorations of the style. Once introduced, it was of course
repeated in other buildings, though seldom carried to so great an extent
or employed so gracefully as in this instance. Indeed, whether taken
internally or externally, San Zenone may be regarded as one of the most
pleasing and perfect examples of the style to be found in the North of
Italy. The cathedral at Modena is another good example, though not possessing
any features of much novelty or deserving special mention. That of Parma
is also important, though hardly so pleasing. Indeed, scarcely any city
in the Valley of the Po is without some more or less-perfect churches of
this date, none showing any important peculiarities that have not been
exemplified above, unless perhaps it is the apse of the church of San
Donato on the Murano near Venice, which is decorated with a richness of
marble decoration to which the purer Gothic style never attained, and
which entitles this church to rank rather with the Byzantine than with
the Lombard buildings of which we are treating, or a style so curiously
exceptional as to make it one of the most interesting churches,
historically, to be found in the North of Italy. Faade of San Zenone, Verona. Recent discoveries in Syria[300] have proved almost beyond a doubt that
the carved slabs with which it is adorned externally were borrowed from
some desecrated building on the coast of Syriadestroyed probably by the
Moslemsand brought to Venice, probably at the time when the church
acquired the remains of San Donato, in the beginning of the 12th
century. Whether brought then or at an earlier period, they belong to
the age of Justinian, certainly came from the East, and, mixed up with
Italian details of the period, make up an exterior as picturesque as it
is interesting to the student of the history of art in those days. It is extremely difficult to draw a line between the pointed and
round-arched Gothic styles in Italy. The former was so evidently a
foreign importation, so unwillingly received and so little understood,
that it made its way but slowly. Even, for instance, in the church at
Vercelli, which is usually quoted as the earliest example of the pointed
style in Italy (built 1219-1222), there is not a pointed arch nor a
trace of one on the exterior. All the windows and openings are
round-headed, and, except the pier-arches and vaults, nothing pointed
appears anywhere. Even at a later date than this the round arch,
especially as a decorative form, is frequently placed above the pointed
one, and always used in preference to it. Instead, therefore, of
attempting to draw a line where none exists in reality, it will be
better now to pass on from this part of the subject, and to take up the
older style at a point from which we can best trace the formation of the
new. The latter does not essentially differ from the former, except in
the introduction of the French form of the pointed arch and its
accompaniments. It remains only to say a few words on the peculiarities
which the round form of churches took in the hands of the early Lombard
architects, as well as on the campanile, which forms so striking a
feature in the cities of Northern Italy. On the boundary-line which separates the Guelfic from the Ghibelline
influence, there exist at Toscanella, near Viterbo, two churches of
great beauty of detail; but which, as might almost be predicated from
their situation, defy any attempt at classification. They are not
Gothic, for they have no vaults, nor does their style suggest any
vaulting contrivances. They are scarcely debased Roman, for the tracery
of their circular windows, their many-shafted doors, and generally their
details are such as to indicate a Northern rather than a Roman affinity;
and the Byzantine sculpture which is found in the pulpit was probably
taken from an earlier churchthough an Italian Byzantine influence can
be traced in much of its decoration. Under these circumstances, it is
better to treat them as exceptional, than to attempt to give them a name
which might mislead without conveying any correct information. Maria, was erected in the
beginning of the 13th century (1206? ), but is so unlike most buildings
of that age, that it is usually ascribed to the 6th or 7th. On a close
examination, however, all its details are found to be full of advanced
Romanesque forms. The pillars are rude Corinthian, with a Lombardic
abacus. They are widely spaced, having no vault to support; and the
mouldings of the arches are what we should call Transitional Early
English.

[Illustration: 451. Externally the faade is too plain to be quite pleasing, but this arises
from its depending originally on painting for its decorationsome traces
of which still remain, but the greater part has perished. Its three
doorways are richly and beautifully ornamented with shafts and
sculptured foliage, quite equal in detail to anything of the class to be
found in Italy, and its great circular window would not be thought out
of place at Chartres or Lincoln. Pietro is probably a century later than that of Sta. Maria, and its faade is richer and more eleganta difference arising
more from those details being in this instance carved which in the
earlier church were painted. The design, however, deserves attention for
its historical, perhaps, even more than its artistic claims; for it was
this class of faade that Palladio and the architects of the
cinque-cento period seized upon, and, applying pilasters and pediments
of classical type, converted it into the fashionable churches which are
to be found in every part of Europe. [301]

[Illustration: 453. The difficulty which the Italians never entirely conquered, was how to
amalgamate the sloping lines of the roofs of the aisles with the
horizontal lines of the rest of the faade. The gallery over the central
doorway enabled them very nearly to accomplish it in these Toscanella
churches, and if the same string-courses had been carried all across,
the whole might have been harmonised; but it was just missed, and, what
is strange, more so in the second than in the first example. In the earliest times of Christian architecture, as we have already
seen, the circular form of church was nearly as frequent as that derived
from the Roman basilica. In process of time the latter was found to be
much better adapted to the extended requirements of Christianity. Hence
in the 11th and 12th centuries, when so many of the early churches were
rebuilt and enlarged, most of the old circular buildings disappeared. Enough, however, remain to enable us to trace, though imperfectly, what
their arrangements were. Among those which have been illustrated, perhaps the most interesting is
that known as the church of San Stefano at Bologna, or rather the
circular centre of that congeries of seven churches usually known by
that name. It is one of those numerous churches of which it is impossible to
predicate whether it was originally a baptismal or a sepulchral edifice. In old times it bore both names, and may have had both destinations, but
latterly, at all events, the question has been settled by the compromise
usually adopted in such cases, of dedicating it to the first martyr, to
whom a sepulchral form of building is especially appropriate. Plan of the Duomo, Brescia. Elevation of Duomo at Brescia. Notwithstanding a considerable amount of ancient remains mixed up in the
details, no part of the present church seems older than the Carlovingian
era; while, on the other hand, its extreme irregularity and clumsiness
of construction point to a period before the 11th century. Its general
form is that of an extremely irregular octagon, about 60 ft. in
diameter, in the centre of which stands a circlet of columns, some
coupled, some single, supporting a semicircular dome. The circumscribing
aisle is covered with the usual intersecting ribbed vault of the 10th
century, but the whole is so rude as scarcely to deserve mention except
for its antiquity. The Duomo Vecchio of Brescia is ascribed to the 8th or 9th century, but
this date according to Cattaneo[302] can only be ascribed to an earlier
basilica church, the crypt of which still exists on the east side of the
Duomo. As will be seen from the plan, it is a large church, 125 ft. across over all, and is covered by a dome 65 ft. in diameter internally
supported by eight piers of plain design. The mode in which light is
introduced into the central compartment illustrates the various
tentative expedients by which the architects in that age attempted to
accomplish their object. First, there is a range of small windows in the
dome below the springing of the dome. In the dome itself there are four
circular sides, and, as if the architect felt that he was doing
something unusual and inartistic, he managed externally to confuse these
with the rudiments of the roof gallery. (From Isabelle, difices Circulaires.)
Scale 50 ft. It is not clear whether originally it had or was intended to have an
apse between its two round towerswhere the foundations of some
buildings can still be traced; but these may be the remains of the early
church referred to. Turning from these, we find the round-arched Gothic style completely
developed in the church of San Tomaso in Limine, near Bergamo. From the
annexed plan it will be seen that the circular part is the nave or
entrance, as in Germany and England, in contradistinction to the French
mode of arrangement, where the circular part is always the sanctum, the
rectangular the nave or less holy place. In the centre stand eight pillars, supporting a
vaulted gallery, which forms a triforium or upper storey, and, with the
dome and its little cupola, raise the whole height to about 50 ft. A
small choir with a semicircular niche projects eastward. The dimensions of the building are so small that it hardly deserves
notice, except as a perfect example of the style of the 11th or 12th
century in Lombardy, and for a certain propriety and elegance of design,
in which it is not surpassed, internally at least, by any building of
its age. It is to be regretted that the idea was never carried out (at
any rate no example remains) on such a scale as to enable us to judge of
the effect of such a domical arrangement as is here attempted. The great
defect of all one-storeyed domes is their lowness, both internally and
more especially externally. This method of building a dome in two
storeys would seem calculated to obviate the objection; but though
common in small sepulchral chambers, it has never been tried on a scale
sufficiently large to enable us to judge of its real effect. After this
period the circular shape was so completely superseded by the
rectangular, that no further improvement took place in it. There is perhaps no question of early Christian archology involved in
so much obscurity as that of the introduction and early use of towers. The great monumental pillars of the Romansas, for instance, those of
Trajan and Antoninuswere practically towers; and latterly their tombs
began to assume an aspiring character like that at St. 231), or those at Palmyra and elsewhere in the East, which show a marked
tendency in that direction. But none of these can be looked upon as an
undoubted prototype of the towers attached to the churches of the
Christians. At Ravenna, as early as the age of Justinian, we find a circular tower
attached to St. Apollinare in Classe (Woodcut No. 412), and in the other
churches of that place they seem even then to have been considered
necessary adjuncts. [303] At the same time it is by no means clear that
they were erected as bell-towers; indeed the evidence is tolerably clear
that bells were not used in Christian churches till the time of Pope
Adrian I., some two centuries later. There is, I
think, no trace of their being sepulchral monuments, or that they were
designed or used as tombs; and unless they were, like the _sthambas_ of
the Buddhists, pillars of victory, or towers erected to mark sacred or
remarkable spots, it is difficult to say what they were, or where we are
to look for an analogy. Be this as it may, the oldest circular towers with which we are
acquainted are those of Ravenna; while the last of the series is the
famous leaning one at Pisa, commenced in the year 1174. The gradations
between these two extremes must have been the same that marked the
changes in the architecture of the churches to which they are attached;
but the links are more completely wanting in the case of the towers than
in that of the churches. [304]

[Illustration: 459. (From Gutensohn and
Knapp.)] Apollinare in Classe, above referred to, the most
perfect of those of Ravenna, is a simple brick tower (see Woodcut No. 412), nine storeys in height, the lower windows being narrow single
openings; above there are two, and the three upper storeys are adorned
with four windows of three lights each. In Rome, as far as we know, the first tower attached to a church was
that said to have been built by Pope Adrian I. in front of the atrium of
St. Peters; but there are no examples now existing in Rome which can be
said to be earlier than the 11th century, and that date applies only to
the lower portion of them. In the 12th and 13th centuries they became
common, and we find them attached to the churches of S. Lorenzo without
the walls, S. Croce in Gerusalemme, SS. Giovanni e Paolo, S. Giorgio in
Velabro (13th century), and others. All these are square in plan and
extremely similar in design, no improvement and scarcely any change
having taken place between the first and the last, as if the form were
an old and established one when we find it first adopted. Maria in Cosmedin (Woodcut No. 459) is perhaps one of the best
and most complete. Its dimensions are small, its breadth being little
more than 15 ft., and its height only 110; but notwithstanding this
there is great dignity in the design, and, in a city where buildings are
not generally tall, its height is sufficient to give it prominence
without overpowering other objects,a characteristic which renders these
Roman towers not only beautiful structures in themselves, but
appropriate ornaments to the buildings to which they are attached. The chief interest of these towers is derived from the numerous progeny
to which they gave birth: for though there is scarcely an instance of a
square Romanesque tower beyond the walls of Rome during the period in
which this style flourished, the form was seized upon with avidity by
the Gothic architects in all the countries of Europe; and whether as a
detached campanile (as in Italy), or as an integral part of the building
(as we soon find it employed on this side of the Alps), it forms the
most prominent, and perhaps also the most beautiful, feature in the
aspiring architecture of the Middle Ages. There is certainly no architectural feature which the Gothic architects
can so justly call their own as the towers and spires which in the
Middle Ages were so favourite, so indispensable a part of their churches
and other edifices, becoming in fact as necessary parts of the external
design as the vaults were of the internal decoration of the building. It is true, as before remarked, that we neither know where they were
first invented, nor even where they were first applied to Christian
churchesthose of Rome and Ravenna being evidently not the earliest
examples; nor have they any features which betray their originat least
none have yet been pointed out, though it is not impossible that a
closer examination would bring some such to light. They certainly are as
little classical, in form or details, as anything that can well be
conceived; and belong to an undefined Romanesque style. Those of which we have already spoken are all church-towers_campaniles_
or bell-towers attached to churches. But this exclusive distinction by
no means applies to the Gothic towers. Mark at Venice,
for instance, and the Toraccio at Cremona, are evidently civic
monuments, like the belfries of the Low Countriessymbols of communal
power wholly distinct from the church, their proximity to which seems
only to arise from the fact of all the principal buildings being grouped
together. This is certainly the case with a large class of very ugly
buildings in Italy, such as those attached to the town-halls of Florence
and Siena, or the famous Asinelli and Garisenda towers at Bologna. They
are merely tall square brick towers, with a machicolated balcony at the
top, but possessing no more architectural design than the chimney of a
cotton factory. Originally, when lower, they may have been towers of
defence, but afterwards became mere symbols of power. A third class, and by far the most numerous, of these buildings are
undoubtedly ecclesiastical erections; they are either actually attached
to the churches, or so placed with regard to them as to leave no doubt
on the matter. There is not, however, I believe, in all Italy a single
example of a tower or towers forming, as on this side of the Alps, an
integral part of the design. Sometimes they stand detached, but more generally are connected with
some angle of the building, the favourite position being the western
angle of the southern transept. Occasionally we find one tower placed at
the angle of the faade, but this is seldom the case when the tower and
the church are of the same age. It is so in the cathedral at Lucca, and
San Ambrogio at Milan; in the latter of which a second tower has been
added more recently to balance the older one. It does also happen as in
the instance of Novara, before quoted (Woodcut No. 443), that two towers
are actually parts of the original design; this, however, is certainly
the exception, not the rule. In design the Italian campaniles differ very considerably from those on
this side of the Alps. They never have projecting buttresses, nor assume
that pyramidal form which is so essential and so beautiful a feature in
the Northern examples. In plan the campanile is always square, and
carried up without break or offset to two-thirds at least of its
intended height. This, which is virtually the whole design (for the
spire seems an idea borrowed from the North), is generally solid to a
considerable height, or with only such openings as serve to admit light
to the stairs or inclined planes. Above the solid part one round-headed
window is introduced in each face, and in the next storey two; in the
one above this three, then four, and lastly five, the lights being
merely separated by slight shafts, so that the upper storey is virtually
an open loggia (see Woodcut No. There is no doubt great beauty and
propriety of design in this arrangement; in point of taste it is
unobjectionable, but it wants the vigour and variety of the Northern
tower. So far as we can judge from drawings and such ancient examples as
remain, the original termination was a simple cone in the centre, with a
smaller one at each of the angles. At Verona an octagonal lantern is added, and at Modena and Cremona the
octagon is crowned by a lofty spire, but these hardly come within the
limits of the epoch of which we are now treating. So greatly did the
Italians prefer the round arch, that even in their imitation of the
Northern styles they used the pointed shape only when compelleda
circumstance which makes it extremely difficult, particularly in the
towers, to draw the line between the two styles; for though pointed
arches were no doubt introduced in the 13th and 14th centuries, the
circular-headed shape continued to be employed from the age of the
Romanesque to that of the Renaissance. One of the oldest and certainly the most celebrated of the Gothic towers
of Italy, is that of St. Marks at Venice, commenced in the year 902; it
took the infant republic three centuries to raise it 180 ft., to the
point at which the square basement terminates. On this there must
originally have been an open loggia of some sort, no doubt with a
conical roof. The present superstructure was added in the 16th century;
but though the loggia is a very pleasing feature, it is overpowered by
the solid mass that it surmounts, and by the extremely ugly square
extinguisher that crowns the whole. Its locality and its associations
have earned for it a great deal of undue laudation, but in point of
design no campanile in Italy deserves it less. The base is a mere
unornamented mass of brickwork, slightly fluted, and pierced
unsymmetrically with small windows to light the inclined plane within. Its size, its height, and its apparent solidity are its only merits. These are no doubt important elements in that low class of architectural
excellence of which the Egyptian pyramids are the type; but even in
these elements this edifice must confess itself a pigmy, and inferior to
even a second-class pyramid on the banks of the Nile, while it has none
of the beauty of design and detail displayed by the Giralda of Seville,
or even by other Italian towers in its own neighbourhood. The campanile at Piacenza (Woodcut No. 448) is, perhaps, more like the
original of St. Marks than any other, and certainly displays as little
beauty as any building of this sort can possess. That of San Zenone at Verona is far more pleasing. It is, indeed, as
beautiful both in proportion and details as any of its age, while it
exemplifies at once the beauties and the defects of the style. Among the
first is an elegant simplicity that always is pleasing, but this is
accompanied by a leanness and poverty of effect, when compared with
Northern examples, which must rank in the latter category. Jackson, in his work on Dalmatia and Istria, gives illustrations of
several towers in those countries which, in beauty of design, excel many
of the Italian examples. The Romanesque style would seem to have had a
much longer duration on the east side of the Adriatic than in Italy. Thus the tower of Spalato, a lofty campanile of six storeys in height,
commenced in the beginning of the 13th century and not terminated till
1416 (except the upper octagon and spire), is virtually in the same pure
Romanesque style throughout. Jackson notes also the continued
influence of Roman work of the 3rd century, by which it is surrounded,
and that fragments of ancient material, columns and capitals, have been
used up in its construction. The campaniles of Zara and in the island of
Arbe are both fine examples of Romanesque design. CHAPTER V.

                         BYZANTINE-ROMANESQUE. Cathedrals of NaplesSan Miniato, FlorenceCathedrals of Pisa and
  ZaraCathedrals of Troja, Bari, and BittontoSan Nicolo,
  BariCloisters of St. John LateranBaptistery of Mont St. AngeloSan
  Donato, ZaraChurches in South ItalyCircular BuildingsTowersCivil
  Architecture. The Normans enter Italy                             A.D. 1018
     The Normans conquer Apulia from the Greeks               1043
     The Normans attack the Saracens in Sicily                1061
     Conquest of Sicily completed by Roger de Hauteville      1090
     Roger II. 1101
     William I., surnamed the Wicked                          1153
     William II., surnamed the Good                           1166
     Tancred                                                  1189
     Frederic Hohenstaufen of Germany                         1197
     Conrad                                                   1250
     Conradin                                                 1254
     Charles I., first Angiovine King of Naples               1266
     Ren, last Angiovine King of Naples                      1435


It would be easier to define the limits and character of the styles of
Italian Medival Architecture in the centre and south of Italy by a
negative than a positive title. To call them the non-Gothic styles
would describe them correctly, but would hardly suffice to convey a
distinct idea of their peculiarities. Romanesque, or even Italian
Romanesque, would not be sufficient, because that term fails to take
cognizance of the foreign element found in them. That element is the
Byzantine, derived partly from the continued relations which such cities
as Venice or Pisa maintained during the Middle Ages with the Levant, and
partly from the intercourse which the inhabitants of Magna Gracia kept
up across the Adriatic with the people on its eastern shores. To such a
mixture of styles the term Byzantine-Romanesque would be quite
appropriate; and although there are in Apulia churches, such as Molfetta
and St. Angelo, which look more like Levantine designs than anything to
be found in other parts of Europe (except perhaps such buildings as St. Front, Prigueux, and one or two exceptional buildings in the South of
France), and in a very detailed description of Italian styles it might
be expedient to attempt a further subdivision with other specific terms,
for the present it will probably suffice to describe the various
non-Gothic styles of the centre and southern half of Italy in local
sections without attempting any very minute classification of their
variations. As the Italians had no great national style of their own,
and both in the North and South were principally working under foreign
influences, it is in vain to look for any thread that will conduct the
student straight through the labyrinth of their styles. Italian unity is
the aspiration of the present century; during the Middle Ages it did not
exist either in politics or art. The Old and New Cathedrals at Naples. Although Naples is in the very centre of its province, where we
naturally first look for examples of the style, there are few cities in
Italy which contain so little to interest the architect or the
antiquary. Still she does possess one group of churches, which, by their
juxtaposition, at least serve to illustrate the progress of the style
during the Middle Ages. Restitutashaded
dark in the plan (Woodcut No. 460)may be as old as the 4th or 5th
century, and retains its original plan and arrangement, though much
disfigured in details. The baptistery, a little behind the apse on its
left, is certainly of the date indicated, and retains its mosaics, which
seem to be of the same age. of Anjou commenced the new cathedral at
right angles with the old, his French prejudices being apparently
shocked at the incorrect orientation of the older church. It is a
spacious building, 300 ft. long, arranged, as Italian churches usually
were at that age, with a wooden roof over the nave and intersecting
vaults over the side-aisles. Opposite the entrance of the old cathedral
is a domical chapel of Renaissance design, so that the group contains an
illustration of each of the three ages of Italian art. Section of San Miniato, near Florence. The church of San Miniato (Woodcuts Nos. 461-463), on a hill overlooking
Florence, is one of the earliest (1013), as well as one of the most
perfect, of the Byzantine-Romanesque style. in length by 70 in width, divided longitudinally into aisles, and
transversely into three nearly square compartments by clustered piers
supporting two great arches which run up to the roof. The whole of the
eastern compartment is occupied by a crypt or under-church open to the
nave, above which are the choir and apse, approached by flights of steps
in the aisles. The entire arrangement, together with the division of the
nave into three compartments, is most satisfactory, and the proportions
of the whole are very appropriate. The pillars themselves are so nearly
classical in design that they almost seem to have been taken from some
ancient building, and the architraves and stringcourses are all well
designed and fitted to the places they occupy. The principal ornament of
the interior is an inlaid pattern of simple design, sufficient to
relieve the monotony of the interior, but without producing any
confusion. The exterior depends principally, like the interior, for its
effect on  panelling, but has a range of blind arches running
round the sides and across the front. The faade, however, is very badly
designed: either it was one of the earliest examples, and the architects
had not learned how to combine the sloping roofs of the aisles with the
upper part of the faades, or it has been altered in more modern times;
but for this slight defect it would be difficult to find a church in
Italy containing more of classic elegance, with perfect appropriateness
for the purposes of Christian worship. There must have been several, probably many, buildings in the same style
erected in Tuscany during the first half of the 11th century. Otherwise
it is almost impossible to understand how so complete a design as that
of Pisa Cathedral could have been executed. It was commenced apparently
in 1006, but it was not till 1063, after the plundering of Palermo,
according to Reber,[305] that the means were provided for the
extraordinary richness of the design, the magnificence of which had at
that time no parallel among the ecclesiastical edifices of Italy; the
work was suspended in 1095, and could only be resumed by means of
pecuniary aid given to the undertaking by the Byzantine emperor. After
the consecration of the cathedral in 1103, the interior decorations were
carried on until the 15th century. Internally its design is evidently
based on that of the basilicas of Rome and Ravenna, except that instead
of the range at the latter place of figures in mosaic, it has a splendid
triforium gallery and in plan strongly marked projecting transepts. Its
great merit, however, as a design arises from the fact that the builders
had learned to proportion the parts to one another so as to get greater
magnificence with very much smaller dimensions. The size, for instance,
of the nave of San Paolo fuori le Mure at Rome is 290 ft. by 215; these
dimensions are nearly double those at Pisa, where they are 173 ft. Yet, in consequence of the greater relative height of the nave and
the better spacing of the pillars and proportion of the parts, the
interior of Pisa is more pleasing and more impressive than the Roman
church. Its effect, too, is immensely increased by the truly Medival
projection of the transepts. In no church in Italy is there such poetry
of perspective as in looking anglewise across the intersection, and
seldom anywhere a more satisfactory interior than that of this church. (From Chapuys
Moyen-Age Monumental.)]

The exterior, too, is almost equally pleasing. The side-aisles are
adorned with a range of blind arches running all round, adorned with
parti- marble, inlaid either in courses or in patterns. Above
this is a gallery, representing the triforium, carried all round, and in
the faades formed into an open gallery; a second open gallery
represents the sloping roof of the aisles, a third the clerestory, a
fourth the <DW72>s of the great roof. The difficulty here, as in almost
all Italian designs, is caused by the sloping roofs; but, with this
exception, the whole makes up a rich and varied composition without any
glaring false construction, and expresses with sufficient clearness the
arrangements of the interior. The dome is of later design, and, being
oval in plan, cannot be said to be pleasing in outline. The Italians were evidently delighted with their new style. It was
repeated with very little variation at Lucca, in the church of San
Michele (1188), only that the arcades stood free on the sides as well as
on the front. The faade of San Martino, in the same city, is in the
same style; so is that of the cathedral at Pistoja, and so is Sta. The arrangement was probably suggested by the porticoes of
Pagan temples; and were it not for the awkwardness caused by the sloping
line of the roofs, it might be characterised as one of the most
successful inventions of the age. In some instances, as in the faade of the Cathedral at Zara in Dalmatia
(Woodcut No. Jackson[306] was not begun
before the 13th century, the consecration taking place in 1285, the
difficulties of the design of the faade are to a great extent conquered
by reducing the arcades to mere decorative panelling, and more than this
by separating the design of the centre from that of the aisles by a bold
square pilaster. This is exactly the feature we miss at Pisa and Lucca,
where the want of it imparts a considerable degree of weakness to the
whole design. (From Sir Gardner
Wilkinsons Dalmatia and Montenegro.)]

The plan of the Zara Cathedral (Woodcut No. 466) is that usually adopted
in churches of this class; but it possesses a lady chapel and
baptistery, placed laterally in a somewhat unusual manner. Its
dimensions are small, being only 170 ft. The east end of this church, its doorways and windows, show, as might be
expected from its locality, a greater tendency towards Romanesque art
than can be found on the western shores of the Peninsula, but in
internal arrangements it belongs wholly to the Italian style. The cathedral at Trau, also in Dalmatia, illustrated in Mr. Jacksons
work, is a fine example, which is not only built in one consistent style
throughout, but possesses the still rarer advantage of being completed
outside as well as inside, instead, as Mr. Jackson observes, of
presenting, like so many Italian churches, a rough face of unfinished
brickwork or masonry awaiting in vain the splendid veneer of marble or
sculpture that never comes. The main part of the church was built in
the first half of the 13th century. The floor is of the basilica type,
with nave (five bays, vaulted) and aisles, centre and side apses, and a
magnificent narthex, the full width of nave and aisles, with a sumptuous
portal of pure Romanesque design (1240), which is perhaps finer than any
example in Italy, and is only rivalled in its decorative sculpture by
those of the French portals. Jackson is of opinion that Dalmatian
art took a great departure under Hungarian rule, and followed more in
the direction of the purer Romanesque style than in that of the
Byzantine. The artists were foreigners, invited not only from Germany
but also from France. Villars dHonecourt recounts his having been sent
for, and French influence, Mr. Jackson states, may be detected in
some other churches in Hungary. The portal of the church at Jak, in
Hungary, illustrated in Mr. Jacksons work, is French in character, with
a profusion of orders carved with the zigzag fret and dentil very
similar to the later Norman work, and includes capitals  crochet such
as belong to French 12th-century work. The series of trefoil-headed
niches, with figures in them which rise above the doorway, are French in
character, and remind one of the faade of St. Pre-sous-Vezelay. At
Cattaro, in Dalmatia, and at Veglia, in one of the islands of the
Quarnero, are other examples of fine Romanesque work of the 12th
century. Further south on the mainland of Italy, at Troja, we find a singularly
elegant cathedral church (1093-1115?) Its flanks and apse are perhaps even more elegant than anything in
the neighbourhood of Pisa. So is the lower part of its faade, which is
adorned with a richness and elegance of foliage characteristic of the
province where it is found; and the cornice that crowns the lower storey
is perhaps unmatched by any similar example to be found in Italy, either
for beauty of sculptural decoration or for appropriateness of profile. The upper part of the faade differs, however, considerably from that of
the examples just quoted. A great rose-window, of elegant but
ill-understood tracery, takes the place of the arcades, and, with the
sculptured arch over it, completes all that remains of the original
design. The plain pieces of walling that support the central window are
parts of a modern repair. As a general rule, all the churches in the South of Italy are small. This one at Troja is arranged in plan like that at Pisa, with bold
projecting transepts, but its length is only 167 ft., and the width of
its nave 50, while in the Northern cathedral these dimensions are nearly
double310 ft. by 106and the area four times as great. This is true of
all, however elegant they may bethey are parish churches in dimensions
as compared with their Northern rivals. Many also, as the cathedral at Bari (Woodcut No. 469), have their apses
internal, which detracts very much from the meaning of the design, and
does away with the apsidal terminations, which are perhaps the most
beautiful features in the external design of Italian churches; while
they lack the great traceried windows which go so far to replace the
absence of the apse in English design. The annexed elevation of the east
end at Bari (Woodcut No. 470) gives a fair idea of the general
arrangement of that part in the churches in Apulia. It is novel, and the
two tall towers with a central dome combine with elegant details to make
up a whole which it is impossible not to admire though it will not bear
comparison with the more artistic arrangements of Northern architects. Where the apse[308] is allowed to be seen externally, it is sometimes,
as at San Pellino (Woodcut No. 471), an object of great beauty and
originality, but such examples are rare in the province, and the designs
suffer in proportion. (From a Sketch by
A. J. R. Gawen, Esq.)] In the richer churches, as at Pisa, a blind arcade is carried round the
flanks, sometimes with an open gallery under the eaves, as in German
churches, but this was far from being universally the case; on the
contrary, it would be difficult, as a typical example of the style, to
select one more characteristic than the flank of the church of Caserta
Vecchia (1100-1153) (Woodcut No. The windows are small but
numerous, and mark the number of bays in the interior. The transept is
slightly projected, and ornamented with an arcade at the top, and above
this rises a dome such as is found only in Calabria or Sicily. The tower
was added afterwards, and, though unsymmetrical, assists in relieving a
design which would otherwise run the risk of being monotonous. West Front of the Church of San Nicolo in Bari. (From a Sketch by A. J. R. Gawen, Esq.)] It was, however, on their entrance faades that the architects of
Southern Italy lavished their utmost care. The central doorways are
usually covered with rich hoods, supported by pillars resting on
monsters somewhat like those found in the North of Italy. Above this is
either a gallery or one or two windows, and the whole generally
terminates in a circular rose-window filled with tracery. As exemplified
in the front of Bittonto Cathedral (Woodcut No. 473), such a composition
is not deficient in richness, though hardly pleasing as an architectural
composition. The same arrangement, on about the same scale, occurs at Bari, Altamura,
and Ruvo; and on a somewhat smaller scale in the churches of Galatina,
Brindisi, and Barletta. The great and peculiar beauty of the cathedral
at Bittonto is its south front, one angle of which is shown in the
woodcut; but which becomes richer towards the east, where it is adorned
with a portal of great magnificence and beauty. The richness of its open
gallery (under what was the roof of the side-aisles) is unsurpassed in
Apulia, and probably by anything of the same kind in Italy. View of the Interior of San Nicolo, Bari. The faade of San Nicolo at Bari (1197) is something like the last
mentioned, except that handsome Corinthian columns have been borrowed
from some older building, and add to the richness of the design, though
they hardly can be said to belong to the composition. Internally this
church seems to have displayed some such arrangement as that of San
Miniato (Woodcuts No. Instead, however, of improving upon it,
as might be expected from the time that had elapsed since the previous
one was erected, the Southern architect hardly knew the meaning of what
he was attempting. He grouped together the three pillars next to the
entrance, and threw arches across the nave from them, but these arches
neither support the roof nor aid the construction in any other way. They
do add to the perspective effect of the interior, but it is only by a
theatrical contrivance very rare in the Middle Ages, and by no means to
be admired when found. Most of these Apulian churches possess crypts almost as important as
that of San Miniato, some more so; and the numerous pillars in some of
these give rise to effects of perspective only to be found elsewhere in
such buildings as the Mosque at Cordova, or the cisterns at
Constantinople. As in the annexed example, from the cathedral at
Otranto, it is wonderful what space and what variety may be attained
with small dimensions by the employment of numerous points of support. This was the secret of most of the best effects produced by the Northern
architects; but the Italians never understood it, or practised it,
except in crypts. Perhaps it may have been that they thought it
necessary to sacrifice architectural effect to the exigencies of public
worship. Whether this were the cause or not, the result, as already
pointed out, was fatal to the architectural effect of many of their
designs, especially in the Northern province. In Southern Italy this is seldom the case, but the difference arose from
the fact that the naves of the churches had never vaulted roofs, and
were consequently separated from the aisles by single pillars instead of
composite piers. This took away all temptation to display mechanical
dexterity, and left the architect free to produce the best artistic
effect he was able to design with the materials at his command. Window in the South Side of the Cathedral Church at
Matera. No one who takes the pains to familiarise himself with the architecture
of these Southern Italian churches, can well fail to be impressed with
their beauty. That beauty will be found, however, to arise not so much
from the dimensions or arrangement of their plans, or the form of their
outline, as from the grace and elegance of their details. Every feature
displays the feeling of an elegant and refined people, who demanded
decoration as a necessity, though they were incapable of rising to any
great architectural conception. They excelled as ornamentists, though at
best only indifferent architects. It is impossible to render this evident in such a work as the present;
but besides the examples already given, a window (Woodcut No. 478) from
the cathedral church at Matera (1270) will explain how unlike the style
of decoration is to anything with which we are familiar in the North,
and at the same time how much picturesque effect may be produced by a
repetition of similar details. The church itself has this peculiarity,
that its west front is plain and unimportant, and that all the
decoration is lavished on the south side, which faces the piazza. There
are two entrances on this face, that towards the east being, as usual,
the richer. Above these is a range of richly-ornamented windows, one of
whicha little out of the centreis far more splendid than the rest
(Woodcut No. From this it is said that letters and rescripts from
the Greek patriarch at Constantinople used to be read, and it is perhaps
as elaborate a specimen of the mode of decoration used in these churches
as can be found in the province. Doorway of Church of Pappacoda, Naples. The same exuberance of decoration continued to be employed down to the
latest period of the art, and after Northern forms had been introduced
by the Angiovine dynasty at Naples. The doorway from the church at
Pappacoda (Woodcut No. 479) is a type of many to be found in that city
and elsewhere in the architectural province. True, it is overdone to
such an extent that much of the labour bestowed upon it must be
considered as thrown away; but if a love of art induced people to labour
so lovingly in it, it is hard to refuse them the admiration which their
enthusiasm deserves. Another class of ornamental detail in which this province is especially
rich is that of bronze doors, of which some six or seven examples still
remain. Of these perhaps the finest are those of the cathedral at Trani. They were made in 1160, and for beauty of design, and for the exuberance
and elegance of their ornaments, are unsurpassed by anything of the kind
in Italy, or probably in the world. Another pair of doors of almost
equal beauty, made in 1119, belongs to the cathedral at Troja (Woodcut
No. 468), and a third, which is still in a very perfect state,
constructed at Constantinople, in the year 1076, for the church of Mont
San Angelo; and is consequently contemporary with the doors of Sta. Sophia, Novogorod, and San Zenone, Verona, and so similar in design as
to form an interesting series for comparison. Other churches in the same style as those mentioned above are found at
Canosa, Giovenazzo, Molo, Ostuni, Manduria, and other places in the
province. Those of Brindisi, from which we should expect most, have been
too much modernised to be of value as examples; but there is in the town
a small circular church of great beauty, built apparently by the Knights
Templars, and afterwards possessed by the Knights of St. It is now
in ruins, but many of the frescoes which once adorned its walls still
remain, as well as the marble pillars that supported its roof. Being at
some distance from the harbour, the Knights of St. John built another
small church near the port, which still remains nearly unaltered. Although throughout the Middle Ages Rome went on building large
churches, it was in the debased-Roman style already referred to, fitting
together Roman pillars with classical details of more or less purity,
but hardly, except in their cloisters, deserving the name of a style. Perhaps the most original, as it certainly is one of the most beautiful,
things the Romans did, is the cloister of St. There the
little arcades, supported by twisted columns, and adorned with mosaics,
are as graceful and pleasing as anything of that class found elsewhere;
and as they are encased in a framework of sufficient strength to take
off all appearance of mechanical weakness, their unconstructive forms
are not unpleasing. The entablature, which is the ruling feature in the
design, retains the classical arrangement in almost every detail, and in
such purity as could only be found in Rome in the 13th century, when
this cloister appears to have been erected; but the style never extended
beyond the limits of that city, and thus has little bearing on the
thread of our narrative. The cloister of the Benedictine monastery adjoining the basilica of St. Pauls outside the walls, is another example of the same kind in which
the columns present almost every variety of form; spiral, twisted,
fluted, and sometimes two or three of these combined, many of them, as
well as the entablature, being covered with mosaics. As already remarked, the architects of the southern half of the Italian
peninsula were generally content to adopt the Romanesque plan of
covering their naves with a wooden rooffor when an intersecting vault
is found it is clearly a French or German interpolationbut they often
employed one dome, generally over the altar, and used it as an ornament
both external and internal. The two illustrations already given of the
domes at Bari (Woodcut No. 470) and Caserta Vecchia (Woodcut No. 472)
show the form these usually took in the province. They belong to a type
not unusual in the East, but unknown to the Gothic architects of Europe. When called upon to roof their churches with stone, they almost
invariably adopted the domical in preference to the vaulted form, as at
Molfetta (1162), where they make a pleasing form of roof, not unlike
that of Loches Cathedral (Woodcut No. The great defect of domes
when thus employed is their height, which generally throws the whole of
the building out of proportion; and unless light is introduced through
openings in the drum, or in the dome itself, they are dark and gloomy. This is certainly the case at Molfetta, but otherwise the church seems
well designed and of pleasing proportions. To be successful, domes
should be low and flat internally; and any height required externally
must be given by a false dome, as at St. Marks, or as done by the
Renaissance architects generally. This was not so much felt when the building was square, and covered by
only one dome, like the baptistery or tomb of Mont St. Angelo, where
effect of space on the floor was not aimed at so much as a combination
of external dignity with limited dimensions in plan, and was attained by
the arrangement adopted. As will be observed, the pointed arch, as in
the tower at Gaeta (Woodcut No. 489), is used in the basement, but above
this round arches with balusters for pillars, such as we should call
Saxon, though their age here may be the 12th century. Among the little bits of Orientalism that crop up here and there all
over the province, one of the most pleasing is the little tomb of
Bohemund at Canosa (1111). It is charming to find in Italy an Eastern
Kibleh with its dome, erected to contain the remains of a Christian
king. Though elegant, however, the dome is not fitted to the square, as
it would have been in more experienced hands, and the whole design is
somewhat badly put together. Its bronze doors are among its chiefest
ornaments, and are elegant, though inferior to numerous examples of the
same class in the churches of the province. Many other examples of Byzantine domical forms might be quoted as
existing in Southern Italy. It is not, however, so much in the forms as
in the details that the Eastern influence is felt, and that no less in
the churches which retain the basilican form of Ravenna than in those
which assume the domical form of Constantinople. The buildings of the Southern Province cannot certainly compete with
those of the Northern either in size or in daring mechanical
construction, but in detail they are frequently more beautiful, while
their forms are more national and less constrained. Their great
interest, however, in the eyes of the student, consists in their forming
a link between the Eastern and Western worlds, and thus joining together
two styles which we have hitherto been too much in the habit of
considering as possessing no point of contact. One of the best known, as well as one of the largest examples of this
class of buildings in Italy, is the baptistery at Pisa (seen partially
on the left side of Woodcut No. Internally it is, as nearly as may
be, 100 ft. in diameter, and the walls are about 8 ft. The dome itself, however, is only 60 ft. in diameter, and is
supported on four piers and eight pillars. These serve to separate the
central space from the aisle which runs round it, and which is two
storeys in height, but singularly ill-proportioned and clumsy in detail. The worst part of the design, however, is the dome, if dome it can be
called. Internally it is conical in form, and thrust through an external
hemispherical dome in a manner more clumsy and unpleasing than any other
example of its class. Externally, these defects are to some extent
atoned for by considerable richness and beauty of detail. It had
originally only one range of blind arcades, with three-quarter columns,
surmounted by an open arcade; an arrangement exactly similar to that of
the two lower storeys of the cathedral and the leaning tower (Woodcut
No. A considerable amount of pointed Gothic decoration was
afterwards added, which, though somewhat incongruous, is elegant in
itself, and hides to some extent the original defects of the design. But
the outline of the building and its whole arrangements are so radically
bad, that no amount of ornament can ever redeem them. Taken altogether, the Pisan baptistery is so very peculiar, that it
would be interesting if its design could be traced back to some
undoubted original. That this is possible will hardly be doubted by any
one at all familiar with the subject; meanwhile, the building most like
it that has been illustrated is the little church of San Donato, at
Zara. at the beginning of the 9th century, with materials taken
from ancient buildings, some of them of the best period of Roman
architecture. The two monolithic columns in front of the triple
sanctuary, and which are 30 ft. in height, bear testimony to the size
and importance of the temple they originally adorned, and the great
thickness of the walls and the size of the piers suggest a wealth of
material at the disposal of the builders. The rectangular building on
the south side Mr. Jackson considers to be coeval with the church; and
the chamber over it, which was on the same level and originally opened
on to the gallery round the aisles, formed a second church intended for
the use of the catechumens. The church is so built round that it is
impossible to say what its external appearance may have been. Both from
its resemblance to the Pisan baptistery and its own merits, it is an
interesting addition to our knowledge of those circular churches which
were such favourites with all the Christian architects in the
Carlovingian period. The resemblance in this instance is the more
remarkable, because the faade of the cathedral at Zara (Woodcut No. 467) is in the Pisan style, only slightly modified by local
peculiarities. From what we already know, it seems undoubted that there
was a close connectionarchitecturally, at leastbetween Pisa and Zara. If this were fully investigated, it would probably throw considerable
light on the origin of the Pisan style, which has hitherto seemed so
exceptional in Italy, and also explain how the Byzantine element came to
be so strongly developed in what at first sight appears to be a
Romanesque style of art. Ground and Upper Storey of San Donato, Zara. The typical example of a tower in the Italian style is the celebrated
leaning tower at Pisa, partly seen in Woodcut No. It is, indeed, so
far as we at present know, the only one which carries out that
arrangement of numerous tiers of superimposed arcades which is so
characteristic of the style. The lower storey is well designed as a
solid basement for the superincumbent mass; its walls are 13 ft. in
thickness, and it is adorned with 15 three-quarter columns: its height
being 35 ft. The six storeys above this average 20 ft. in height, and
are each adorned with an open arcade. The whole is crowned by a smaller
circular tower, 27 ft. in height, in which the bells are hung. The
entire height is thus 182 ft. ; the mean diameter of the main portion,
52. There is no doubt that it was originally intended to stand
perpendicular, though the contrary has been asserted; but before the
commencement of the fifth storey the foundations had given way, and the
attempts to readjust the work are plainly traceable in the upper
storeys, though without success. out of the
perpendicular,[309] which, though not sufficient to endanger its
stability, is enough to render it very unsightly. Even without this
defect, however, its design can hardly be commended; an arrangement of
six equal arcades, with horizontal entablatures, is not an expedient
mode of adorning a building, where elevation is the element of success. The introduction of strongly-marked vertical lines, or some variation in
the design of the arcades, would have greatly improved the design: and
so the Italians seem to have thought, for it was never repeated, and the
Pisan tower remains a solitary example of its class. Nothing at all resembling it occurs in the southern parts of the
province, though it must be admitted that they contain very few really
important towers of any sort. Perhaps the earthquakes to which a great portion of the country is
liable may have deterred the architects from indulging in structures of
great altitude; but it must be added that the idea of belfry or tower
did not enter into their municipal arrangements, and their towns are not
consequently illustrated by such towers as those of Venice, Cremona, or
Verona in the north. Of those which do exist that of Gaeta is perhaps as
picturesque as any. It was erected 1276-1290, and is both characteristic
of the style and elegant in outline. As will be observed, the lower
storey has pointed arches, while those above are all round; an
arrangement which, though to our eyes it may appear archologically
wrong, is certainly constructively right, and the effect is very
pleasing, from the height and dignity given to the entrance. The two towers of the cathedral at Bari (Woodcut No. 470) are not so
happy in design as this. They are too tall for their other dimensions,
and want accentuation throughout; while the change from the lower to the
upper storey is abrupt and ill-contrived. The tower at Caserta Vecchia
(Woodcut No. 472) is low and squat in its proportions, and unfortunately
too typical of the towers in this land of earthquakes. As a rule, it may be asserted that the southern province of Italy is
singularly deficient in examples of civil or domestic architecture. Great monastic establishments existed there during the Middle Ages which
must have possessed buildings befitting their magnificence; but these
have either perished and been rebuilt, or have been so restored that
their original forms can hardly be recognised. There are, indeed,
cloisters at Amalfi and Sorrento; much more remarkable, however, for the
beauty of their situation than for their architecture, which is
extremely rude and clumsy. There are no chapter-houses: no halls or
conventual buildings of any sort. In this respect, the province forms a
remarkable contrast with Spain in the same age; though it must be
confessed that the North of Italy is also very deficient in conventual
buildings of the Middle Ages, the most magnificent and beautiful
belonging more to the Renaissance than to the Medival period. At Ravello there is the Casa Ruffolo, a picturesque palace of the 13th
century, still nearly entire: a strange mixture of Gothic and Saracenic
taste, but so exceptional, that it would not be fair to quote it as a
type of any style. It seems to owe its peculiarities more to the taste
of some individual patron or architect rather than to any national taste
or form of design. There are, however, several Hohenstauffen castles of tolerable
preservation, more or less typical of the domestic arts of the day in
which they were erected. One of the best preserved of these is that of
Castel del Monte, erected by Frederick II., 1240-44. It is an octagon in
plan, with octagonal turrets at each angle. across
its extreme breadth, and surrounds a courtyard 57 ft. Both
storeys are vaulted, and all the details throughout are good and
pleasing. The whole is an admixture of Italian taste, superimposed on a
German design; but it will be observed how little removed the
architectural details of the entrance are, even at that early age, from
the style of the Renaissance. This is, indeed, the great characteristic
of the architectural objects in Southern Italy. Though they adopted
Christian forms, they never abandoned the classical feeling in details;
and it is this which mainly renders them worthy of study. Whether
considered in regard to dimensions, outline, or constructive
peculiarities, their churches will not bear a moments comparison with
those of the North; but in elegance of detail they often surpass purely
Gothic buildings to such a degree as to become to some extent as worthy
of study as their more ambitious rivals. Part Section, part Elevation, of Castel del Monte. POINTED ITALIAN GOTHIC. Fresco paintingsChurches at Vercelli, Asti, Verona, and LuccaCathedral
  at SienaSta. Maria, FlorenceChurch at ChiaravalleSt. Petronio,
  BolognaCathedral at MilanCertosa, near PaviaDuomo at Ferrara. Bologna independent                   A.D. 1112
            Countess Matilda at Florence               1115
            Obizzo dEste at Ferrara                   1184
            Enrico Dandolo takes Constantinople        1203
            War between Genoa and Venice               1205
            Azzo dEste at Ferrara                     1208
            Martino della Scala at Verona              1259
            Martino delle Torre at Milan               1260
            Visconti Lord of Milan                     1277
            Taddeo de Pepoli at Bologna                1334
            Conspiracy of Marino Faliero               1355
            Gian Galeazzo Visconti, Duke of Milan      1395
            Verona ceded to Venice                     1409
            Cosmo de Medici                           1434


Before the commencement of the 13th century, the Italians had acquired
such mastery over the details of their round-arched style, and had
worked it into such originality and completeness, that it is surprising
that they should so easily have abandoned it for that form of Pointed
Gothic which they afterwards adopted. It is true the Italians never rose
to the conception of such buildings as the great Rhenish cathedrals,
like those of Spires and Worms, or the old churches at Cologne; nor did
they perhaps even rival the quasi-classical grace and elegance of the
Provenal churches; but at Verona, Modena, and indeed throughout the
North of Italy, they had elaborated a complete round-arched style, all
the details of which were not only appropriate and elegant, but seemed
capable of indefinite development in the direction in which they were
proceeding. They had also before their eyes the Romanesque style of Pisa
and Lucca with all its elegance, and the example of Rome, where the
architects steadily refused to acknowledge the pointed arch during the
whole of the Medival period. Yet in the beginning of the 13th
centurysay 1220, when the cathedrals of Amiens, Salisbury, and Toledo
were designedItaly too was smitten with admiration for the pointed
arch, and set to work to adapt it to her tastes and uses. It would be difficult to account for this, were we not aware how deeply
the feelings that gave rise to the Ghibelline faction were rooted in the
Italian soil. In all the cities, except Rome, the cause of the
Ghibellines was throughout the Middle Ages identified with that of
freedom and local independence, in opposition to that of the Guelfs,
which symbolised the supremacy of the Pope and the clerical party. Knowing how strenuously this was resisted, we naturally expect to find
it expressed in the architecture of the country. Two, indeed, of the
great churches of Italy, Assisi (1228) and Milan (1385), were erected by
Germans in the German style of the day; but these are exceptional. The
form which the pointed-arched style took on its introduction, was that
of adaptation to the Italian style, in a manner which the Italians
thought more consonant with beauty and convenience than that adopted
north of the Alps. The elegance of
the details employed by a refined and cultivated people, and based on
classical traditions, goes far to redeem, in most instances, the defects
of their designs; but they never grasped the true principles of Gothic
art, and the fatal facility of the pointed arch led them more astray
after mechanical clevernesses than even the Germans. Still, it is an
original style, and, however imperfect, is well worthy of study. Before proceeding to describe the style more in detail, it may be well
to point out one of the principal causes which led to the more marked
features of difference between the Gothic architecture of Italy and that
of Germany and France. This was the distaste of the Italians for the
employment of painted glass, or at least their want of appreciation of
its beauties when combined with architecture. It will be explained in a future chapter how all-important painted glass
was to the elaboration of the Gothic style. But for its introduction,
the architecture of France would bear no resemblance to what it was, and
is. In Italy, indeed, the people loved polychromy, but always of the
opaque class. They delighted to cover the walls of their churches with
frescoes and mosaics, to enrich their floors with the most gorgeous
pavements, and to scatter golden stars over the blue ground of their
vaults; but rarely, if ever, did they fill, or design to fill, their
windows with painted glass. Perhaps the glare of an Italian sun may have
tended to render its brilliancy intolerable; but more probably the
absence of stained glass is owing to its incompatibility with
fresco-painting, the effect of which would be entirely destroyed by the
superior brightness of the transparent material. The Italians were not
prepared to relinquish the old and favourite mode of decoration in which
they so excelled. This adherence to the ancient method of ornamentation
enabled them, in the 15th and 16th centuries, to surpass all the world
in the art of painting, but it was fatal to the proper appreciation of
the pointed style, and to its successful introduction into the land. The first effect of this tendency was that the windows in Italian
churches were small, and generally devoid of tracery, with all its
beautiful accompaniments. The walls, too, being consequently solid, were
sufficient, by their own weight, to abut the thrust of the arches: so
that neither projecting or flying buttresses nor pinnacles were needed. The buildings were thus deprived externally of all the aspiring vertical
lines so characteristic of true Gothic. The architects, to relieve the
monotony arising from the want of these features, were forced to recur
to the horizontal cornices of the classical times, and to cover their
walls with a series of panelling which, however beautiful in itself, is
mere ornamentboth unmeaning and inconsistent. Internally, too, having no clerestory to make room for, and no
constructive necessities to meet, they jumped to the conclusion that the
best design is that which covers the greatest space with the least
expenditure of materials, and the least encumbrance of the floor. With
builders this is a golden rule, but with architects it is about the
worst that can possibly be adopted. The Germans were not free from this
fault, but the Italians carried it still further. If on four or five
piers they could support the vault of a whole nave, they never dreamed
of introducing more. A French architect, though superior in constructive
skill, would probably have introduced eight or ten in the same space. An
Italian aimed at carrying the vaults of the side-aisles to the same
height as that of the nave, if he could. A Northern architect knew how
to keep the two in their due proportion, whereby he obtained greater
height and greater width in the same bulk, and an appearance of height
and width greater still, by the contrast between the parts, at the same
time that he gave his building a character of strength and stability
perhaps even more valuable than that of size. In the same manner the Northern architects, while they grouped their
shafts together, kept them so distinct as to allow every one to bear its
proportional part of the load, and perform its allotted task. The
Italians never comprehended this principle, but merely stuck pilasters
back to back, in imitation of the true architects, producing an
unmeaning and ugly pier. The same incongruities occur in every part and
every detail. It is a style copied without understanding, and executed
without feeling. The elegance of the sculptured foliage and other
details sometimes goes far to redeem these faults; for the Italians,
though bad architects, were always beautiful carvers, and, as a Southern
people, were free from the vulgarities sometimes apparent farther north,
and never fell into the wild barbarisms which too often disfigure even
the best buildings on this side of the Alps. Besides, when painting is
joined to sculpture in churches, the architecture may come to occupy a
subordinate position, and thus escape the censure it deserves. Unfortunately there are only two examples of any importance in this
style that retain all their painted decorationsSt. Francis at Assisi,
and the Certosa near Pavia. From this circumstance they are perhaps the
most admired in Italy. In others the spaces left for colour are still
plain and blank. We see the work of the architect unaided by the
painting which was intended to set it off, and we cannot but condemn it
as displaying at once bad taste and ignorance of the true Gothic
feeling. One of the earliest, or perhaps the very first Italian edifice into
which the pointed arch was introduced, is the fine church of St. Andrea
at Vercelli, commenced in the year 1219 by the Cardinal Guala Bicchieri,
and finished in three years. This prelate, having been long legate in
England, brought back with him an English architect called, it is said,
Brigwithe, and entrusted him with the erection of this church in his
native place. (From Ostens
Baukunst in Lombardei.) Scale 100 ft. In plan, it is certainly very like an English church, terminating
squarely towards the east, and with side chapels to the transepts,
arranged very much as we find them at Buildwas, Kirkstall, and other
churches of this class and size, only that here they are polygonal,
which was hardly ever the case in England. But with the plan all
influences of the English architect seem to have ceased, and the
structure is in purely Italian style. Externally the pointed arch
nowhere appears, all the doors and windows being circular-headed; while
internally it is confined to the pier-arches of the nave and the
vaulting of the roof. The faade is flanked at its angles by two tall,
slender, square towers; and the intersection of the nave and transept is
covered by one of those elegant octagonal domes which the Italians knew
so well how to use, and which is in fact the only original feature in
their designs. The external form of this church is interesting, as
displaying the germs of much that two centuries afterwards was so
greatly expanded by a German architect in the design of Milan cathedral. A few years later, in 1229, a church was commenced at Asti, the tower of
which was finished in 1266. This allowed time for a more complete
development of the pointed style, which here prevails not only
internally, but externally. Tall pointed windows appear in the flanks,
and even the doorways assume that form, in their canopies, if not in
their openings. 493) is a later addition, and a
characteristic specimen of the style during the 14th century. This
church is also one of the earliest examples in which those elegant
terra-cotta cornices of small intersecting arches seem to have been
brought to perfection. (From Chapuy, Moyen-ge
Monumental.)]

The most remarkable church of this age is that of St. Francis at Assisi,
commenced in 1228, and finished, in all essentials at least, in 1253. It
is said to have been built by a German named Jacob, or Jacopo. Certainly
no French or English architect would have designed a double church of
this class, though, on the other hand, no Italian could have drawn
details so purely Northern as those of the upper church. In the lower
church there are hardly any mouldings to mark the style, but its
character is certainly rather German than Italian. This church depends
for its magnificence and character much more on painting than on
architecture. In the first place it is small, the upper church being
only 225 ft. width; and though the lower one has
side-aisles which extend the width to 100 ft., yet the upper church is
only 60 ft. in height, and the lower about 30, so that it is far too
small for much architectural magnificence. None of its details are equal
to those of contemporary churches on this side of the Alps. The whole
church is covered with fresco paintings in great variety and of the most
beautiful character, which justly render it one of the most celebrated
and admired of all Italy. On this side of the Alps without its frescoes,
it would hardly attract any attention. It is invaluable as an example of
the extent to which the polychromatic decoration may be profitably
carried, and of the true mode of doing it; and also as an illustration
of the extent to which the Italians allowed a foreign style and mode of
ornamentation to be introduced into their country. One of the purest and most perfect types of an Italian Gothic church is
that of Sta. Anastasia at Verona, commenced apparently in 1260. It is
not large, being only 285 ft. in length externally; but its arrangements
are very complete, and very perfect if looked at from an Italian point
of view. The square of the vault of the nave is the modulus, instead of
that of the aisles, as in true Gothic churches: owing to which the
pier-arches are further apart than a true artist would have placed them;
there are also no buttresses externally, but only pilasters. The
consequence of this is, that the arches have to be tied in with iron
rods at the springing, which internally adds very much to the appearance
of weakness, caused in the first instance by the wide spacing and
general tenuity. These bad effects are aggravated by the absence of a
string-course at the springing of the vault; and by the substitution of
a circular hole for the triforium, and a hexafoiled opening of very
insignificant dimensions for the glorious clerestory windows of Northern
churches. Altogether, though we cannot help being pleased with the
spaciousness and general elegance of design, it is impossible not to
feel how very inferior it is to that of churches on this side the Alps. One Bay, externally and internally, of the Church of
San Martino, Lucca.] The church of San Martino at Lucca, built about a century after Sta. Anastasia (middle of 14th century), presents a strikingly happy
compromise between the two styles. The pier-arches are still too wide23
ft. in the clear; but the defect is remedied to some extent by the
employment of circular instead of pointed arches, and the triforium is
all that can be desired; the clerestory, however, is as insignificant as
it must be where the sun is so brilliant and painted glass inadmissible. It would be easy to point out other defects; but, taking it altogether,
there are few more elegant churches than this, and hardly one in Italy
that so perfectly meets all the exigencies for which it was designed. (From the glises
principales dEurope.) Scale 100 ft. The cathedrals of Siena and Orvieto (the former commenced in 1243, the
latter in 1290) are perhaps, taken altogether, the most successful
specimens of Italian pointed Gothic. They are those at least in which
the system is carried to the greatest extent without either foreign aid
or the application of distinctly foreign details. These two buildings,
moreover, both retain their faades as completed by their first
architects, while the three great churches of this stylethe cathedrals
of Florence, Bologna, and Milanwere in this respect left unfinished,
with many others of the smaller churches of Italy. The church at Siena
illustrates forcibly the tendency of the Italian architects to adhere to
the domical forms of the old Etruscans, which the Romans amplified to
such an extent, and the Byzantines made peculiarly their own. I cannot
but repeat my regret that the Italians alone, of all the Western
Medival builders, showed any predilection for this form of roof. On
this side of the Alps it could have been made the most beautiful of
architectural forms. In Italy there is no instance of more than moderate
successnothing, indeed, to encourage imitation. Even the example now
before us is no exception to these remarks, though one of the boldest
efforts of Italian architects. In plan it ought to have been an octagon,
but that apparently would have made it too large for their skill to
execute, so they met the difficulty by adopting a hexagon, which, though
producing a certain variety of perspective, fits awkwardly with the
lines of columns, and twists the vaults to an unpleasant extent. Still,
a dome of moderate height, and 58 ft. in diameter, covering the centre
of the church, and with sufficient space around to give it dignity, is a
noble and pleasing feature, the merit of which it is impossible to deny. Combined with the rich colouring and gorgeous furniture of the church,
it makes up a whole of great beauty. The circular pier-arches, however,
and the black and white stripes by which the exterior is marked, detract
considerably from the effect of the wholeat least in the eyes of
strangers, though the Italians still consider it a beauty. The faade of
this cathedral is represented in Woodcut No. It consists of three
great portals, the arches of which are equal in size, though the centre
doorway is larger than those at the sides. Above is the invariable
circular window of the Italian architects, and the whole is crowned by
steep triangular gables. Beneath the cathedral, or rather under the
choir, is the ancient baptistery, now the church of St. John the
Baptist; its front is in a much purer style of Gothic than the
cathedral. [310]

[Illustration: 498. Faade of the Cathedral at Siena.] The carved architectural ornaments of the faade are rich and elaborate
in the extreme, though figured sculpture is used to a much less extent
than in Northern portals of the same age. It is also observable that the
strong horizontal lines do not harmonise with the aspiring character of
pointed architecture. The cathedral of Orvieto is smaller and simpler, and less rich in its
decorations, than that at Siena, with the exception of its faade, which
is adorned with sculpture and painting. Indeed the three-gabled front
may be considered the typical one for churches of this class. The
faades intended to have been applied to the churches at Florence,
Bologna, Milan, and elsewhere, were no doubt very similar to that
represented in Woodcut No. As a frontispiece, if elaborately
sculptured and painted, it is not without considerable appropriateness
and even beauty; but, as an architectural object, it is infinitely
inferior to the double-towered faades of the Northern cathedrals, or
even to those with only one great tower in the centre. It has besides
the defect of not expressing what is behind it; the central gable being
always higher than the roof, and the two others merely ornamental
appendages. Indeed, like the Italian Gothic buildings generally, it
depended on painting, sculpture, and carving for its effect, far more
than on architectural design properly so called. Among the greatest and most complete examples of Italian Gothic is the
church of Sta. Maria dei Fiori, the cathedral of Florence, one of the
largest and finest churches produced in the Middle Agesas far as mere
grandeur of conception goes, perhaps the very best, though considerably
marred in execution from defects of style, which are too apparent in
every part. (From Isabelle,
difices Circulaires.) Scale 100 ft. The building of the church was commenced in the year 1294 or 1298 (it is
not quite clear which), from the designs and under the superintendence
of Arnolfo di Lapo, for unfortunately in this style we know the names of
all the architects, and all the churches show traces of the caprice and
of the misdirected efforts of individuals, instead of the combined
national movement which produced such splendid results in France and
England. It is not known how far Arnolfo had carried the building when
he died, in 1310, but probably up to the springing of the vaults. After
this the works proceeded more leisurely, but the nave and smaller domes
of the choir were no doubt completed as we now find them in the first
twenty years of the 14th century. The great octagon remained unfinished,
and, if covered in at all, it was only by a wooden roof of domical
outline externally, which seems to be that represented in the fresco in
the convent of San Marco, till Brunelleschi commenced the present dome
in 1420, and completed it in all essential parts before his death, which
happened in 1444. The building may therefore be considered as
essentially contemporary with the cathedral of Cologne, which it very
nearly equals in size (its area being 84,802 ft., while that of Cologne
is estimated at 91,000), and, as far as mere conception of plan goes,
there can be little doubt but that the Florentine cathedral far
surpasses its German rival. Nothing indeed can be finer than its general
ground-plan. A vast nave leads to an enormous dome, extending into the
triapsal arrangement so common in the early churches of Cologne, and
which was repeated in the last and greatest effort of the Middle Ages,
or rather the first of the new schoolthe great church of St. In the Florentine church all these parts are better subordinated
and proportioned than in any other example, and the mode in which the
effect increases and the whole expands as we approach from the entrance
to the sanctum is unrivalled. Like all inexperienced architects, Arnolfo seems to have
thought that largeness of parts would add to the greatness of the whole,
and thus used only four great arches in the whole length of his nave,
giving the central aisle a width of 55 ft. of that of Cologne, and the height about the same; and
yet, in appearance, the height is about half, and the breadth less than
half, owing to the better proportion of the parts and to the superior
appropriateness in the details on the part of the German cathedral. At
Florence the details are positively ugly. The windows of the side-aisles
are small and misplaced, those of the clerestory mere circular holes. The proportion of the aisles one to another is bad, the vaults
ill-formed, and altogether a colder and less effective design was not
produced in the Middle Ages. The triapsal choir is not so objectionable
as the nave, but there are large plain spaces that now look cold and
flat; the windows are too few and small, and there is a gloom about the
whole which is very unsatisfactory. It is nearly certain that the
original intention was to paint the walls, and not to colour the
windows, so that these defects are hardly chargeable to the original
design, and would not be apparent now were it not that in a moment of
mistaken enthusiasm the Florentines were seized with a desire to imitate
the true style of Gothic art, and rival Northern cathedrals in the glory
of their painted glass. This, in a church whose windows were designed
only of such dimensions as were sufficient to admit the requisite
quantity of white light, was fatal. Notwithstanding the beauty of the
glass itself, which seems to have been executed at Lubeck, 1434, from
Italian designs, it is so completely out of place that it only produces
irritation instead of admiration, and has certainly utterly destroyed
the effect and meaning of the interior it was intended to adorn. Section of Dome and part of Nave of the Cathedral at
Florence. Part of the Flank of Cathedral at Florence.] Dome at Chiaravalle, near Milan. Externally the faade was never finished,[311] and we can only fancy
what was intended from the analogy of Siena and Orvieto. The flanks of
the nave are without buttresses or pinnacles, and, with only a few
insignificant windows, would be painfully flat except for a veneer of
 marbles disposed in panels over the whole surface. For an
interior or a pavement such a mode of decoration is admissible; but it
is so unconstructive, so evidently a mere decoration, that it gives a
weakness to the whole, and most unsatisfactory appearance to so large a
building. This is much less apparent at the east end, where the outline
is so broken, and the main lines of the construction so plainly marked,
that the mere filling in is comparatively unimportant. This is the most
meritorious part of the church, and, so far as it was carried up
according to the original design, is extremely beautiful. Even the
plainness and flatness of the nave serve as a foil to set off the
varying outline of the choir. Above the line of the cornice of the
side-aisles there is nothing that can be said to belong to the original
design except the first division of the drum of the dome, which follows
the lines of the clerestory. It has long been a question what Arnolfo
originally intended, and especially how he meant to cover the great
octagonal space in the centre. All knowledge of his intentions seems to
have been lost within a century after his death: at least, in the
accounts of the proceedings of the commission which resulted in the
adoption of Brunelleschis design for the dome, no reference is made to
any original design as then existing, and no one appears to have known
how Arnolfo intended to finish his work. Judging from the structure as
far as he carried it, and with the knowledge we now possess of the
Italian architecture of that age, we can easily conjecture what his
design for its completion may have been. Internally, it probably
consisted of a dome something like the present, but flatter, springing
from the cornice, 40 ft. lower than the present one, and pierced with
large openings on each of its eight faces. Section of Eastern portion of Church at Chiaravalle. (From Gruners Terra Cotta Architecture in Italy.) Scale 50 ft. Externally, two courses were open to him. The first and most obvious was
to hide the dome entirely under a wooden roof, as is done in St. Georges, Thessalonica (Woodcut No. 305), or in the baptistery in front
of the cathedral, and is done in half the baptisteries in Italyas at
Parma, for instance (Woodcut No. Had he done this, the span of the
dome might have been very much larger, without involving any
constructive difficulties, and the three towers over the choir and
transepts might have sufficed to relieve its external appearance
sufficiently for architectural effect. On the whole, however, I am
rather inclined to believe that something more ambitious than this was
originally proposed, and that the design was more like that of
Chiaravalle near Milan, built in 1221, and one of the most complete and
perfect of this class of dome now existing in Italy. Its external
appearance may be judged of from Woodcut 502, and its constructive
details from the section, Woodcut No. If the basement is sufficiently solidand that at Florence is more than
sufficient for any superstructure of the sortit is evident the
architect can dispose of such masses of masonry, that he can counteract
any thrust or tendency to spread that can exist in any dome of this
sort; and instead of being only 136 ft. across, 150 or 160 might easily
have been attempted. Instead of 375 ft., which is the height of the
present dome from the floor to the top of the cross externally, it might
even with the present diameter have been carried up to at least 500 ft.,
or as high as the church was long,70 to 100 ft. Had this been done, the three smaller semi-domes must have been intended
to be crowned with miniature octagonal spires of the same class with the
great dome, and between these the vast substructures show that it was
intended to carry up four great spires, probably to a height of 400 ft. Had all this been done (and something very like it seems certainly to
have been intended), neither Cologne Cathedral, nor any church in
Europe, ancient or modern, would have been comparable to this great and
glorious apse. As it is, the plain, heavy, simple outlined dome of
Brunelleschi acts like an extinguisher, crushing all the lower part of
the composition, and both internally and externally destroying all
harmony between the parts. It has deprived us of the only chance that
ever existed of witnessing the effect of a great Gothic dome; not indeed
such a dome as might with the same dimensions have been executed on this
side of the Alps, but still in the spirit, and with much of the poetry,
which gives such value to the conceptions of the builders in those days. But for this change of plan, the ambition of the Florentines might have
been in some measure satisfied, whose instructions to the architect
were, that their cathedral should surpass everything that human
industry or human power had conceived of great and beautiful.

About a century later (1390), the Bolognese determined on the erection
of a monster cathedral, which, in so far as size went, would have been
more than double that at Florence. According to the plans that have come
down to us, it was to have been about 800 ft. long and 525 wide across
the transepts; at the intersection was to have been a dome 130 ft. in
diameter, or only 6 ft. less than that at Florence; and the width of
both nave and transepts was to have been 183 ft. : so that the whole
would have covered about 212,000 ft., or nearly the same area as St. Peters at Rome, and three times that of any French cathedral! Of this
vast design, only about one-third (Woodcut No. ft., was
ever carried out; but that fragment is quite sufficient to enable us to
judge of the merits or defects of this style in its state of greatest
perfection. The only other building in the same style on a sufficient
scale to admit of comparison with this is the nave of the cathedral at
Florence just described, but that is nearly as may be only half of its
dimensions, or 36,000 ft. The chapels, too, at
Bologna add practically a fifth aisle, giving great variety and richness
to the perspective. The varied heights and proportions of the central
and side aisles are singularly pleasing, and there being six arches at
Bologna instead of only four as at Florence, and twelve side chapels
where none exist in the other example, go far to redeem the lean
mechanical look which is the great defect of this style. The great
advantage San Petronio has over the Florentine church is in the size and
number of its windows, and these not being filled with stained glass the
whole church has a bright and pleasing effect that contrasts most
favourably with the gloom of its great rival. Notwithstanding this, the
nave of San Petronio cannot be considered as a successful work of art. In the first place it is too mechanically perfect. The area of the
points of support as compared with the voids is, as far as can be made
out from such plans as exist, about one-twelfth, which would be a merit
in a railway station, but something more is wanted in a monumental
building. In the next there is a singular deficiency of either
constructive or constructed ornament. On this side of the Alps an
architect with vaulting shafts, string-courses, galleries, and fifty
other expedients, would have relieved the bareness of the walls. At
Bologna it probably was intended they should be painted, and this never
having been executed may account for most of its apparent defects. In Gothic architecture one of two systems seems indispensable: either
painted glass with strongly-marked carved mouldings over the whole of
the interior, or white glass with flat surfaces suitable for opaque
paintings. Few cathedrals are complete in both respects at the present
day, but in their imperfect state the Northern system has an immense
advantage over the Southern. The architecture of our cathedrals is
complete and beautiful even in ruins. An Italian church without its
 decoration is only a framed canvas without harmony or meaning. Were San Petronio as complete in its  decoration as the Certosa
at Pavia or Monreale at Palermo, it might stand a fair competition with
the best interiors on this side of the Alps. As it is, it is only a
splendid example of ornamental but unornamented construction, and, as
was attempted to be explained in the Introduction, both elements are
wanted for success in architectural design. Section of San Petronio, Bologna. The exterior of the church is in too unfinished a state to enable us to
judge of what its effect might have been if completed, but many of its
details, especially of the faade, are of very great beauty, in many
respects superior to what is to be found on this side of the Alps. Its
central dome, however, never could have been a feature worthy of so vast
a church. In diameter it is equal, or nearly so, to that of Florence,
but the points of support are so small, and so far apart, that it must
have been mainly if not wholly of wood. No such towering structure as
Arnolfos vast substructures show that he intended, could have stood on
the slim supports of the Bolognese church. [312]

[Illustration: 506. (From Chiesi
Principali dEuropa.) Scale 100 ft. The cathedral of Milanat once the most remarkable and one of the
largest and richest of all the churches erected in the Middle Ageswas
commenced in the year 1385, by order of Gian Galeazzo, first Duke of
Milan, and consecrated in 1418, at which date all the essential parts
seem to have been completed, though the central spire was not finished
till about the year 1440, by Brunelleschi. The design is said to have been furnished by a German architect,
Heinrich Arlez von Gemunden, or as the Italians call him, da
Gamondia,a statement which is corroborated by the fact that the
details and many of the forms are essentially Northern; but it is
equally certain that he was not allowed to control the whole, for all
the great features of the church are as thoroughly Italian as the
details are German: it is therefore by no means improbable that Marco da
Campione, as the Italians assert, or some other native artist, was
joined with him or placed over him. In size it is, except Seville, the largest of all Medival cathedrals,
covering 107,782 ft. In material it is the richest, being built wholly
of white marble, which is scarcely the case with any other church, large
or small; and in decoration it is the most gorgeousthe whole of the
exterior is covered with tracery, and the amount of carving and statuary
lavished on its pinnacles and spires is unrivalled in any other building
of Europe. It is also built wholly (with the exception of the faade)
according to one design. Yet, with all these advantages, the appearance
of this wonderful building is not satisfactory to any one who is
familiar with the great edifices on this side of the Alps. Cologne is
certainly more beautiful; Rheims, Chartres, Amiens, and Bourges leave a
far more satisfactory impression on the mind; and even the much smaller
church of St. Ouen will convey far more pleasure to the true artist than
this gorgeous temple. The cause of all this it is easy to understand, since all or nearly all
its defects arise from the introduction of Italian features into a
Gothic building; or rather, perhaps, it should be said, from a German
architect being allowed to ornament an Italian cathedral. Petronio at Bologna as our standard of
comparison, it will be seen that the sections (Woodcuts Nos. 505, 507)
are almost identical both in dimensions and in form, except that at
Milan the external range is a real aisle instead of a series of side
chapels; but, at the same time, it will be perceived that the German
system prevailed in doubling the number of the piers between the nave
and side-aisles. So far, therefore, the German architect saved the
church. The two small clerestories, however, still remain; and although
the design avoids the mullionless little circles of Bologna, there is
only space for small openings, which more resemble the windows of an
attic than of a clerestory. The greater quantity of light being thus
introduced by the tall windows of the outer aisle, the appearance is
that of a building lighted from below, which is fatal to architectural
effect. The model still preserved on the spot shows that the German architect
designed great portals at each end of the transepts. This, however, was
overruled in favour of two small polygonal apses. Instead of the great
octagonal dome which an Italian would have placed upon the intersection
of the whole width of the nave and transepts, German influence has
confined it to the central aisle, which is perhaps more to be regretted
than any other mistake in the building. The choir is neither a French
chevet nor a German or Italian apse, but a compromise between the two, a
French circlet of columns enclosed in a German polygonal termination. This part of the building, with its simple forms and three glorious
windows, is perhaps an improvement on either of the models of which it
is compounded. [313] (From
Wiebeking.) This is the nearest approach to the French chevet arrangement to be
found in all Italy. It is extremely rare in that country to find an
aisle running round the choir, and opening into it, or with the circlet
of apsidal chapels which is so universal in France. The Italian church
is not, in fact, derived from a combination of a circular Eastern church
with a Western rectangular nave, but is a direct copy from the old Roman
basilica. The details of the interior of Milan cathedral are almost wholly German
(Woodcut No. The great capitals of the pillars, with their niches
and statues, are the only compromise between the ordinary German form
and the great deep ugly capitalsfragments, in fact, of classical
entablatureswhich disfigure the cathedrals of Florence and Bologna, and
so many other Italian churches. Had the ornamentation of these been
carried up to the springing of the vault, they would have been
unexceptionable; as it is, with all their richness, their effect is
unmeaning. Externally, the appearance is in outline not unlike that of Sta. Maria
dei Fiori; the apse is rich, varied, and picturesque, and the central
dome (excepting the details) similar, though on a smaller scale, to what
I believe to have been the original design of the Florentine church. The
nave is nearly as flat as at Florence, the clerestory not being visible;
but the forest of pinnacles and flying buttresses and the richness of
the ornamentation go far to hide that defect. The faade was left
unfinished, as was so often the case with the great churches of Italy. Pellegrini was afterwards employed to finish it, and a model of his
design is still preserved. It is fortunate that his plan was not carried
out. The faade was finished, as we now see it, from the designs of
Amati, by order of Napoleon. It is commonplace, as might be expected
from its age, but inoffensive. The doorways are part of Pellegrinis
design, and the Medival forms being placed over those of the
cinque-cento, produce a strangely incongruous effect. For the west front
several original designs are still preserved. One of these, with two
small square towers at the angles, as at Vercelli and elsewhere, was no
doubt the Italian design. 509) is preserved
by Bassi:[314] had this been executed, the faade would have been about
one-third (viz. Had the height of
the towers been in the same proportion, they would have been the tallest
in the world. In that case the effect here, as at Cologne, would have
been to shorten and overpower the rest of the building to a painful
extent. A design midway between the two, with spires rising to the same
height as the central one, or about 360 ft., would perhaps have the
happiest effect. At any rate, the want of some such features is greatly
felt in the building as it stands. The Certosa, near Pavia, was commenced about the same date (1396) as the
cathedral at Milan. It is seldom that we find two buildings in the
Middle Ages so close to one another in date and locality, and yet so
dissimilar. There is no instance of such an occurrence on this side of
the Alps, till modern times; and it shows that in those days the
Italians were nearly as devoid of any distinct principles of
architecture as we have since become. View of the Certosa, near Pavia. The great difference between Pavia and Milan is that the former shows no
trace of foreign influence. Petronio, and
by no means so complete or consistent in design. Nothing, in fact, can
be more painful than the disproportion of the parts, the bad drawing of
the details, the malformation of the vaults, and the meanness of the
windows; though all these defects are completely hidden by the most
gorgeous colouring, and by furniture of such richness as to be almost
unrivalled. So attractive are these two features to the majority of
spectators, and so easily understood, that nine visitors out of ten are
delighted with the Certosa, and entirely forget its miserable
architecture in the richness and brilliancy of its decorations. Externally the architecture is better than in the interior. From its
proximity to Pavia, it retains its beautiful old galleries under the
roof. Its circular apses, with their galleries, give to this church, for
the age to which it belongs, a peculiar character, harmonising well with
the circular-headed form, which nearly all the windows and openings
present. Even in the interior there are far more circular than pointed
arches. The most beautiful and wonderful part of the building is the faade. This was begun in 1473, and is one of the best specimens in Italy of the
Renaissance style. It would hardly, therefore, be appropriate to mention
it here, were it not that the dome over the intersection of the nave and
transepts is of the same age and style, but reproduces so exactly
(except in details) what we fancy the Medival Italian Gothic dome to
have been, that it may be considered as a feature of the earlier ages. 502, it will be seen how like it is to that of
Chiaravalle in outline. It is less tall, however, and, if translated
into the details of the great church at Florence, would fit perfectly on
the basement there prepared for such a feature. Like many other churches in Northern Italy, the principal parts of the
Certosa are built in brick, and the ornamental details executed in
terra-cotta. Some of the latter, especially in the cloisters, are as
beautiful as any executed in stone in any part of Italy during the
Middle Ages; and their perfect preservation shows how suitable is the
material for such purposes. It may not be appropriate for large details
or monumental purposes, but for the minor parts and smaller details,
when used as the Italians in the Middle Ages used it, terra-cotta is as
legitimate as any material anywhere used for building purposes; and in
situations like the alluvial plains of the Po, where stone is with
difficulty obtainable, its employment was not only judicious but most
fortunate in its results. It would be a tedious and unprofitable task to attempt to particularise
all the churches which were erected in this style in Italy, as hardly
one of them possesses a single title to admiration beyond the very
vulgar one of size. To this Santa Croce, at Florence, adds its
association with the great men who lie buried beneath it, and Sta. Maria
Novella can plead the circumstanceexceptional in that cityof
possessing a faade;[315] but neither of these has anything to redeem
its innate ugliness in the eyes of an architect. There are two great churches of this period at Venice, the San Giovanni
e Paolo (1246-1420) and the Frari (1250); they are large and richly
ornamented fabrics, but are both entirely destitute of architectural
merit. (From Hopes Architecture.)
Scale 50 ft. A much more beautiful building is the cathedral at Como, the details of
which are so elegant and so unobtrusively used as in great measure to
make up for the bad arrangement and awkward form of the whole. In design
it is, however, inferior to that of the Duomo at Ferrara (Woodcut No. The latter does not display the richness of the faades of Siena
or Orvieto, nor the elegance of that last named; but among the few
Italian faades which exist, it stands pre-eminent for sober propriety
of design and the good proportions of all its parts. The repose caused
by the solidity of the lower portions, and the gradual increase of
ornament and lightness as we ascend, all combine to render it harmonious
and pleasing. It is true it wants the aspiring character and bold relief
of Northern faades; but these do not belong to the style, and it must
suffice if we meet in this style with a moderate amount of variety,
undisturbed by any very prominent instances of bad taste. The true type of an Italian faade is well illustrated in the view of
St. Francesco at Brescia (Woodcut No. 512), which may be considered the
germ of all that followed. Whether the church had three aisles or five,
the true Italian faade in the age of pointed architecture was always a
modification or extension of this idea, though introduced with more or
less Gothic feeling according to the circumstances of its erection. At Florence there is a house or warehouse, converted into a church,Or
(horreum) San Michele, which has attracted a good deal of attention, but
more on account of its curious ornaments than for beauty of designwhich
latter it does not, and indeed can hardly be expected to, possess. Maria della Spina at Pisa owes its celebrity to
the richness of its niches and canopies, and to the sculpture which they
contain. In this the Italians were always at home, and probably always
surpassed the Northern nations. It was far otherwise with architecture,
properly so called. This, in the age of the pointed style, was in Italy
so cold and unmeaning, that we do not wonder at the readiness with which
the Italians returned to the classical models. They are to be forgiven
in this, but we cannot so easily forgive _our_ forefathers, who
abandoned a style far more beautiful than that of Italy to copy one
which they had themselves infinitely surpassed; and this only because
the Italians, unable either to comSprehend or imitate the true
principles of pointed art, were forced to abandon its practice. Unfortunately for us, they had in this respect in that age sufficient
influence to set the fashion to all Europe. (From Streets
Brick and Marble in the Middle Ages.)]

Of late work in Dalmatia the most remarkable is the Cathedral of
Sebenico (described in Mr. Jacksons work), built entirely in stone and
marble, and without any brick or timber in its construction. It is a
cruciform building, covered over by a waggon-vault of stone, visible
both inside and outside. It was commenced from the design of Messer
Ambrosia, a Venetian architect, in 1435, to whom may be attributed the
nave and aisles up to the string-course above nave arches. The work was
continued after 1441 by another architect, Messer Giorgio, also from
Venice, who died in 1475, leaving the building still incomplete. The
style of the work is late Venetian Gothic, influenced in its later
portions by the Renaissance revival. The cloisters of the Badia at
Curzola, and of the Dominican and Franciscan convents at Ragusa, are
also beautiful specimens of late Italian Gothic. ----------------------------

          LONDON: PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS LIMITED,
                   STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING CROSS. Footnote 1:

  The first volume was published in 1865; the second in 1867. Footnote 2:

  Mmoire sur les Fouilles excuts au Madrasen, Constantine, 1873. Footnote 3:

  Monumentos Arquitectonicos de Espaa. Folio. Madrid, 1860, _et
  seqq._

Footnote 4:

  Parcerisa, Recuerdos y Bellezas de Espaa. Folio. Footnote 5:

  Gothic Architecture in Spain, by G. E. Street. Footnote 6:

  Denkmler der Kunst des Mittelalters in Unter Italien, by H. W.
  Schulz. Footnote 7:

  Syrie Centrale, by Count M. De Vog. Footnote 8:

  Byzantine Architecture, by Chev. Footnote 9:

  Mission to the Court of Ava in 1855, by Colonel Yule. Footnote 10:

  Travels in Siam and Cambodia, by Henri Mouhot. Footnote 11:

  The number of illustrations in the chapters of the Handbook comprised
  in this first volume of the History was 441. They now stand at 536
  (1874); and in the second volume the ratio of increase will probably
  be even greater. Footnote 12:

  It may be suggested that the glory of a French clerestory filled with
  stained glass made up for all these defects, and it may be true that
  it did so; but in that case the architecture was sacrificed to the
  sister art of painting, and is not the less bad in itself because it
  enabled that art to display its charms with so much brilliancy. Footnote 13:

  The numbers in the table must be taken only as approximative, except
  2, 4, 6, and 7, which are borrowed from Gwilts Public Buildings of
  London.

Footnote 14:

  The Isis-headed or Typhonian capitals cannot be quoted as an exception
  to this rule: they are affixes, and never appear to be doing the work
  of the pillar. Footnote 15:

  See woodcuts further on. Footnote 16:

  Max Mller, who is the _facile princeps_ of the linguistic school in
  this countryin an inaugural lecture which he delivered when, it was
  understood, he was appointed to a chair in the Strasburg
  Universitygave up all that has hitherto been contended for by his
  followers. He admitted that language, though an invaluable aid, did
  not suffice for the purposes of the investigation, and that the
  results obtained by its means were not always to be depended upon. Footnote 17:

  The term Persistent Varieties has recently been introduced, instead
  of race, in ethnological nomenclature, and, if scientific accuracy
  is aimed at, is no doubt an improvement. It is an advantage to have a
  term which does not even in appearance prejudge any of the questions
  between the monogenists and polygenists, and leaves undecided all the
  questions how the variations of mankind arose. But it sounds pedantic;
  and race may be understood as meaning the same thing. Footnote 18:

  The whole of this subject has been carefully gone into by the Author
  in a work entitled Rude Stone Monuments published in 1872, to which
  the reader is referred. Footnote 19:

  All round the shores of the Mediterranean are found the traces of an
  art which has hitherto been a stumbling-block to antiquarians. Egyptian cartouches and ornaments in Assyria, which are not Egyptian;
  sarcophagi at Tyre, of Egyptian form, but with Phnician inscriptions,
  and made for Tyrian kings; Greek ornaments in Syria, which are not
  Greek; Roman frescoes or ornaments, and architectural details at
  Carthage, and all over Northern Africa, which however are not Roman. In short, a copying art something like our own, imitating everything,
  understanding nothing. Franks for the
  suggestion that all this art may be Phnician, in other words,
  Semitic, and I believe he is right. Footnote 20:

  Had there been no Pelasgi in Greece, there probably would have been no
  Architecture of the Grecian period. Footnote 21:

  The derivation of the two words Heathen and Pagan seems to indicate
  the relative importance of these two terms very much in the degree it
  is here wished to express. Heathen is generally understood to be
  derived from , a nation or people; and Pagan from _Pagus,
  Pagani_, a village, or villagers. Both are used here not as terms of
  reproach, but as indicative of their being non-Christian, which is
  what it is wished to express, and was the original intention of the
  term. Footnote 22:

  Rude Stone Monuments, 1 vol. Footnote 23:

  The above scheme of Egyptian Chronology was published by me in the
  True Principles of Beauty in Art, in 1849; and the data on which it
  was based were detailed in the Appendix to that work. As there seems
  to be nothing in the subsequent researches or discoveries which at all
  invalidates the reasoning on which the table was founded, it is here
  reproduced in an abridged form as originally set forth. Footnote 24:

  Syncellus, Chron. Dindorff, Bonn, 1829. Footnote 25:

  Josephus contra Apion, i. Footnote 26:

  Vyse, Operations on the Pyramids at Gizeh in 1837, vol. Footnote 27:

  At Wady Meghara, in the Sinaitic peninsula, a king of the 4th dynasty
  is represented as slaying an Asiatic enemy. It is the only sign of
  strife which has yet been discovered belonging to this ancient
  kingdom. Footnote 28:

  By a singular coincidence, China has been suffering from a Hyksos
  domination of Tartar conquerors, precisely as Egypt did after the
  period of the Pyramid builders, and, strange to say, for about the
  same periodfive centuries. Had the Taepings been successful, we
  should have witnessed in China the exact counterpart of what took
  place in Egypt when the 1st native kings of the 18th dynasty expelled
  the hated race. H. Vyse, Operations carried on the Pyramids of Gizeh in 1837.
  Lond. Footnote 30:

  This will be best understood by looking at the section (Woodcut 7), in
  which it will be seen that the so-called coping or casing-stones were
  not simply triangular blocks, filling up the angles formed by the
  receding steps, and which might have been easily displaced, but stones
  from 7 to 10 feet in depth, which could not have been supported unless
  the work had been commenced at the bottom. On the other hand, it is
  difficult to understand how the casing-stones for the upper portion
  could have been raised up the sloping portion completed. It is
  probable, therefore, that the casing was commenced at the angles and
  was carried up in vertical planes, thus leaving a causeway of steps in
  the middle of each face, which diminished in width as the work
  proceeded; this causeway, a few feet wide only, on each face being
  then encased from the top downwards after the apex blocks had been
  laid.ED. Footnote 31:

  The Pyramids and Temples of Gizeh by W. M. Flinders Petrie. Footnote 32:

  On the north side the paving is carried under the lowest course. Footnote 33:

  Except the spires of Cologne Cathedral. Footnote 34:

  They are situated in latitude 30 N.

Footnote 35:

  Pyramids and Temples of Gizeh, p. 117: All the chambers of this pyramid are
  entirely hewn in the rock.

Footnote 37:

  Medum, by M. Flinders Petrie. D. Nutt, London, 1892. Footnote 38:

  Diodorus, i. Footnote 39:

  M. Mariettes discoveries in these tombs were only in progress at the
  time of his death: but his manuscript notes and drawings of the
  hieroglyphics and figures have since been published in facsimile under
  the title of Les Mastabas de lAncienne Empire Paris 1889. They are,
  however, incomplete; some of the plates referred to could not be
  found, and M. Maspero, who edited the work, has unfortunately given no
  preface of his own, which might have rendered them more intelligible. At present no sufficient data exist to enable others to realise and
  verify the extraordinary revelation it presents to us. It is 2000
  years older, and infinitely more varied and vivid, than the Assyrian
  pictures which recently excited so much interest. Footnote 40:

  The false door is a niche in the side of the mastaba, the back of
  which is carved in imitation of a wooden door. Footnote 41:

  Lucian, De Syria Dea, ed. 451, alludes to the
  fact of the old temples of the Egyptians having no images. Footnote 42:

  The roof slabs are gone, but the lower portions of the slits are still
  uninjured. Footnote 43:

  The plan and particulars relating to this temple are taken from Mr. W.
  M. Petries work before referred to. Footnote 44:

  The tablet discovered at Gizeh, in which Khufu, the builder of the
  Great Pyramid, is recorded to have made some repairs to the Sphinx, is
  stated by Mr. Petrie to be a forgery of the 20th dynasty, and his
  reasons are given in section 118 of his work. Footnote 45:

  Lepsius, Denkmaler, Abt. Footnote 46:

  Syncellus, p. Footnote 47:

  Hawara, Biahmun, and Arsinoe by W. M. Flinders Petrie, 1889. Footnote 48:

  Kahun, Garob, and Hawara, by W. M. Flinders Petrie, 1890. Footnote 49:

  Illahun, Kahun, and Gurob, by W. M. Flinders Petrie, 1891. Footnote 50:

  _Ibid._

Footnote 51:

  The researches of Mr. Petrie at Kahun have shown that originally this
  form of column was in wood, which would account for the base on which,
  in Egyptian work, it is always placed. Footnote 52:

  In a tomb of the 4th dynasty found at Sakkara is a wall decoration in
  which the lotus column is used in a frieze, examples of it being
  carved in low relief to separate the figures in a procession (see
  plate 10, Voyage dans la Haute gypte, by F. A. F. Mariette. The polygonal or Proto-Doric column has also been found as a
  hieroglyph in an inscription of the 4th dynasty. This carries back the
  date of the two columns to a period some twelve centuries prior to the
  example at Beni-Hasan. Footnote 53:

  Revue Archologique, vol. Footnote 54:

  518 years: Josephus contra Apion., I. Footnote 55:

  Layard, Nineveh and Babylon, 281. Footnote 56:

  Tacitus, Ann. Footnote 57:

  Revue Archologique, vol. Footnote 58:

  Now in Sir John Soanes Museum, in Lincolns-Inn-Fields. Footnote 59:

  Egyptian Archology, by G. Maspero, translated from the French by
  Amelia B. Edwards. Footnote 60:

  The information regarding these temples is principally derived from
  Hoskinss Travels in Ethiopia, which is the best and most accurate
  work yet published on the subject. Footnote 61:

  Herodotus. Footnote 62:

  Woodcuts 982 and 1091 in the first edition of this History. Footnote 63:

  Published in the Rheinischer Museum vol. Footnote 64:

  Josephus contra Apion, i. Footnote 65:

  If the Greeks traded to Naucratis as early as the 1st Olympiad. Footnote 66:

  When the Handbook of Architecture was published in 1855, there
  existed no data from which these affinities could be traced. It is to
  the explorations of Sir Henry Rawlinson and Messrs. Taylor and Loftus
  that we owe what we now know on the subject; but even that is only an
  instalment. Footnote 67:

  The chronology here given is based on the various papers communicated
  by Sir Henry Rawlinson to the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,
  vol. x. et seq., and to the Athenum journal. The whole has been
  abstracted and condensed in his brothers Five Great Monarchies of
  the Ancient world; from which work the tables here given are taken in
  an abridged form. Footnote 68:

  Loftus, Chalda and Babylonia, p. Footnote 69:

  Journal R. A. S., vol. Footnote 70:

  Journal R. A. S., vol. p. i, et seq., Sir H. Rawlinsons paper,
  from which all the information here given regarding the Birs is
  obtained. Footnote 71:

  Flandin and Coste, Voyage en Perse, vol. Footnote 72:

  I have ventured to restore the roof of the cella with a sikra (ziggur
  or ziggurah, according to Rawlinsons Five Ancient Monarchies, vol. 395, et passim), from finding similar roofs at Susa, Bagdad,
  Keffeli, &c. They are certainly indigenous, and borrowed from some
  older type, whether exactly what is represented here is not clear, it
  must be confessed. It is offered as a suggestion, the reason for which
  will be given when we come to speak of Buddhist or Saracenic
  architecture. Footnote 73:

  Rich gives its dimensions: On the north, 600 feet; south, 657; east,
  546; and west, 408. But it is so ruinous that only an average guess
  can be made at its original dimensions. George Smith, in the
  Athenum of February 1876, wrote a letter giving an account of a
  tablet of the Temple of Belus at Babylon he had deciphered, which
  constitutes the only description found giving the dimensions thereof. The bottom stage was 300 feet square and 110 feet high, the second,
  with raking sides, 260 feet square and 60 feet high, the third 200
  feet square and 20 feet high, the fourth, fifth, and sixth each 20
  feet high and 170, 140, and 110 feet respectively. The top stage,
  which was the sanctuary, was 80  70 feet and 50 feet high, the whole
  height being thus 300 feet, the same as the width of the base. W.
  R. Lethaby, in his work on Architecture, Mysticism, and Myth, gives
  as a frontispiece a restoration according to these dimensions, the
  appearance of which is more impressive and probably approaches more
  closely to the actual proportions of a ziggurat than any previously
  published, excepting that at Khorsabad, with which in general
  proportion it coincides.ED.] Footnote 74:

  Strabo, xvi. Footnote 75:

  There is a slight discrepancy in the measures owing to the absence of
  fractions in the calculation. Footnote 76:

  Loftus, Chalda and Babylonia, p. Footnote 77:

  This chapter and that next following may be regarded as, in all
  essential respects an abridgment or condensation of the information
  contained in a work published by the author in 1851, entitled, The
  Palaces of Nineveh and Persepolis Restored, the only real difference
  being that the more perfect decipherment of the inscriptions since
  that work was published has caused some of the palaces and buildings
  to be ascribed to different kings and dynasties from those to whom
  they were then assigned, and proved their dates to be more modern than
  was suspected, for the oldest at least. The order of their succession,
  however, remains the same, and so consequently do all the
  architectural inferences drawn from it. Those readers who may desire
  further information on the subject are referred to the work alluded
  to. Footnote 78:

  Published in 1862, in the Athenum journal, No. Footnote 79:

  This plan, with all the particulars here mentioned, are taken from
  Layards work, which is the only authority on the subject, so that it
  is not necessary to refer to him on every point. The plan is reduced
  to the usual scale of 100 ft. to 1 inch, for easy comparison with the
  dimensions of all the other edifices quoted throughout this work. Footnote 80:

  The whole of the information regarding Khorsabad is taken from M.
  Bottas great work on the subject, and its continuation, Ninive et
  lAssyrie, by M. Victor Place. Footnote 81:

  These particulars are all borrowed from M. Places great work, Ninive
  et lAssyrie, folio. Footnote 82:

  Space will not admit of my entering into all the reasons for this
  restoration here. If any one wishes for further information on the
  subject, I must refer him to my Palaces of Nineveh and Persepolis
  Restored, published in 1851. Nothing has occurred during the
  twenty-three years that have elapsed since that work was published
  that has at all shaken my views of the correctness of the data on
  which these restorations were based. On the contrary, every subsequent
  research has served only more and more to convince me of their general
  correctness, and I cannot now suggest any improvement even in details. [It should be noted that the authors theory as to the covering over
  of the Assyrian halls with a flat roof carried on columns has never
  been accepted by foreign archologists, and no trace has ever been
  found of the foundations which would be required to carry such
  columns. M. Place, who conducted the excavations at Khorsabad, and
  Messrs. Perrot & Chipiez, who, among others, have devoted much time
  and research to the subject, are of opinion that the halls were
  vaulted. It would be difficult now to determine the possibility of
  building vaults of thirty feet span in crude or unburnt brick, because
  we have no means of testing the resistance to crushing which such
  bricks might afford. The brick voussoirs found by M. Place in the
  arches of the town gates had been prepared in special moulds, and so
  completely dried that liquid clay had been used to cement them
  together. In some of the large halls, far away from the walls, and in
  some cases in the centre of the rooms, huge blocks of hard clay were
  found with their lower surface curved and covered with a layer of
  stucco; these masses were sometimes many metres long, one to two
  metres wide, nearly a metre thick. According to M. Place they formed
  part of a barrel vault covering the halls, and their size would
  account for the immense thickness of the walls constructed to carry
  them and resist their thrust, as well as for the peculiar shape of the
  halls; that is, their length as compared with their breadth. The
  sculptured slabs would seem to have been carved to be seen by a high
  side-light, which suggests openings of some kind, just above the
  springing of the vault, and above the flat roof of the smaller halls
  round.ED.] Footnote 83:

  These gateways are extremely interesting to the Biblical student,
  inasmuch as they are the only examples which enable us to understand
  the gateways of the Temple at Jerusalem as described by Ezekiel. Their
  dimensions are nearly the same, but the arrangement of the side
  chambers and of gates generally are almost identical. These gates had
  been built 100 years at least before Ezekiel wrote. Footnote 84:

  Layards excavations here furnish us with what has not been found or
  has been overlooked elsewhere, _e.g._, a ramp or winding staircase
  leading to the upper storey (Nineveh and Babylon, 461). As explained
  above, I believe the tops of the walls, which are equal to the floor
  space below, formed such a storey. This ramp at Koyunjik would just
  suffice to lead to them, and goes far to prove the theory. If it was
  similarly situated at Khorsabad it would be in the part fallen away. Footnote 85:

  [This assumption is speculative, no trace of such dwarf columns having
  been found; to raise a solid wall thirteen feet thick to carry a
  gallery seems unlikely.ED.] Footnote 86:

  This faade, as I read it, is identical with the one I erected at the
  Crystal Palace as a representation of an Assyrian faade, long before
  this slab was exhumed. Footnote 87:

  See Rawlinson, Ancient Monarchies, vol. Footnote 88:

  It is called tomb by Strabo, lib. xvi., and Diodorus, xvii. 112, 3;
  temple, Herodotus, i. Footnote 89:

  Texier shows columns on the fourth side. Weld Blundell in 1892 found a column with fluted base and Doric
  capital, but it did not apparently belong to the palace. Footnote 91:

  [It follows from what has already been pointed out in a note
  respecting the roofs of the Assyrian palaces; if, as is contended by
  French archologists, the great halls were vaulted, Mr. Fergussons
  theory respecting the origin of the Persian columns partly falls to
  the ground; in that case it would seem more probable that the Persians
  owed their columnar architecture to prototypes of wooden posts,
  covered with metal plates, such as are described as existing in the
  Median palaces of Ecbatana, where Cyrus, the first Persian monarch,
  passed so many years of his life.ED.] Footnote 92:

  The woodcuts in this chapter, except the restorations, are taken from
  Flandin and Costes Voyage en Perse, except where the contrary is
  mentioned. Footnote 93:

  It is curious that neither Ker Porter, nor Texier, nor Flandin and
  Coste, though measuring this building on the spot, could make out its
  plan. Yet nothing can well be more certain, once it is pointed out. Footnote 94:

  Palaces of Nineveh and Persepolis Restored, p. [The prayer platform or talar represented on the tomb of Darius is
  extremely unlike any constructional feature such as an upper storey,
  and may have been placed there only to give dignity and importance to
  the figure of the king: the hall of the Palace of Darius could easily
  have been lighted by clerestory windows over the roofs of the smaller
  chambers on each side.ED.] Footnote 95:

  It is very strange that this similarity, like the plan of the square
  halls, should hitherto have escaped observation. Had any one looked at
  the matter as a whole we should have been spared some restorations
  which are too absurd even to merit exposure. [The restorations referred to are those in which the columns of the
  Great Hall and of the porticoes are shown as isolated features
  standing on the platforms. The authors of these designs would appear
  to have been misled by Messrs. Flandin and Costes plan, in which the
  drains are shown as if they ran under the line of the wall proposed by
  Mr. Fergusson, the enclosing wall of the Great Hall. Weld
  Blundells researches (1891), however, have shown that the main drain
  really lies under the hall, and between the enclosure wall and the
  first row of columns, and that the vertical rain-water shafts which
  were built into the wall communicated direct with this main drain. These shafts, cut in stone, in some cases rise above the level of the
  platform, which show that they were not intended to carry off the
  surface water from the platform. Weld Blundell discovered also the
  traces of the foundation of walls at the angles where shown by Mr. It would seem that in course of time the platforms have
  become coated with so hard and uniform a covering as to suggest its
  being the natural surface; when once broken through, however, the
  evidences of foundations of various walls are abundant.ED.] Footnote 96:

  M. Dieulafoys work on the Acropolis of Susa has just (1893) appeared,
  but, so far as the palace is concerned, his discoveries do not add
  much to our knowledge. He appears to have arrived at the conclusion
  that the great hall (which in plan resembles that of the palace of
  XerxesWoodcut 94) was not enclosed on the south side, but was left
  open to the court in the same way as the great reception halls of the
  later Parthian and Sassanian kings at Al Hadhr, Firouzabad, and
  Ctesiphon. Footnote 97:

  It is now generally considered that these two buildings were tombs;
  the projecting bosses, as shown on woodcut, are in reality sinkings,
  and were probably decorative only.ED. Footnote 98:

  M. Dieulafoy claims to have traced the plan of a temple at Susa which
  consisted of a sanctuary the roof of which was supported by four
  columns, with a portico-in-antis in front, and a large open court,
  measuring about 50 ft. by 40 ft., in the middle of which was placed
  the fire-altar. The whole building was enclosed with a corridor or
  passage, with entrances so arranged that no one could see inside the
  temple from without.ED. Flinders Petries latest excavations at Medum have resulted in the
  discovery of small brick arches over a passage in the sepulchral pit
  of Rahotep of the 4th dynasty. Footnote 100:

  Wilkinsons Egypt and Thebes, pp. Footnote 101:

  Manners and Customs of the Egyptians, vol. Footnote 102:

  1 Kings vii. Josephus, B. J. viii. Footnote 103:

  Josephus, Ant. Footnote 104:

  The details of this restoration are given in the Dictionary of the
  Bible, _sub voce_ Temple, and repeated in my work entitled The
  Holy Sepulchre and the Temple at Jerusalem. Murray, 1865. Footnote 105:

  Speakers Commentary on the Bible, vol. 520; note on verse
  15, chap. Footnote 106:

  For a restoration of this screen see Tree and Serpent Worship,
  Appendix i., p. Footnote 107:

  Since the article on the Temple in Smiths Dictionary of the Bible
  was written, from which most of the woodcuts in this chapter are
  taken, I have had occasion to go over the subject more than once, and
  from recent explorations and recently discovered analogies have, I
  believe, been able to settle, within very narrow limits of doubt, all
  the outstanding questions with reference to this celebrated building. I have in consequence written and published a monograph of the Temple,
  but have deemed it more expedient to leave the illustrations here as
  they are. Footnote 108:

  2 Chronicles xx. Footnote 109:

  Hecateus of Abdera, in Mllers Fragments, ii. Footnote 110:

  Josephus, Ant. Footnote 111:

  Josephus, B. J. v. Footnote 112:

  Dawkins and Wood, The Ruins of Palmyra, Lond. Footnote 113:

  Texier, Armnie et la Perse, vol. Footnote 114:

  Texier, Asie Mineure, pl. Footnote 115:

  Herodotus, i. Footnote 116:

  Lydischen Knigsgrber, I. F. M. Olfers, Berlin, 1859. Footnote 117:

  Toward the centre of the monument two large stones were found leaning
  at an angle the one against the other, and forming a sort of tent,
  like in Woodcut 124, under which was presently discovered a small
  statue of Minerva seated on a chariot with four horses, and an urn of
  metal filled with ashes, charcoal, and burnt bones. This urn, which is
  now in the possession of the Comte de Choiseul, is enriched in
  sculpture with a vine branch, from which is suspended bunches of
  grapes done with exquisite art.Description of the Plain of Troy,
  translated by Dalzel, Edin. If this is so, this is no doubt the vessel mentioned, Iliad, xvi. 92; Od., xxiv. and why has not the fact of its existence been more insisted upon? Footnote 118:

  One of the most interesting facts brought to light in Dr. Schliemanns
  excavations is that between the age of the Ilium Vetus of Homer,
  rich in metals and in arts, and the Ilium Novum of Strabo, a people
  ignorant of use of the metals, and using only bone and stone
  implements, inhabited the mound at Hissarlik which covered both these
  cities. This discovery is sufficient to upset the once fashionable
  Danish theory of the three agesStone, Bronze, and Ironbut,
  unfortunately, adds nothing to our knowledge of architecture. These
  people, whoever they were, built nothing, and must consequently be
  content to remain in the longa nocte of those who neglect the Master
  Art. Footnote 119:

  Fergussons History of Indian and Eastern Architecture. John Murray,
  London 1876, page 108 et seq. Footnote 120:

  This tomb is considered by M. Renan (Mission de Phnicie, Paris 1864)
  to be of Phnician origin, who remarks generally on their work:
  Phnician tombs are generally excavated in the solid rock; their
  architecture is the carved rock without columns; they obtained all
  they could out of the solid rock, leaving it as they found it, with
  more or less attempt to make it graceful; the fact that it was worked
  before being transported suggests that as it left the quarry so it
  remained, no sound of hammer or saw being heard during its erection.
  There is another tomb at Marathos also attributed to the Phnicians,
  which is partly cut out of the rock and partially built in large
  blocks of masonry. Footnote 121:

  In reality the monument stands exactly over the centre of the rock-cut
  sepulchre. The section-line must, therefore, be understood to be
  carried back about 10 feet from the face of the monument. Footnote 122:

  Josephus, Ant. Footnote 123:

  Beules excavations have proved that the outer gate of the Acropolis
  was in front, not at the side, as here shown. Acropole dAthnes.
  Paris, vol. Footnote 124:

  For details of this see Btticher, Baumkultus der Hellenen. Berlin,
  1856. Footnote 125:

  Pausanias, ix. Footnote 126:

  It appears that on the back of the stones laid in horizontal courses
  were others of great size piled on the top. Footnote 127:

  The same scroll exists at New Grange in Ireland, in the Island of Gozo
  near Malta, and generally wherever chambered tumuli are found. Footnote 128:

  A cast of these is to be found in the South Kensington Museum. Footnote 129:

  These ant (parastades) or responds were destined in the first case to
  protect the angles of the wall, and in the second case to support the
  beams carried by them and the columns between, the sun-dried brick
  wall being not to be relied on; in the later Greek temples the walls
  were built in stone and marble, and the parastades became therefore no
  longer constructional necessities, being retained only as decorative
  features, of which so many others are found in the style. Footnote 130:

  Pausanias, vi. Footnote 131:

  The dimensions are 94 feet by 45, covering consequently only 4230
  feet. Footnote 132:

  This refers only to the columns and ant; the lower portion of the
  walls, 3 feet 6 inches high, were in stone; above this clay bricks
  were employed in building the walls, and it was to the disintegration
  of these that we owe the preservation of the Hermes of Praxiteles,
  which was found embedded in a thick layer of clay. At first it was
  thought that this clay had been washed down from the neighbouring
  <DW72>s of the hill of Kronos. Footnote 133:

  M. J. Thacher Clarke, who directed the American expedition in 1881, is
  now occupied with a monograph on the subject, and a report by him was
  published in 1882. Footnote 134:

  A proto-Ionic capital of early date was found in 1882 on the summit of
  Mount Chigri, in the Troad, by Mr. J. Thacher Clarke, and is described
  in the American Journal of Archology, Baltimore. Another
  example ascribed to Phnician artists was found at Trapeza in Cyprus,
  and is now in the Louvre; both are of the same type as that which is
  represented in the ivory carvings from the north-western palace of
  Nimroud, now in the British Museum, so that the Asiatic origin of the
  order is thus confirmed. Footnote 135:

  Pausanias, viii. Footnote 137:

  [The earliest example in stone at Benihasan is of less diameter than
  the columns at Kalabscheh, so that it is difficult to draw this
  distinction; we have already shown also (p. 115 note) that wooden
  shafts of the twelfth dynasty have been found at Kahun, and this and
  the existence of the base proves their wooden origin. If therefore the
  Greek Doric column was derived originally from Egypt, as Mr. Fergusson
  believed, then its earlier wooden parentage must be accepted. Further
  evidence on this subject however has been afforded by the discoveries
  at Olympia, and the references in consequence made to Greek authors;
  all these show without doubt that the columns of the temple of Hera
  were originally in wood, and were gradually replaced by stone. The
  theory that the pillars in Egypt or early Greece were built in
  brickwork or rubble masonry is not borne out by the discoveries at
  Tiryns, for the walls of the palace there, in rubble and clay mortar,
  were of such weak construction that posts of timber were required to
  carry the epistyle or beam, either isolated as columns or built up
  against the wall as ant. Fergussons theory that a pillar, originally copied from the
  wooden post, is slenderer at first, and gradually departs from the
  wood form as the style advances, is borne out by the evidence of the
  Egypt lotus column; this, as found in the rock-cut tombs of Benihasan,
  is of very small diameter, and quite unequal to carry the weight of
  any stone superstructure; whereas afterwards in the temples at Thebes
  it assumes a proportion nearer that of the earliest Greek Doric
  example at Corinth.ED.] Footnote 138:

  These facts have all been fully elucidated by Mr. Penrose in his
  beautiful work containing the results of his researches on the
  Parthenon and other temples of Greece, published by the Dilettanti
  Society. Footnote 139:

  For measurements we depend on Penrose, Principles of Athenian
  Architecture, &c., fol. ; and Cockerell, The Temples of Egina and
  Bass, Lond. The details of the system were first publicly
  announced by Watkiss Lloyd, in a paper read to the Institute of
  British Architects in 1859; afterwards in an appendix to Mr. Cockerells work, and in several minor publications. Footnote 140:

  The pyramid-building kings of Lower Egypt seem to have had some
  distinct ideas of a system of definite proportions in architectural
  building, and to have put it into practice in the pyramid, and
  possibly elsewhere, but it has not yet been sought for in the other
  buildings of that age. At times I cannot help suspecting more affinity to have existed
  between the inhabitants of Lower Egypt and those of Greece than is at
  first sight apparent. Footnote 141:

  It was called Zoophorus (_life_ or _figure bearer_). Footnote 142:

  [The reasons which induced the late Mr. Fergusson to suggest an
  opaion, or clerestory, were fully set forth in the True Principles
  of Beauty in Art, in 1849. A paper on the same subject was
  communicated by him to the Royal Institute of British Architects in
  1861, and published in their Transactions for that year. Since his
  death, however, Mr. Penroses discovery that the Temple of Jupiter
  Olympius at Athens was really octastyle has thrown a new light on the
  question of hypthral temples; and, as Dr. Dorpfield remarks in his
  essay on the Hypthral Temple (communicated to the R. I. B. A. on
  Dec. 19): The words of Vitruvius have now received quite another
  interpretation, through the excavation of the Olympieion at Athens, to
  that which they have had up to the present. The most important proof
  of the hypthral lighting of the temples of antiquity has now turned
  into a proof against the same; and he concludes his arguments by
  stating: After it has been shown by the excavations that the
  Olympieion at Athens is the sole example of a great hypthral temple
  mentioned by Vitruvius, we can answer this much-vexed question of the
  lighting of the temples of antiquity in this waythat a few great
  dipteral hypthral temples existed, but that the Greek and Roman
  temples had as a rule no light from above, and were only lighted from
  the door.ED.] Footnote 143:

  See Woodcuts Nos. Footnote 144:

  Vitruvius, lib. Footnote 145:

  Boeckh, Corpus Inscript. Footnote 146:

  Attica, xxvi. Footnote 147:

  Historia, viii, 41. Footnote 148:

  Among the many attempts made to restore the interior of this temple,
  the last and most elaborate is that by the late E. Beul, Acropole
  dAthnes, 1854, vol. ; but it is also one of the worst. Indeed it is quite painful to see how the author twists his
  authorities to meet a preconceived theory. Without going into it,
  there is one objection which seems fatal to the whole. Like most antiquaries when in difficulties for lighting Greek temples,
  he takes off the roof and makes the Temple of Pandrosus an open
  courtyard, in which he plants the olive. This is so opposed to the
  whole spirit of Greek art as to be inadmissible on general grounds,
  but in this instance it introduces the further absurdity that the
  Greeks opened three windows in the west wall of the temple to light
  this courtyard which was already open to the sky! The mode of lighting
  a temple by vertical windows is so exceptional that it would not have
  been introduced here had any other means existed of lighting the
  interior, and consequently the combination shown by M. Beul seems
  simply impossible. Footnote 149:

  Universo Templo longitudo est ccccxxv. Column
  centum viginti septem a singulis regibus fact, lx. pedum altitudine:
  ex iis xxxvi. clat, una a Scopa.H. Wood places two in the pronaos and two in the posticum, thus
  reducing the depth of the opisthodomus; beyond the pronaos he places a
  vestibule and omits the staircases as shown on plan 159. Fergusson returned to the subject again, and published in the
  Transactions of the Institute (session 1882-83) a revised plan, to
  which we refer our readers.ED.] Footnote 151:

  The finial ornament is triangular in plan, and there are three scrolls
  on the roof with mortices in them, showing that something must have
  stood on them to support the projecting angles. Dolphins and various
  other objects have been suggested. My own conviction is that they were
  winged genii, most probably in bronze, and gilt like the neckings of
  the capitals. Dorpfield is of opinion that in the Greek theatres of the best
  period there was no proscenium, or raised stage, and that the actors
  played their parts in the orchestra on the same level as the chorus. Professor Middleton also points out that in the earliest Greek
  theatres built in the 5th and 4th centuries B.C. the orchestra was a
  complete circle, the space being gradually diminished by the bringing
  forward of the stage.ED.] Footnote 153:

  It will not be necessary to enter here into all the details of this
  restoration. They will be found in a separate work published by me on
  the subject, to which the reader is referred. [The student should also
  refer to the restoration suggested by M. Pullan in the work published
  by him and Sir Charles Newton (Discoveries at Halicarnassus, 1862). In the arrangement and design of the podium it accords better with
  other examples of Greek tombs than Mr. The three columns
  as shown at the angle of Mr. Fergussons peristyle would be quite
  repugnant to any student of Greek architecture.ED.] Footnote 155:

  The figures given in the text are all Greek feet: the difference
  between them and English feet, being only 1 per cent., is hardly
  perceptible in these dimensions, without descending to minute
  fractions, and disturbing the comparison with Plinys text. Footnote 156:

  The circumstance of Asoka, the Buddhist king of India B.C. 250, having
  formed an alliance with Megas of Cyrene for the succour of his
  co-religionists in the dominions of the latter, points to such a
  conclusion even if nothing else did.Journal Asiatic Society of
  Bengal, vii. 261; J. R. A. S. xii. Footnote 157:

  Beechys Journey to Cyrene, p. 444; see also Smith and Porcher, pl. Footnote 158:

  Vitruvius, iv. Footnote 159:

  Dionysius, iv. Footnote 160:

  For more detail, see The True Principles of Beauty in Art, p. Footnote 161:

  The Etruscan and Roman origin of the circular temple is now known to
  be erroneous, as remains of large circular temples have been
  discovered at Epidaurus and Olympia. Footnote 162:

  Even in more modern times I know of no building showing a trace of
  these forms except the tomb of Theodoric at Ravenna. This, however, is
  Etruscan both in form and detail, as will be seen farther on. Hist. xxxvi. Footnote 164:

  A diagram is given in The True Principles of Beauty in Art p. 459,
  which shows at least that there is no difficulty in designing a
  monument in perfect accordance with the text. Whether the latter is to
  be depended upon or not is another matter. Footnote 165:

  These dimensions, with all those that follow, unless otherwise
  specified, are taken from Taylor and Cresys Architectural
  Antiquities of Rome, London, 1821. They seem more to be depended upon
  than any others I am acquainted with. Footnote 166:

  These two temples, like almost all the others of Rome, have recently
  been renamed by the Roman or rather German antiquaries. The Jupiter
  Tonans is now the Temple of Saturn, and the Jupiter Stator is decreed
  to have been the Temple of Castor and Pollux. The names by which they
  are currently known has been adhered to, as the architecture is of
  more importance here than the archology. Footnote 167:

  Laborde, Monumens de la France, vol. M. AVRELIVS ANTONINVS PIVS FELIX AVG. PANTHEVM VETVSTATE CORRVPTVM CVM OMNI CVLTV RESTITVERVNT. Isabelle, difices Circulaires, p. Footnote 169:

  When the first edition of this work was written I believed the rotunda
  to have been added to the portico by Severus; and if this were so it
  would get over many of the difficulties arising from its size and the
  character of its brickwork. My personal examination, however, has
  forced me very unwillingly to give up this hypothesis. It certainly
  is, however, very astonishing that such a vault should have been
  attempted at so early an age. [There seems to be some probability that Mr. Fergussons first belief
  was correct, and that the Rotunda was built by Hadrian, bricks with
  the stamp of his period having been found in the casing and in the
  bond courses in the solid concrete both of the drum and in the dome. The discovery is due to M. Chedanne, one of the Grand Prix students
  in the Villa Medici, who had selected the subject for his Envoi de
  Rome, and was allowed to superintend certain repairs and restorations
  which were required in the Pantheon. It would seem that the portico
  erected by Agrippa preceded a temple with cella of the ordinary form,
  the pavement of which has been found nearly seven feet below the floor
  of the present church. From this it follows that when the Rotunda was
  erected in the first half of the second century, the portico, which is
  undoubtedly of Agrippas time, must have been taken down and rebuilt
  on to it, and this explains Mr. Fergussons reasons for insisting that
  the portico was built on to the Rotunda. The theory as to the Pantheon
  forming part of Agrippas bath is thus disposed of. Independently of
  that, however, Prof. Middleton has pointed out that the discoveries
  made in 1882, by the removal of the block of houses at the back,
  showed that there was no connection whatever between the two
  buildings. Traces exist of the original marble lining, and of cornices
  which were continued round the dome, showing that originally the
  complete circuit was exposed to view. Middleton
  states, if further proof were wanting to contradict the theory that
  the Pantheon was over the Calidarum or Laconicum of the bath, this is
  supplied by the fact that there is no trace of any hypocaust under the
  floor, but merely an ancient drain to carry away the rain-water that
  fell through the opening in the dome. The Pantheon, too, is on the
  north side of the Therma very improbable position for the Laconicum,
  or hot room, which was usually placed on the sunny side of the
  buildings.ED.] Footnote 170:

  The bronze plates which were removed by Pope Urban VIII. in 1626 to
  make cannon, and also for the great Baldachino in St. Peters, were
  taken from the portico; the coffers of the interior of the dome were
  decorated, according to Prof. Middleton, with mouldings in stucco
  painted and gilt. Footnote 171:

  This building is commonly called a temple, though it is not known to
  what deity it was dedicated. My own impression is that it was a tomb,
  or at least a funereal monument of some sort. Footnote 172:

  Owing to a misreading of Vitruviuss statement respecting the temple
  it had always been classed as decastyle. Penroses researches
  published in the Transactions of the Royal Institute of British
  Architects, vol. Footnote 173:

  See The True Principles of Beauty in Art, where the reasons for this
  arrangement will be found stated at length. [See note on page
  272.ED.] Footnote 174:

  Canina, in his restoration, shows a flat roof with coffers, so there
  is probably no exact authority for its form, though it seems to be
  generally agreed that the centre was not hypthral. Footnote 175:

  This basilica is generally represented as having an apse at either
  end; but there is no authority whatever for this, and general analogy
  would lead us rather to infer that it was not the case. Middleton, however, is of opinion that an apse existed at both ends,
  and shows the same in his restoration of the plan of Trajans
  form.The Remains of Ancient Rome, by J. H. Middleton, Fig. Footnote 176:

  One of the pillars of this basilica remained _in situ_ till the year
  1614, when it was removed by Carlo Maderno, by order of Paul V., and
  re-erected in the piazza of St. M. Maggiore, where it now stands as a
  monumental column, supporting a statue of the Virgin. The column, with
  its base and capital, is as nearly as may be 60 ft. in height; the
  whole monument, as it now stands, 140 ft. Footnote 177:

  As it was sunk slightly below the pavement of the peristyle, and
  drains leading from it were traced by Mr. Ashpitel, it was probably
  hypthral. Footnote 178:

  The theatres of Curio and Scaurus were in timber, except the
  proscenium of the latter, which was partly decorated with marble and
  mosaics. The Theatre of Pompey, B.C. 54, was in stone, and parts of it
  still exist (Prof. The Theatre of Marcellus was begun by
  Julius Csar, but not completed till 13 B.C., when it was opened by
  Augustus. It was subsequently restored after a fire by Vespasian, but
  the purity and simplicity of the architecture, and the refinement of
  the details, in comparison with those of the Colosseum, 70-80 A.D.,
  are in favour of the earlier date assigned to it. Middleton
  quotes another theatre, that of Cornelius Balbus (13 B.C. ), built to
  the north-west of the Theatre of Marcellus. Footnote 179:

  According to Prof. Middleton the Amphitheatre of Sutrium is of Roman
  origin, and but little earlier than the Colosseum at Rome. There is
  really no evidence, he says (p. 76), that amphitheatres were built
  by the Etruscans; and there can be little doubt that they were purely
  Roman inventions.

Footnote 180:

  At the Crystal Palace it has always been found necessary to allow 6
  sq. Footnote 181:

  Considerable difference of opinion seems to exist as to the extent of
  the velaria which sheltered the arena; this was supported by masts
  fixed outside the upper part of the walls, resting on brackets, 14 ft. below the cornice, which was cut away to allow the mast to fit close
  against the wall. M. Grme suggests, in his well-known picture of the
  Roman gladiators, that the velaria extended over a portion of the
  arena only. Middleton states, The awning did not, as has been
  sometimes supposed, cover the whole amphitheatre, a thing which would
  have been practically impossible, owing to the enormous strain of so
  long a bearing, far beyond what any ropes could bear. It simply sloped
  down over the spectators in the cavea, leaving the whole central arena
  uncovered. In case of rain, however, this might have been
  inconvenient, and it would not have protected the spectators from the
  sun, supposing that the performances lasted the whole day. Besides,
  there is no reason why the masts should have been carried so high
  above the wall, as shown in the restoration in Prof. Middletons book,
  p. Alma Tadema is of opinion that the velarium extended over
  the whole arena, and was suspended on a principle similar to that of a
  suspension bridge, the ridge, or highest portion lying between the
  foci of the ellipse. This accounts in a much more satisfactory way for
  the height of the masts, and would afford facilities for the draining
  off of the rain on to the top of the gallery round. Footnote 182:

  Maffei, Verona Illustrata, vol. Footnote 183:

  See note on p. Footnote 184:

  These baths have been carefully measured by M. Blouet, who has also
  published a restoration of them. This is, on the whole, certainly the
  best account we have of any of these establishments. Footnote 185:

  According to Prof. Middleton this magnificent hall appears to have
  been what Spartianus calls the _cella soliaris_, the ceiling of which
  he says was formed of interlaced bars of gilt bronze. When the
  excavations in this hall were being made, many tons of fragments of
  iron girders were found. Aitchison)
  compound girders, formed of two T bars riveted together, and then
  cased in bronze. A sort of lattice-work ceiling had been formed with
  these bronze-cased girders, the panels being probably filled in with
  concrete made of light pumice-stone, worked with fine stucco reliefs,
  painted and gilt. Middleton is of opinion that the central part
  over the swimming-bath was left open for the admission of light. In
  the upper part of the walls deep sinkings to receive the ends of the
  great girders which supported the ceiling are clearly visible. Georges Hall at Liverpool is the most exact copy in modern times
  of a part of these baths. The Hall itself is a reproduction both in
  scale and design of the central hall of Caracallas baths, but
  improved in detail and design, having five bays instead of only three. With the two courts at each end, it makes up a suite of apartments
  very similar to those found in the Roman examples. The whole building,
  however, is less than one-fourth of the size of the central mass of a
  Roman bath, and therefore gives but little idea of the magnificence of
  the whole. Footnote 187:

  The left-hand wing of this arch has since been restored by M.
  Viollet-le-Duc, and the right-hand wing cleared of the square building
  in front of it. Footnote 188:

  These two buildings are described further on (p. 544) as Christian
  edifices. Footnote 189:

  Professor Middleton states: This building appears to be a nymphum,
  or a part of some baths of about the time of Gallienus (263-268
  A.D. ). It was known in the Middle Ages as the Terme de Gallucio.
  The site of the real Temple of Minerva Medica was discovered in 1887
  (according to the same authority) between the new Via Macchiavelli and
  the Via Buonarroti, about 7 ft. Footnote 191:

  M. de Saulcy has recently attempted to prove that these tombs are
  those of the kings of Judah from David downwards. Their architecture
  is undoubtedly as late as the Christian era, and the cover of the
  sarcophagus which is now in the Louvre under the title of that of
  David is probably of the same date as these tombs, or if anything more
  modern. Footnote 192:

  Voyage dans la Marmarique, la Cyrnaique, &c. Didot, Paris, 1827-29. Footnote 193:

  Though the dates of all these tombs at Cyrene are so uncertain, there
  seems little doubt that if any one thoroughly versed in the style were
  to visit the place, he could fix the age of all of them with
  approximate correctness. The one difficulty is, that a chronometric
  scale taken from the buildings at Rome, or even in Syria, will not
  suffice. Local peculiarities must be taken into account and allowed
  for, and this requires both time and judgment. Footnote 194:

  Le Tombeau de la Chrtienne, par A. Berbrugger, Alger. 1867, from
  which the above particulars are taken. Footnote 195:

  It is understood that it too has been explored, but no account of the
  result has yet reached this country, and such rumours as have reached
  are too vague to be quoted. Footnote 196:

  De Situ Orbis, I. vi. Footnote 197:

  For plan of same, see Prof. Middletons Ancient Rome, 1891. Footnote 198:

  By an oversight this difference is not expressed in the woodcut. Footnote 200:

  These are well epitomised by Gibbon, Book xlvi. Footnote 201:

  Journal of the Royal Geographical Society, ix. Footnote 202:

  The sixth great Oriental monarchy; or the geography, history and
  antiquities of Parthia, &c., 1873. Footnote 203:

  These inscriptions were all copied by Consul Taylor, and brought home
  to this country. I never could learn, however, that they were
  translated. I feel certain they were never published, and cannot find
  out what has become of them. Footnote 204:

  These are expedients for filling up the corners of square lower
  storeys on which it is intended to place a circular superstructure. They somewhat resemble very large brackets or great coves placed in an
  angle. Examples of them are shown on page 434 when speaking of
  Byzantine architecture, and others will be found in the chapter on
  Mahomedan Architecture in India, in vol. Footnote 205:

  These three buildings probably date as near as may be one century from
  each other, thus

                          Serbistan         A.D. 350
                          Firouzabad             450
                          Ctesiphon              550

                    To which we may now add

                          Mashita                620

  A bare skeleton, which it will require much time and labour to clothe
  with flesh and restore to life. Footnote 206:

  The Land of Moab, by H. B. Tristram, M. A., &c. Murray, 1873. As all
  the information respecting the palace is contained in that book, pp. 195 to 215, all the illustrations here used are taken from it, it will
  not be necessary to refer to it again. For further information on the
  subject the reader is referred to that work. Footnote 207:

  Rich, Residence in Koordistan, ii. Footnote 208:

  The plan made by Dr. Tristrams party, which is all we yet have, was
  only a hurried sketch, and cannot be depended upon for minute details. Footnote 209:

  Flandin and Coste, vol. Footnote 210:

  Texier and Pullan. Byzantine Architecture. 4to. Footnote 211:

  Ruskin, Stones of Venice, vol. Footnote 212:

  Lart Antique de la Perse, by Marcel Dieulafoy. Footnote 213:

  In the Museum at Pesth are a number of objects of Egyptian art, said
  to have been found in this quarter. Is it too much to assume the
  pre-existence of a Phnician or Egyptian colony here before the Roman
  times? Footnote 214:

  As a matter of fact, 12th century would be more exact; nearly all the
  chief problems of pointed arch construction in intersecting vaulting
  having been worked out before the close of that century. Footnote 215:

  [The domical construction of the vaults of the two great cisterns
  erected by Constantine, the Binbirderek, or thousand-and-one columns,
  and the Yeri Batan Sera, both in Constantinople, suggests that there
  already existed in the East a method of vaulting entirely different
  from that which obtained in Rome, and which may have been a
  traditional method handed down even from Assyrian times.ED.] Footnote 216:

  Syrie Centrale: Architecture civile et religieuse du I^{er} au
  VII^{me} Sicle. Par le Comte Melchior de Vog.

Footnote 217:

  Byzantine Architecture, by Texier and Pullan. Footnote 218:

  De Vog, glises de la Terre Sainte, p. Footnote 219:

  For a careful analytical description of the church, see Professor
  Willis, Architectural History of the Holy Sepulchre, London, 1849. Footnote 220:

  The particulars for these churches are taken from Texier and Pullans
  splendid work on Byzantine architecture published by Day, 1864. Footnote 221:

  Another very small church, that of Moudjeleia, though under 50 ft. square, seems to have adopted the same hypthral arrangement. Footnote 222:

  A great deal of very irrelevant matter has been written about these
  giant cities of Bashan, as if their age were a matter of doubt. There is nothing in the Hauran which can by any possibility date
  before the time of Roman supremacy in the country. The very earliest
  now existing are probably subsequent to the destruction of Jerusalem
  by Titus. Footnote 223:

  The constructive dimensions of the porch at Chillambaram (p. History of Indian and Eastern Architecture, 1876.) are very similar to
  those of this church: both have flat stone roofs, but in the Indian,
  though a much more modern example, there is no arch. Footnote 224:

  These are all given in colours in Texier and Pullans beautiful work
  on Byzantine architecture, from which all the particulars regarding
  this church are taken. Footnote 225:

  A wayside retreat or shelter. Footnote 226:

  A restoration of the church from Procopiuss description, De
  dificiis, lib. iv., will be found in Hbsch, Altchristliche
  Baukunst, pls. iii., in chapter on Indian Saracenic Architecture. Footnote 228:

  The Renaissance dome which fits best to the church on which it is
  placed is that of Sta. Maria at Florence; but, strange to say, it is
  neither the one originally designed for the place, nor probably at all
  like it. All the others were erected as designed by the architects who
  built the churches, and none fit so well. Footnote 229:

  [The apses on each side of central apse are said to be additions to
  the original structure. The triple apses in Greek churches are found,
  according to Dr. Freshfield (Archologia, vol. 44), only in churches
  erected subsequent to Justin II. Sergius at Bosra the side apses have been added afterwards.ED.] Footnote 230:

  Strictly speaking, circular with flattened sides, for the pendentive
  has a longer radius than half the diagonal of the square. Footnote 231:

  The two eastern cupolas have been raised in Arab times, and a
  cylindrical drum inserted with windows pierced in them to give more
  light to the interior. Footnote 232:

  There are numerous examples of this class of structure in North Syria,
  but whether they are memorials or tombs is not known. See Reisen
  Kleinasien und Nord Syria by Karl Humann and Otto Puchstein. Footnote 233:

  [This rule cannot be made a hard and fast one. Procopius states that
  in the central dome of the Church of the Apostles, Constantinople,
  the circular building standing above the arches is pierced with
  windows, and the spherical dome which over-arches it seems to be
  suspended in the air. In the church of St. Sergius at Constantinople
  the walls of the octagon, which are pierced with windows, are carried
  up to the vault, and in the church of Sta. Sophia at Thessalonica the
  windows are pierced in an upright dome cylindrical internally. In all
  these cases, however, there is a marked distinction between these
  examples and those of the lofty cylindrical drums which were employed
  in the Neo-Byzantine churches. Fergussons rule, therefore, with
  these exceptions, may be taken as absolute.ED.] Footnote 234:

  They are found in the Mustaphapacha mosque at Constantinople dating
  from 430 A.D., but rebuilt in the 13th century. Footnote 235:

  [It is now considered that the Church of the Holy Apostles was the
  original model. This church, rebuilt by Justinian, was pulled down in
  1464 A.D. to furnish a site for his mosque.ED.] Footnote 236:

  [This work has lately been undertaken by Messrs. Barnsley and Schultz,
  who are preparing their drawings for publication, and hope to follow
  up the task with a survey of the more important churches in Mount
  Athos.ED.] Footnote 237:

  Die Kunst in den Athos Kirchen, Leipzig, 1890. Footnote 238:

  Athos; or, the Mountain of the Monks, by Athelstan Riley, M.A.,
  1887. Footnote 239:

  See the photogravure of the interior of the Catholicon at Dochiariu. Footnote 240:

  glises Byzantines en Grce.

Footnote 241:

  Expdition scientifique de la More.

Footnote 242:

  There would seem however to have been a revival in the 11th century,
  possibly a reflex of that which was taking place in West Europe. And
  it was during this period that the churches of St. Luke in Phoeis, the
  church at Daphn and the churches of St. Footnote 243:

  C. Texier, Armnie et la Perse. 2 vols. Footnote 244:

  Dubois de Montpereux, Voyage autour du Caucase. 6 vols. Paris,
  1839, 1841. Footnote 245:

  Brosset, Voyage Archologique dans la Georgie et lArmnie. St. Footnote 246:

  D. Grimm, Monuments dArchitecture en Georgie et Armnie. St. Footnote 247:

  Texier gives three dates to this church. In the Byzantine
  Architecture, p. 174, it is said to be of the 7th, and at p. 4, of
  the 9th century. In the LArmnie et la Perse, at p. 120, the date
  is given as 1243. Footnote 248:

  Flandin and Coste, Voyage en Perse, pls. Footnote 249:

  Texier and Pullan, Byzantine Architecture, pp. Footnote 250:

  I am a little doubtful regarding the scales of these two buildings. They are correctly reduced from M. Brossets plates. But are these to
  be depended upon? Footnote 251:

  Even if it should be asserted that this is no proof that the
  inhabitants of these countries were Buddhists in those days, it seems
  tolerably certain that they were tree-worshippers, which is very
  nearly the same thing. Procopius tells us that even in his day these
  barbarians worshipped forests and groves, and in their barbarous
  simplicity placed the trees among their gods. (De Bello Gotico,
  Bonn, 1833, ii. Footnote 252:

  The principal part of the information regarding these excavations is
  to be found in the work of Dubois de Montpereux, _passim_. Footnote 253:

  [See paper by Mr. Simpson in R. I. B. A. Transactions, vol. vii.,
  1891.ED.] Footnote 254:

  All the plans and information regarding the churches at Kief are
  obtained from a Russian work devoted to the subject, procured for me
  on the spot by Mr. Footnote 255:

  The first bay, as shown on plan (Woodcut No. 382), is the narthex; the
  five domes come beyond it. Footnote 256:

  The particulars and illustrations of this church are taken from a
  paper by Heinrich Keissenberger, in the Jahrbuch der K. K. Commission
  fr Enthaltung der Baudenkmale, 1860. A model of it, full size, was
  exhibited at the Paris Exhibition of 1867. Footnote 257:

  [It has been assumed that the Roman basilicas were taken possession of
  by the early Christians for their own religious services, but as Mr. G. G. Scott points out in his Essay on the History of English Church
  Architecture, there is no well-authenticated instance of the
  conversion of any Pagan basilica into a Christian church, whilst there
  are abundant examples of Pagan temples converted into Christian
  sanctuaries (see Texier and Pullans Byzantine Architecture, pp. Scott observes, on the face of it
  improbable, if we reflect that the conversion of the government to
  Christianity had no tendency to render the existing basilicas less
  necessary for legal business, after the peace of the church, than they
  had been before that event. Christianity, unfortunately, could not
  abolish the litigious instincts of our nature, and after fifteen
  centuries of the gospel the legal profession still flourishes. The
  buildings which were rendered useless by the official recognition of
  the new faith were not the basilicas but the temples, the fact being
  that the class of building known as a basilica (a term never used by
  either the writers or architects of Byzantine times), with its wide
  central nave and aisles with galleries over them lighted by clerestory
  or side windows, and covered with a timber roof, constituted the
  simplest and most economical building of large size which could be
  constructed to hold a vast assembly of worshippers; especially as the
  only features which can be looked upon as having any architectural
  pretensions, viz., the columns and their capitals, could be taken
  wholesale from temples and other Roman buildings. The semicircular
  apse, which alone in the Roman basilica served as a court of law,
  became the tribune for the bishop and presbyters. Scott is even inclined to assign an earlier and more independent
  origin for the basilican form. According to his theory the germ of the
  Christian basilica was a simple oblong aisleless room divided by a
  cross arch, beyond which lay an altar detached from the wall. This
  germ was developed by the addition of side aisles, and sometimes an
  aisle returned across the entrance, and over these upper aisles were
  next constructed and transepts added, together with the oratories or
  chapels in various parts of the building. Butler, in his work on
  The Ancient Coptic Churches of Egypt, accepts this theory, as the
  churches of Egypt are rich in evidence that favours it. At the same
  time, the first great basilica erected by Constantine, viz., the
  Vatican (St. Peters), and the Lateran, (St. John Lateran), are of too
  great importance to warrant the suggestion that their origin should be
  sought for in the very small though possibly earlier examples in Egypt
  or the East.ED.] Footnote 258:

  This probably refers to its foundation, for M. Cattaneo, in his work
  Larchitecture en Italie, 1890, judging by its ornamental detail,
  places the church in the second half of the seventh century. Footnote 259:

  Antiquits, vol. Footnote 260:

  _Eodem_, vol. Alfred J. Butlers work, already referred to, has thrown
  considerable light on the subject, though, as he was unable to visit
  any of the Coptic churches up the Nile, we are still left in doubt as
  to the age of the convent near Siout and other buildings. From
  comparison of the plans and descriptions given in Denon, Curzon and
  Pococke of these buildings, with those in Cairo and Old Cairo, Mr. Butler ascribes them to the fourth century, that which in fact is
  claimed for them as having been founded by Sta. On this
  subject he says, p. 365: Were there no more of evidence besides to
  determine the truth of this tradition, the plan of the Haikal (the
  central of the three chapels in a Coptic church) would decide it
  beyond question. The persistence with which certain churches are
  ascribed to Sta. Helena by a people utterly ignorant of history and
  architecture is in itself remarkable, and it is still more remarkable
  to find that these churches are always marked by a particular form of
  Haikal. Indeed, so regular is the coincidence, that a deep apsidal
  haikal with recesses all round it and columns close against the wall
  may be almost infallibly dated from the age of Sta. Helena.

Footnote 262:

  The older church has been so altered and ruined by the subsequent
  rebuildings that it is extremely difficult to make out its history. It
  seems, however, to have been built originally above the site of an old
  Mithraic temple, which has recently been cleared out, and probably
  before the time of Gregory the Great. It was apparently rebuilt, or
  nearly so, by Adrian I., 772, and burnt by Robert Guiscard, 1084. The
  upper church seems to have been erected by Paschal, 1099-1118. The
  question is, to what age do the frescoes found on the walls of the
  older church belong? Some of the heads and single figures may, I
  fancy, be anterior even to the time of Adrian; but the bulk of the
  paintings seem certainly to have been added between his age and 1084,
  and nearer the latter than the former date. If it had not been
  entirely ruined in 1084 Paschal would not have so completely
  obliterated it a century afterwards. A considerable quantity of the
  materials of the old church were used in the new, which tends further
  to confuse the chronology. Footnote 263:

  Gutensohn and Knapp, Die Basiliken des Christlichen Roms.

Footnote 264:

  Cicero de Legg., ii. 24; Festus, s. v.; Smiths Dictionary of
  Classical Antiquities.

Footnote 265:

  The dates here given generally refer to the building now existing or
  known, and not always to the original foundation. G. G. Scott, in his work before referred to (p. 506), after
  giving a full quotation from Eusebius of Constantines basilica at
  Jerusalem, in which he points out that the orientation of primitive
  times is the reverse of that which has become general in later times,
  continues his enquiry into the evidence afforded by the numerous early
  basilicas in Rome itself. Of about fifty churches of early date, in
  forty of them the sanctuary is placed at the western end, and of the
  remaining ten (one of which is the great church of St. Paolo fuori le
  Mura), there are only seven which appear to have retained their
  original form, and which have an eastward sanctuary. The exact orientation of the sanctuary in each case has been added to
  the list.ED.] Footnote 266:

  Il Vaticano discritto da Pistolesi, vol. Footnote 267:

  The new church which superseded this one is described in the History
  of the Modern Styles of Architecture, vol. Footnote 268:

  It should be observed that the dosseret is first found in Italy in the
  Church of St. Stefano Rotondo, built 468-482, and is there of similar
  design to examples in Thessalonica. Footnote 269:

  Larchitecture en Italie du vie au xi^e sicle. Venice, 1891. Footnote 270:

  Altchristlichen Kirchen nach Baudenkmalen und alteren
  Beschreibungen, von D. Hubsch. Footnote 271:

  These piers were built in the 12th century, taking the place of the
  columns of the original Basilican church of the 9th century, and the
  arches date from the same period (Cattaneo). Footnote 272:

  It is now called S. Martino in Cielo dOro, from its having been
  decided in the twelfth century that the other church in Classe
  possessed the true body of the saint to which both churches were
  dedicated. Footnote 273:

  A. F. von Quast, Die Altchristlichen Bauwerke von Ravenna.

Footnote 274:

  The basilica Pudenziana at Rome has similar arcades externally. Footnote 275:

  The twenty-four marble columns are said to have been brought over from
  Constantinople, but they were probably obtained from Greek quarries. Footnote 276:

  [The narthex as shown in Woodcut No. 409 is of much later date than
  the church, and has been partially rebuilt on two or three occasions. It is now (1892) being taken down, and the removal of the central
  portion has uncovered the triple window which originally lighted the
  nave.ED.] Footnote 277:

  La basilica di San Marco in Venezia, by Cattaneo, continued by
  Boito. Footnote 278:

  Probably owing to its having been utilized to receive the relics of
  St. Footnote 279:

  This church, built by Justinian, no longer exists, having been pulled
  down in 1464 by Mohammed II. From the
  description of it, however, given by Procopius, the plan was similar
  to that adopted in St. Mark, being that of a Greek Cross with central
  and four other domes. Procopius speaks of the church being surrounded
  within by columns placed both above and below, probably referring to
  galleries similar to those in St. Marks the columns exist in one storey only, and the main wall is
  carried up at the back of the aisles to give increased size inside. Footnote 280:

  Originally, according to M. Cattaneo, his was the vestibule to the
  atrium from the south, but it is now blocked up by an altar. Footnote 281:

  [They are shown in the mosaic of the doorway of St. Alipe, executed at
  the end of the 13th century, as also the filling in of the great west
  window.ED.] Footnote 282:

  Dalmatia, the Quarnero and Istria, by T. G. Jackson, M.A. Footnote 283:

  In support of this statement he points out that twice during Christian
  times it had been found necessary to raise the floor of the church. The nave floor, which in 1857 was two steps below that of the aisles,
  was raised in 1881 to the same level; but two feet nine inches below
  the nave floor before it was raised there existed, according to Prof. Eitelberger, another mosaic pavement, which must have been the floor
  of the first basilica erected, and which was pulled down by Bishop
  Euphrasius in 543. This lower pavement extended also under the three
  chapels of the confessio, which suggests that these are part of the
  first basilica. Footnote 284:

  The same polygonal form is found in the apses of St. Apollinare in Classe, St. Apollinare in Nuovo, St. Vitale, all in Ravenna, and St. Footnote 285:

  The apses of two churches, of the 4th and 6th century respectively, in
  the island of Paros, are similarly fitted with marble seats: in the
  6th century church there are eight rows, so that the apse looks like a
  small amphitheatre. Footnote 286:

  That is on the supposition that the word kirk is derived from the
  Latin word circus, circular, as the French term it, cirque. My
  own conviction is that this is certainly the case. The word is only
  used by the Barbarians as applied to a form of buildings they derived
  from the Romans. Why the Germans should employ  , when
  neither the Greeks nor the Latins used that name, is a mystery which
  those who insist on these very improbable names have as yet failed to
  explain. Footnote 287:

  The Tholos at Epidaurus seems to be an exception to this rule. Footnote 288:

  Isabelle, difices Circulaires, plates 26 and 27. Footnote 289:

  M. Cattaneo states that it was built by Pope St. Footnote 290:

  Above the capitals are impost blocks or dosserets, the earliest known
  examples of that feature in Italy. Footnote 291:

  [The Vaults over the outer aisle of St. Stefano Rotondo were built
  with hollow pots, the remains of which can still be traced in the
  outer walls of the 2nd aisle. Middleton points out also the existence of rings of earthen pots
  in the vault of the tomb of Sta. 227), and also in
  the vaults of the Circus of Maxentius, on the Via Appia.ED.] Footnote 292:

  In this building they now show a sarcophagus of ancient date, said to
  be that of Galla Placidia, daughter of Theodosius. She, however, was
  certainly buried at Ravenna; but it may be of her time, and in these
  ages it is impossible to distinguish between baptisteries and tombs. Footnote 293:

  Frederick Von Osten, Bauwerke in der Lombardei. Darmstadt, 1852. Footnote 294:

  By an oversight of the engraver, the vault of the nave, which ought to
  be made hexapartite, is drawn as quadripartite. [The nave was so
  completely restored in the 14th century as to render doubtful the
  original existence of a vault.ED.] Footnote 295:

  tude de lArchitecture Lombarde, par F. de Dartein. Footnote 296:

  These are incorrectly shown on woodcut. The central pier is nearly 4
  feet wide and carried a transverse rib of the same size and of two
  orders. Footnote 297:

  Ferrario, Monumenti Sacri e Profani dell I. R. Basilica di S.
  Ambrogio, Milan, 1824. Footnote 298:

  Quid dicamus columnarum junceam proceritatem? Moles illas
  sublimissimas quasi quibusdam erectis hastilibus contineri substanti
  qualitate concavis canalibus excavatas vel magis ipsas stimes esse
  transfusas. Ceris judices factum quod metallis durissimis videas
  expolitum. Marmorum juncturas venas dicas esse genitales, ubi dum
  falluntur oculi laus probatur crevisse miraculis. In the above,
  _metallum_ does not seem to mean metal as we now use the word, but any
  hard substance dug out of the ground. (Cassiodorus, Variorum, lib. Footnote 300:

  The Land of Moab, by Dr. Tristram (Murray, 1873), pp. 376 _et seqq._
  [The small triangular marble panels referred to in Murano are of a
  very elementary character in their carving, and have scarcely the
  importance attached to them by Mr. Besides, the same wall
  decoration in brickwork is found in the apse of St. Fosca, Torcello
  (c. 1008), where, however, the triangular recesses are simply covered
  with stucco and painted; being closer to the eye in Murano, they
  filled the spaces with incised marble slabs: in other words, it seems
  more probable that the slabs were made for the triangular panels than
  the converse, which is suggested by Mr. Footnote 301:

  The typical example of this class is the San Giorgio at Venice, though
  it is not by any means the one most like St. Pietro; many attempts
  were made before it became so essentially classical as this (see
  Woodcut No. I. in the History of Modern Architecture). Footnote 302:

  From the boldness of the construction, M. Cattaneo is induced to place
  the erection of the building at the end of the 11th or beginning of
  the 12th century. Footnote 303:

  The four square towers of San Lorenzo, Milan, and the circular
  campanile by the side of the cathedral of Ravenna, are the earliest
  examples known, the latter dating from the commencement of the 5th
  century. Footnote 304:

  [The tower of St. Satiro at Milan (879 A.D. ), is considered by
  Cattaneo to be the most ancient campanile known in which the wall
  surface is broken up with flat pilasters or vertical bands in relief,
  and divided into storeys by horizontal string courses, with ranges of
  small blind arches below, carried on corbels, and may be regarded as
  the prototype of the most characteristic Lombard towers.ED.] Footnote 305:

  History of Medieval Art, by Dr. F. M. Reber, translated by J. T.
  Clarke. Footnote 306:

  Dalmatia, the Quarnero and Istria, by T. G. Jackson, A.R.A. Footnote 307:

  Schultz, Denkmler der Kunst der Mittelalters in Unter-Italien.
  Folio, 1860. Footnote 308:

  The polygonal form given to the apse externally shows the direct
  influence of Byzantine art. Footnote 309:

  The cornice projects 1 ft. 10 in., and consequently overhangs the base
  by 13 ft. Footnote 310:

  The present cathedral is only a portion, viz. the transept of a much
  vaster edifice which was never completed; but the beautiful unfinished
  south front and portions of the gigantic nave and aisles still exist
  on the western side of the present cathedral, and the drawings of it
  are preserved in the archives of the Duomo. Footnote 311:

  [Since this was written the faade has been completed to harmonize
  with the rest, but not in accordance with the original design, if we
  may judge by the painting in Sta. Maria Novella, which shows side
  gablets similar to those of the cathedral of Siena.ED.] Footnote 312:

  If we may trust Wiebeking, the first two bays of the nave from the
  front were vaulted in 1588, but the work was suspended till 1647, and
  completed only in 1659. Yet no difference can be perceived in the
  details of the design. Footnote 313:

  The plan and section being taken from two different writers, there is
  a slight discrepancy between the scales. I believe the plan to be the
  more correct of the two, though I have no means of being quite certain
  on the point. Footnote 314:

  Dispareri dArchitettura.

Footnote 315:

  Within the last few years a faade has been added to Sta. Croce, but
  about which the less said the better. Transcribers Notes


This book often uses inconsistent spelling, particularly with respect to
accents. These were left as printed unless the author showed a clear
preference for one form. Some presumed printers errors have been corrected, including
normalizing punctuation. Page number references in the Table of Contents
were corrected where errors were found. Further corrections are listed
below with the original text (top) and the corrected text (bottom). every pains has been taken
               every pain has been taken p. xxii

               progres
               progress p. 48

               cotemporary
               contemporary p. 50

               formula
               formul p. 77

               Sedinag
               Sedinga Illustration 27.

               longed ceased
               long ceased p. 219

               Nor is is
               Nor is it p. 247

               ines
               lines p. 372

               Roumeia
               Roumea  p. 372

               Nimes
               Nmes p. 385

               Voge
               Vog p. 423

               neo-Byzantine
               Neo-Byzantine p. 455

               iconicon
               icon p. 460

               orginally
               originally p. 538

               turned the
               turned to the p. 558

               100 ft. to
               100 ft. Illustration 467 (missing number added)

               next
               next to p. At any rate, the younger girl did not
enjoy Bens presence as much as her sister seemed to, and almost daily
detracted from his comfort by suggestions that the apartments were very
small, and that a man hanging around all day took up a deplorable amount
of room. It had been Jessicas notion, too, that she and her sister would walk
out in the evenings under the escort of their father, and thus secure
themselves from misapprehension. But Lucinda rebelled flatly against
this, at least until Ben had some new clothes, and the money for these
was not forthcoming. Jessica did find it possible to spare a dollar or
so to her father weekly, and there had been a nebulous understanding
that this was to be applied to raiment; but the only change in his
appearance effected by this so far had been a sporadic accession of
startlingly white paper collars. There were other minor disappointments--portions of her plan, so to
speak, which had failed to materialize--but the net result of a months
trial was distinctly hopeful. Although most of such work as had come to
her was from the factory-girls, not a few ladies had visited the little
store, and made purchases or given orders. Among these she liked best
of all the one who owned the house; a very friendly old person, with
corkscrew curls and an endless tongue--Miss Tabitha Wilcox. She had
already made two bonnets for her, and the elderly lady had been so
pleasant and talkative that she had half resolved, when next she came
in, to unfold to her the scheme which now lay nearest to her heart. This was nothing less than securing permission to use a long-deserted
and roomy building which stood in the yard, at the back of the one she
occupied, as a sort of evening club for the working-girls of the town. Jessica had never been in this building, but so far as she could see
through the stained and dismantled windows, where the drifts did not
render approach impossible, it had formerly been a dwelling-house, and
later had been used in part as a carpenters shop. To get this, and to fit it up simply but comfortably as a place where
the tired factory and sewing girls could come in the evening, to read or
talk or play games if they liked, to merely sit still and rest if they
chose, but in either case to be warm and contented and sheltered from
the streets and the deadly boredom of squalid lodgings, became little by
little her abiding ambition. She had spoken tentatively to some of the
girls about it, and they were all profoundly enthusiastic over the plan. It remained to enlist the more fortunate women whose assistance could
alone make the plan feasible. Jessica had essayed to get at the parsons
wife, Mrs. Turner; but that lady, after having been extremely cordial,
had unaccountably all at once turned icy cold, and cut the girl dead in
the street. I said unaccountably, but Jessica was not at all at a loss
to comprehend the change, and the bitterness of the revelation had
thrown her into an unusually deep fit of depression. For a time it had
seemed to her hopeless to try to find another confidante in that class
which despised and shrank from her. Then Miss Tabithas pleasant words
and transparent good-heartedness had lifted her out of her despondency,
and she was almost resolved now to approach her on the subject of the
house iii the back yard. CHAPTER XVI.--A GRACIOUS FRIEND RAISED UP. The opportunity which Jessica sought came with unlooked-for
promptness--in fact, before she had quite resolved what to ask for, and
how best to prefer her request. It was a warm, sunny winter morning, with an atmosphere which suggested
the languor of May rather than the eagerness of early spring, and
which was already in these few matutinal hours playing havoc with the
snowbanks. The effects of the thaw were unpleasantly visible on the
sidewalks, where deep puddles were forming as the drifts melted away,
and the back yard was one large expanse of treacherous slush. Jessica
had hoped that her father would come, in order that he might cut away
the ice and snow in front, and thus drain the walk for passers-by. But
as the mild morning air rendered it unnecessary to seek the comfort of a
seat by the stove, Ben preferred to lounge about on the outskirts of the
hay-market, exchanging indolent jokes with kindred idlers, and vaguely
enjoying the sunshine. Samantha, however, chose this forenoon for her first visit to the
milliners shop, and showed a disposition to make herself very much at
home. The fact that encouragement was plainly wanting did not in any way
abash her. Lucinda told her flatly that she had only come to see what
she could pick up, and charged her to her face with having instigated
her friends to offer them annoyance and affront. Samantha denied both
imputations with fervor, the while she tried on before the mirror a
bronze-velvet toque with sage-green feathers. I dont know that I ever quite believed that of you, Samantha, said
Jessica, turning from her dismayed contemplation of the water on the
sidewalk. And if you really want to be friendly, why, you are welcome
to come here. But I have heard of things you have said that were not at
all nice.

All lies! remarked Samantha, studying the effect of the hat as nearly
in a profile view as she could manage with a single glass. You cant
believe a word you hear here in Thessaly. Wouldnt this go better if
there was some yellow put in there, close by the feathers?

I didnt want to believe it, said Jessica. Ive never done you any
harm, and never wished anything but well by you, and I couldnt see why
you should want to injure me.

Dont I tell you they lied? responded Samantha, affably. Cindy,
here, is always blackguarding me. You know you always did, she added,
in passing comment upon Lucindas indignant snort, but I dont bear no
malice. I suppose a hat like this comes pretty
high, dont it?

As she spoke, a sleigh was driven up with some difficulty through the
yielding snowbanks, and stopped close to the sidewalk in front of the
shop. It was by far the most distinguished-looking sleigh Jessica had
seen in Thessaly. The driver on the front seat bore a cockade proudly
in his high hat, and the horses he controlled were superbly matched
creatures, with glossy silver-mounted harness, and with tails neatly
braided and tied up in ribbons for protection from the slush. A costly
silver-fox wrap depended over the back of the cutter, and a robe of some
darker but equally sumptuous fur enfolded the two ladies who sat in the
second seat. Jessica was glad that so splendid an equipage should have drawn up
at her door, with a new-born commercial instinct, even before she
recognized either occupant of the sleigh. Thats Kate Minster, said Samantha, still with the hat of her dreams
on her head, the handsomest girl in Thessaly, and the richest, and the
stuck-up-edest. but youre in luck!

Jessica did not know much about the Minsters, but she now saw that the
other lady, who was already preparing to descend, and stood poised on
the rail of the cutter looking timorously at the water on the walk, was
no other than Miss Tabitha Wilcox. I will give you that hat youve got on, she said in a hurried tone,
if youll go with Lucinda clear back into the kitchen and shut both
doors tight after you, and stay there till I call you.

At this considerable sacrifice the store was cleared for the reception
of these visitors--the most important who had as yet crossed its
threshold. Miss Tabitha did not offer to introduce her companion--whom Jessica
noted furtively as a tall, stately, dark girl, with a wonderfully
handsome face, who stood silently by the little showcase and was wrapped
in furs worth the whole stock of millinery she confronted--but bustled
about the store, while she plunged into the middle of an explanation
about hats she had had, hats she thought of having, and hats she might
have had, of which the milliner understood not a word. It was not,
indeed, essential that she should, for presently Tabitha stopped short,
looked about her triumphantly, and asked:

Now, wasnt I right? Arent they the nicest in town?

The tall girl smiled, and inclined her dignified head. They are very pretty, indeed, she answered, and Jessica remarked to
herself what a soft, rich voice it was, that made even those commonplace
words so delightful to the ear. I dont know that we wanted to look at anything in particular, rattled
on Miss Tabitha. We were driving by (O Tabitha! as if Miss Kate had
not commanded this excursion for no other purpose than this visit!) and
I just thought wed drop in, for Ive been telling Miss Minster about
what excellent taste you had.

A momentary pause ensued, and then Jessica, conscious of blushes and
confusion, made bold to unburden her mind of its plan. I wanted to speak to you, she said, falteringly at first, but with a
resolution to have it all out, about that vacant house in the back yard
here. It looks as if it had been a carpenters shop last, and it seems
in very bad repair.

I suppose it might as well come down, broke in Miss Wilcox. Still,
I--

Oh, no! that wasnt what I meant! protested Jessica. I--I wanted
to propose something about it to you. If--if you will be seated, I can
explain what I meant.

The two ladies took chairs, but with a palpable accession of reserve on
their countenances. The girl went on to explain:

To begin with, the factory-girls and sewing-girls here spend too much
time on the streets--I suppose it is so everywhere--the girls who were
thrown out when the match factory shut down, particularly. Then they get into trouble, or at any
rate they learn slangy talk and coarse ways. But you cant blame them,
for their homes, when they have any, are not pleasant places, and where
they hire rooms it is almost worse still. Now, Ive been thinking of
something--or, rather, it isnt my own idea, but Ill speak about that
later on. This is the idea: I have come to know a good many of the best
of these girls--perhaps you would think they were the worst, too, but
theyre not--and I know they would be glad of some good place where they
could spend their evenings, especially in the winter, where it would be
cosey and warm, and they could read or talk, or bring their own sewing
for themselves, and amuse themselves as they liked. And I had thought
that perhaps that old house could be fixed up so as to serve, and they
could come through the shop here after tea, and so I could keep track of
them, dont you see?

I dont quite think I do, said Miss Tabitha, with distinct
disapprobation. The plan had seemed so excellent to her,
and yet it was to be frowned down. Perhaps I havent made it clear to you, she ventured to say. Oh, yes, you have, replied Miss Tabitha. I dont mind pulling the
house down, but to make it a rendezvous for all the tag-rag and bob-tail
in town--I simply couldnt think of it! These houses along here have
seen their best days, perhaps, but theyve all been respectable,
always!

I dont think myself that you have quite grasped Miss Lawtons
meaning.

It was the low, full, quiet voice of the beautiful fur-clad lady that
spoke, and Jessica looked at her with tears of anxious gratitude in her
eyes. Miss Minster seemed to avoid returning the glance, but went on in the
same even, musical tone:

It appears to me that there might be a great deal of much-needed
good done in just that way, Tabitha. The young lady says--I think I
understood her to say--that she had talked with some of these girls, and
that that is what they would like. It seems to me only common-sense, if
you want to help people, to help them in their own way, and not insist,
instead, that it shall be in your way--which really is no help at all!

Nobody can say, I hope, that I have ever declined to extend a helping
hand to anybody who showed a proper spirit, said Miss Wilcox, with
dignity, putting up her chin. I know that, maam, pleaded Jessica. That is why I felt sure you
would like my plan. I ought to tell you--it isnt quite my plan. Fairchild, at Tecumseh, who used to teach the Burfield school, who
suggested it. She is a very, very good woman.

And I think it is a very, very good idea, said Miss Kate, speaking for
the first time directly to Jessica. Of course, there would have to be
safeguards.

You have no conception what a rough lot they are, said Miss Tabitha,
in more subdued protest. There is no telling who they would bring here,
or what they wouldnt do.

Indeed, I am sure all that could be taken care of, urged Jessica,
taking fresh courage, and speaking now to both her visitors. Only those
whom I knew to mean well by the undertaking should be made members, and
they would agree to very strict rules, I feel certain.

Why, child alive! where would you get the money for it, even if it
could be done otherwise? Miss Tabitha wagged her curls conclusively,
but her smile was not unkind. It would not be exact to say that Jessica had not considered this, but,
as it was now presented, it seemed like a new proposition. Miss Wilcox did not wait over long for a reply, but proceeded to point
out, in a large and exhaustive way, the financial impossibilities of the
plan. Jessica had neither heart nor words for an interruption, and Miss
Kate listened in an absent-minded manner, her eyes on the plumes and
velvets in the showcase. The interruption did come in a curiously unexpected fashion. A loud
stamping of wet feet was heard on the step outside; then the door from
the street was opened. The vehemence of the call-bells clamor seemed to
dismay the visitor, or perhaps it was the presence of the ladies. At
all events, he took off his hat, as if it had been a parlor instead of a
shop, and made an awkward inclusive bow, reaching one hand back for the
latch, as if minded to beat a retreat. Tracy! exclaimed Tabitha, rising from her chair. Reuben advanced now and shook hands with both her and Jessica. For an
instant the silence threatened to be embarrassing, and it was not wholly
relieved when Tabitha presented him to Miss Minster, and that young lady
bowed formally without moving in her chair. But the lawyer could not
suspect the disagreeable thoughts which were chasing one another behind
these two unruffled and ladylike fronts, and it was evident enough that
his coming was welcome to the mistress of the little shop. I have wanted to look in upon you before, he said to Jessica, and
I am ashamed to think that I havent done so. I have been very much
occupied with other matters. It doesnt excuse me to myself, but it may
to you.

Oh, certainly, Mr. Tracy, Jessica answered, and then realized how
miserably inadequate the words were. Its very kind of you to come at
all, she added. Tabitha shot a swift glance at her companion, and the two ladies rose,
as by some automatic mechanical device, absolutely together. We must be going, Miss Lawton, said the old maid, primly. A womans intuition told Jessica that something had gone wrong. If she
did not entirely guess the nature of the trouble, it became clear enough
on the instant to her that these ladies misinterpreted Reubens visit. Perhaps they did not like him--or perhaps--She stepped toward them and
spoke eagerly, before she had followed out this second hypothesis in her
mind. If you have a moments time to spare, she pleaded, I _wish_ you would
let me explain to Mr. Tracy the plan I have talked over with you. He was
my school-teacher; he is my oldest friend--the only friend I had when
I was--a--a girl, and I havent seen him before since the day I arrived
home here. I should _so_ much like to have you hear his opinion. The
lady I spoke of--Mrs. Perhaps he knows
of the plan already from her.

Reuben did not know of the plan, and the two ladies consented to take
seats again while it should be explained to him. Tabitha assumed a
distant and uneasy expression of countenance, and looked straight ahead
of her out through the glass door until the necessity for relief by
conversation swelled up within her to bursting point; for Kate had
rather flippantly deserted her, and so far from listening with haughty
reserve under protest, had actually joined in the talk, and taken up the
thread of Jessicas stumbling explanation. The three young people seemed to get on extremely well together. Reuben
fired up with enthusiasm at the first mention of the plan, and showed
so plainly the sincerity of his liking for it that Miss Minster felt
herself, too, all aglow with zeal. Thus taken up by friendly hands, the
project grew apace, and took on form and shape like Aladdins palace. Tabitha listened with a swiftly mounting impatience of her speechless
condition, and a great sickening of the task of watching the cockade of
the coachman outside, which she had imposed upon herself, as the talk
went on. She heard Reuben say that he would gladly raise a subscription
for the work; she heard Kate ask to be allowed to head the list with
whatever sum he thought best, and then to close the list with whatever
additional sum was needed to make good the total amount required;
she heard Jessica, overcome with delight, stammer out thanks for this
unlooked-for adoption and endowment of her poor little plan, and then
she could stand it no longer. Have you quite settled what you will do with my house? she asked,
still keeping her face toward the door. There are some other places
along here belonging to me--that is, they always have up to now--but of
course if you have plans about them, too, just tell me, and--

Dont be absurd, Tabitha, said Miss Minster, rising from her chair as
she spoke. Of course we took your assent for granted from the start. I
believe, candidly, that you are more enthusiastic about it this moment
than even we are.

Reuben thought that the old lady dissembled her enthusiasm skilfully,
but at least she offered no dissent. A few words more were exchanged,
the lawyer promising again his aid, and Miss Minster insisting that she
herself wanted the task of drawing up, in all its details, the working
plan for the new institution, and, on second thoughts, would prefer to
pay for it all herself. I have been simply famishing for something to do all these years,
 she said, in smiling confidence, to Tracy, and here it is at last. You
cant guess how happy I shall be in mapping out the whole thing--rules
and amusements and the arrangements of the rooms and the furnishing,
and--everything.

Perhaps Jessicas face expressed too plainly the thought that this
bantling of hers, which had been so munificently adopted, bade fair to
be taken away from her altogether, for Miss Minster added: Of course,
when the sketch is fairly well completed, I will show it to _you_, and
we will advise together, and Jessica smiled again. When the two ladies were seated again in the sleigh, and the horses had
pranced their way through the wet snow up to the beaten track once more,
Miss Tabitha said:

I never knew a girl to run on so in all my born days. Here you are,
seeing these two people for the very first time half an hour ago, and
youve tied yourself up to goodness only knows what. One would think
youd known them all your life, the way you said ditto to every random
thing that popped into their heads. And a pretty penny theyll make
it cost you, too! And what will your mother say? Miss Minster smiled
good-naturedly, and patted her companions gloved hand with her own. Never you worry, Tabitha, she said, softly. Dont talk, please, for a
minute. I want to think.

It was a very long minute. The young heiress spent it in gazing
abstractedly at the buttons on the coachmans back, and the rapt
expression on her face seemed to tell more of a pleasant day-dream than
of serious mental travail. Miss Wilcox was accustomed to these moods
which called for silence, and offered no protest. At last Kate spoke, with a tone of affectionate command. When we get to
the house I will give you a book to read, and I want you to finish every
word of it before you begin anything else. It is called All Sorts and
Conditions of Men, and it tells how a lovely girl with whole millions
of pounds did good in England, and I was thinking of it all the while we
sat there in the shop. Only the mortification of it is, that in the
book the rich girl originated the idea herself, whereas I had to have
it hammered into my head by--by others. But you must read the book, and
hurry with it, because--or no: I will get another copy to read again
myself. And I will buy other copies; one for _her_ and one _for him_,
and one--

She lapsed suddenly into silence again. The disparity between the
stupendous dream out of which the Peoples Palace for East Londons
mighty hive of millions has been evolved, and the humble project of a
sitting-room or two for the factory-girls of a village, rose before her
vision, and had the effect of making her momentarily ridiculous in her
own eyes. The familiarity, too, with which she had labelled these two
strangers, this lawyer and this milliner, in her own thoughts, as him
 and her, jarred just a little upon her maidenly consciousness. Perhaps
she had rushed to embrace their scheme with too much avidity. It was
generally her fault to be over-impetuous. Of course, what we can do here--she began with less eagerness of tone,
thinking aloud rather than addressing Tabitha--must at best be on
a very small scale. You must not be frightened by the book, where
everything is done with fairy prodigality, and the lowest figures dealt
with are hundreds of thousands. I only want you to read it that you may
catch the spirit of it, and so understand how I feel. And you neednt
worry about my wasting money, or doing anything foolish, you dear, timid
old soul!

Miss Wilcox, in her revolving mental processes, had somehow veered
around to an attitude of moderate sympathy with the project, the while
she listened to these words. Im sure you wont, my dear, she replied,
quite sweetly. And I daresay there can really be a great deal of good
done, only, of course, it will have to be gone at cautiously and by
degrees. And we must let old Runkle do the papering and whitewashing;
dont forget that. Hes had ever so much sickness in his family all the
winter, and work is so slack.

Do you know, I like your Mr. Tracy! was Kates irrelevant reply. She
made it musingly, as if the idea were new to her mind. You can see for yourself there couldnt have been anything at all
in that spiteful Sarah Cheese-boroughs talk about him and her, said
Tabitha, who now felt herself to have been all along the champion of
this injured couple. How on earth a respectable woman can invent such
slanders beats my comprehension.

Kate Minster laughed merrily aloud. Its lucky you werent made of
pancake batter, Tabitha, she said with mock gravity; for, if you had
been, you never could have stood this being stirred both ways. You would
have turned heavy and been spoiled.

Instead of which I live to spoil other people, eh? purred the
gratified old lady, shaking her curls with affectionate pride. If we werent out in the street, I believe I should kiss you, Tabitha,
 said the girl. You cant begin to imagine how delightfully you have
behaved today!




CHAPTER XVII.--TRACY HEARS STRANGE THINGS. REUBENS first impulse, when he found himself alone in the little shop
with his former pupil, was to say good-by and get out as soon as he
could. To the best of his recollection, he had never before been in a
store consecrated entirely to the fashions and finery of the opposite
sex, and he was oppressed by a sense of being an intruder upon an
exclusively feminine domain. The young girl, too, whom he had been
thinking of all this while as an unfortunate child whom he must watch
over and be good to, stood revealed before him as a self-controlled and
sophisticated woman, only a few years younger than himself in actual
age, and much wiser than himself in the matters of head-gear and
textures and colors which belonged to this place. He could have talked
freely to her in his law-office, with his familiar accessories of papers
and books about him. A background of bonnets was disconcerting. How beautiful she is! were Jessicas first words, and they pleasurably
startled the lawyer from his embarrassed revery. She is, indeed, he answered, and somehow found himself hoping that the
conversation would cling to this subject a good while. I had never met
her before, as you saw, but of course I have known her by sight a long
time.

I dont think I ever saw her before to-day, said Jessica. How
wonderful it seems that she should have come, and then that you came,
too, and that you both should like the plan, and take it up so, and make
a success of it right at the start.

Reuben smiled. In your eagerness to keep up with the procession I fear
you are getting ahead of the band, he said. I wouldnt quite call it
a success, at present. But, no doubt, its a great thing to have her
enlisted in it. Im glad she likes you; her friendship will make all the
difference in the world to you, here in Thessaly.

The girl did not immediately answer, and Tracy, looking at her as she
walked across to the showcase, was surprised to catch the glisten of
tears on her eyelashes. He had no idea what to say, but waited in pained
puzzlement for her to speak. Friendship is not quite the word, she said at last, looking up at
him and smiling with mournful softness through her tears. I shall be
glad if she likes me--as you say, it will be a great thing if she helps
me--but we shall hardly be friends, you know. _She_ would never call
it that. oh, no!

Her voice trembled audibly over these last words, and she began
hurriedly to re-arrange some of the articles in the showcase, with the
obvious design of masking her emotion. You can do yourself no greater harm than by exaggerating that kind of
notion, my girl, said Reuben Tracy, in his old gravely kind voice. You
would put thoughts into her head that way which she had never dreamt of
otherwise; that is, if she werent a good and sensible person. Why, she
is a woman like yourself--

Oh, no, no! _Not_ like _me!_

Tracy was infinitely touched by the pathos of this deprecating wail,
but he went on as if he had not heard it: A woman like yourself, with
a heart turned in mercy and charity toward other women who are not so
strong to help themselves. Why on earth should you vex your soul with
fears that she will be unkind to you, when she showed you as plain
as the noonday sun her desire _to_ be kind? You mustnt yield to such
fancies.

Kind, yes! But you dont understand--you _cant_ understand. I
shouldnt have spoken as I did. It was a mere question of a word,
anyway.

Jessica smiled again, to show that, though the tears were still there,
the grief behind them was to be regarded as gone, and added, Yes, she
was kindness itself.

She is very rich in her own right, I believe, and if her interest
in your project is genuine--that is, of the kind that lasts--you will
hardly need any other assistance. Of course you must allow for the
chance of her dropping the idea as suddenly as she picked it up. Rich
women--rich people generally, for that matter--are often flighty about
such things. Put not your trust in princes, serves as a warning about
millionnaires as well as monarchs. The rest of us are forced to be
more or less continuous in what we think and do. We have to keep at the
things weve started, because a waste of time would be serious to us. We have to keep the friends and associates weve got, because others
are not to be had for the asking. But these favored people are more
free--their time doesnt matter, and they can find new sets of friends
ready made whenever they weary of the others. Still, let us hope she
will be steadfast. She has a strong face, at all events.

The girl had listened to this substantial dissertation with more or less
comprehension, but with unbounded respect. Anything that Reuben Tracy
said she felt must be good. Besides, his conclusion jumped with her
hopes. Im not afraid of her losing interest in the thing itself, she
answered. What worries me is--or, no-- She stopped herself with a
smile, and made haste to add, I forgot. Tell me about her.

She owns a share of the works, I think. I dont know how big a share,
or, in fact, much else about her. Ive heard my partner, Horace Boyce,
talk lately a good deal--

Tracy did not finish his sentence, for Jessica had sunk suddenly into
the chair behind the case, and was staring at him over the glass-bound
row of bonnets with wide-open, startled eyes. _Your partner!_ Yours, did you say? That man?

Her tone and manner very much surprised Reuben. Why, yes, hes my
partner, he said, slowly and in wonderment. Didnt you know that? Weve been together since December.

She shook her head, and murmured something hastily about having been
very busy, and being cooped up on a back street. This did not explain her agitation, which more and more puzzled Reuben
as he thought upon it. He stood looking down upon her where she sat, and
noted that her face, though it was turned away from him now, was both
pale and excited. Do you know him? he asked finally. She shook her head again, and the lawyer fancied she was biting her
lips. He did not know well what else to say, and was speculating whether
it would not be best to say nothing, when all at once she burst forth
vehemently. I _wont_ lie to you! she exclaimed. I _did_ know him, very much to
my cost. Dont you trust him, I say! Hes
not fit to be with you. Oh, my God!--_dont_ I know Horace Boyce!

Reuben stood silent, still looking down gravely into the girls flashing
eyes. What she had said annoyed and disturbed him, but what he thought
chiefly about was how to avoid bringing on an explanation which must
wound and humiliate her feelings. It was clear enough what she meant,
and he compassionately hoped she would not feel it necessary to add
anything. Above all things he felt that he wanted to spare her pain. I understand, he said at last, as the frankest way out of the dilemma. Dont say any more. He pondered for a minute or so upon the propriety
of not saying anything more himself, and then with decision offered her
his hand across the showcase, and held hers in his expansive clasp with
what he took to be fatherly sympathy, as he said:

I must go now. And I shall hear from you soon about the
project? He smiled to reassure her, and added, still holding her hand,
Now, dont you let worry come inside these doors at all. You have made
a famous start, and everything will go well, believe me.

Then he went out, and the shrill clamor of the bell hung to jangle
when the door was opened woke Jessica from her day-dream, just as the
sunbeams had begun to drive away the night. She rose with a start, and walked to the door to follow his
retiring figure through the glass. She stood there, lost in another
revery--vague, languorous, half-bright, half-hideous--until the door
from the back room was opened, and Samanthas sharp voice fell on the
silence of the little shop. I aint going to set in that poky old kitchen any longer for all
the bonnets in your whole place, she remarked, with determination,
advancing to the mirror with the toque on her truculently poised head. Besides, you said youd call us when they were all gone.

Lucinda stole up to her sister-employer, and murmured in a side-long
whisper: I couldnt keep her from listening a little. She heard what you said about that Boyce chap.

The tidings angered Jessica even more than they alarmed her. With an
impulse equally illogical and natural, she frowned at Samantha, and
stiffened her fingers claw-wise, with a distinct itching to tear that
arrangement of bronze velvet and sage-green feathers from her perfidious
sisters head. Curiously enough, it was the usually aggressive Lucinda who counselled
prudence. If I was you, Id ask her to stay to dinner, she said,
in the same furtive undertone. Ive been talking to her, and I guess
shell be all right if we make it kind o pleasant for her when she
comes. But if you rub her the wrong way, shell scratch.

Samantha was asked to dinner, and stayed, and later, being offered her
choice of three hat-pins with heads of ornamented jet, took two. *****

Reuben walked slowly back to the office, and then sat through a solitary
meal at a side-table in the Dearborn House dining-room, although his
customary seat was at the long table down the centre, in order that he
might think over what he had heard. It is not clear that the isolated fact disclosed to him in the
milliners shop would, in itself, have been sufficient to awaken in his
mind any serious distrust of his partner. As the sexes have different
trainings and different spheres, so they have different standards. Men
set up the bars, for instance, against a brother who cheats at cards, or
divulges what he has heard in his club, or borrows money which he cannot
repay, or pockets cigars at feasts when he does not himself smoke. But
their courts of ethics do not exercise jurisdiction over sentimental or
sexual offences, as a rule. These the male instinct vaguely refers to
some other tribunal, which may or may not be in session somewhere else. And this male instinct is not necessarily co-existent with immoral
tendencies, or blunted sensibilities, or even indifference: it is the
mans way of looking at it--just as it is his way to cross a muddy
street on his toes, while his sisters perform the same feat on their
heels. Reuben Tracy was a good man, and one with keen aspirations toward
honorable and ennobling things; but still he was a man, and it may
be that this discovery, standing by itself, would not seriously have
affected his opinion of Horace. In an indefinite kind of way, he was conscious of being less attracted
by the wit and sparkling smalltalk of Horace than he had been at first. Somehow, the young man seemed to have exhausted his store; he began to
repeat himself, as if he had already made the circuit of the small ring
around which his mind travelled. Reuben confronted a suspicion that the
Boyce soil was shallow. This might not be necessarily an evil thing, he said to himself. Lawyers
quite often achieved notable successes before juries, who were not
deep or well-grounded men. Horace was versatile, and versatility was
a quality which Reuben distinctly lacked. From that point of view the
combination ought, therefore, to be of value. Versatility of that variety was not so
admirable. Reuben could count
on his fingers now six separate falsehoods that his partner had already
told him. They happened not to be upon vital or even important subjects,
but that did not render them the more palatable. He knew from other sources
that Horace had been intrusted with the papers left to Mr. The young man had taken them to his fathers house, and had
never mentioned so much as a syllable about them to his partner. No
doubt, Horace felt that he ought to have this as his personal business,
and upon the precedent Reuben himself had set with the railroad work,
this was fair enough. But there was something underhanded in his secrecy
about the matter. Reubens thoughts from this drifted to the Minsters themselves, and
centred reverently upon the luminous figure of that elder daughter
whom he had met an hour before. He did not dwell much upon her
beauty--perhaps he was a trifle dull about such things--but her
graciousness, her sweet interest in the charity, her womanly commingling
of softness and enthusiasm, seemed to shine about him as he mused. Thessaly unconsciously assumed a brighter and more wholesome aspect,
with much less need of reform than before, in his minds eye, now that
he thought of it as her home. The prosperous and respected lawyer was still a country boy
in his unformed speculations as to what that home might be like. The
Minster house was the most splendid mansion in Dearborn County, it was
said, but his experience with mansions was small. A hundred times it had
been said to him that he could go anywhere if he liked, and he gave the
statement credence enough. But somehow it happened that he had not gone. To be in society, as the phrase went, had not seemed important to him. Now, almost for the first time, he found himself regretting this. Then
he smiled somewhat scowlingly at his plate as the vagrant reflection
came up that his partner contributed social status as well as
versatility and mendacity to the outfit of the firm. Horace Boyce had a
swallowtail coat, and visited at the Minsters. The reflection was not
altogether grateful to him. Reuben rose from the table, and stood for a few moments by the window
overlooking the veranda and the side street. The sunny warmth of the
thawing noon-day had made it possible to have the window open, and the
sound of voices close at hand showed that there were people already
anticipating pneumonia and the springtime by sitting on the porch
outside. These voices conveyed no distinct impression at first to Reubens mind,
busy as he was with his own reflections. But all at once there was a
scraping of feet and chair-legs on the floor, signifying that the party
had risen, and then he heard two remarks which made a sharp appeal to
his attention and interest. The first voice said: Mind, Im not going to let you put me into a
hole. What I do, I do only when it has been proved to me to be to my
own interest, and not at all because Im afraid of you. Understand that
clearly!

The other voice replied: All that you need be afraid of is that you
will kick over your own bucket of milk. Youve got the whole game in
your hands, if you only listen to me and dont play it like a fool. Shall we go up to your house and put the thing into shape? We can be alone there.

The voices ceased, and there was a sound of footsteps descending from
the porch to the sidewalk. The two men passed before the window,
ducking their heads for protection against the water dripping from the
overflowed eaves on the roof of the veranda, and thus missing sight of
the man who had overheard them. Reuben had known at once by the sound of the voice that the first
speaker was Horace Boyce. He recognized his companion now as Schuyler
Tenney, and the sight startled him. Just why it should have done so, he could not have explained. He had
seen this Schuyler Tenney almost every day for a good many years,
putting them all together, and had never before been troubled, much less
alarmed, by the spectacle. But coming now upon what Jessica had
told him, and what his own thoughts had evolved, and what he had
inadvertently overheard, the figure of the rising hardware merchant
loomed darkly in his perturbed fancy as an evil and threatening thing. A rustic client with a grievance sought Tracy out in the seclusion
of the dining-room, and dragged him back to his office and into the
intricacies of the law of trespass; but though he did his best to listen
and understand, the farmer went away feeling that his lawyer was a
considerably overrated man. For, strive as he might, Reuben could not get the sound of those words,
youve got the whole game in your hands, out of his ears, or restrain
his mind from wearying itself with the anxious puzzle of guessing what
that game could be. CHAPTER XVIII.--A SIMPLE BUSINESS TRANSACTION. Schuyler Tenney had never before been afforded an opportunity of
studying a young gentleman of fashion and culture in the intimacy of
his private apartments, and he looked about Horaces room with lively
curiosity and interest, when the two conspirators had entered the
Generals house, gone up-stairs, and shut doors behind them. It looks like a ninety-nine-cent store, for all the world, was his
comment when he had examined the bric--brac on the walls and mantels,
hefted a bronze trifle or two on the table, and taken a comprehensive
survey of the furniture and hangings. Its rather bare than otherwise, said Horace, carelessly. I got
a tolerably decent lot of traps together when I had rooms in Jermyn
Street, but I had to let most of them go when I pulled up stakes to come
home.

German Street? I suppose that is in Germany?

No--London.

Oh! Sold em because you got hard up?

Not at all. But this damned tariff of yours--or ours--makes it cost too
much to bring decent things over here.

Protection to American industry, my boy, said Mr. We
couldnt get on a fortnight without it. Just think what--

Oh, hang it all, man! We didnt come here to talk tariff! Horace broke
in, with a smile which was half annoyance. No, thats so, assented Mr. Tenney, settling himself in the low,
deep-backed easy-chair, and putting the tips of his lean fingers
together. No, we didnt, for a fact. He added, after a moments pause:
I guess Ill have to rig up a room like this myself, when the thing
comes off. He smiled icily to himself at the thought. Meanwhile, let us talk about the thing, as you call it. Will you have
a drink?

Never touch it, said Mr. Tenney, and he looked curiously on while
Horace poured out some brandy, and then opened a bottle of soda-water to
go with it. He was particularly impressed by the little wire frame-work
stand made to hold the round-bottomed bottle, and asked its cost, and
wondered if they wouldnt be a good thing to keep in the store. Now to business! said Horace, dragging out from under a sofa the black
tin box which held the Minster papers, and throwing back its cover. Ive told you pretty well what there is in here.

Mr. Tenney took from his pocket-book the tabular statement Horace had
made of the Minster property, and smoothed it out over his pointed knee. Its a very pretty table, he said; no bookkeeper could have done it
better. I know it by heart, but well keep it here in sight while you
proceed.

Theres nothing for me to proceed with, said Horace, lolling back
in his chair in turn. I want to hear _you!_ Dont let us waste time. Broadly, what do you propose?

Broadly, what does everybody propose? To get for himself what somebody
else has got. Its every kind of nature, down to
the little chickens just hatched who start to chase the chap with the
worm in his mouth before theyve fairly got their tails out of the
shell.

You ought to write a book, Schuyler, said Horace, using this
familiar name for the first time: Tenney on Dynamic Sociology! What particular worm have you got in your
bills eye?

We are all worms, so the Bible says. I suppose even those scrumptious
ladies there come under that head, like we ordinary mortals. Mr. Tenney
pointed his agreeable metaphor by touching the paper on his knee with
his joined finger-tips, and showed his small, sharpened teeth in a
momentary smile. I follow you, said Horace, tentatively. Go on!

Thats a heap of money that youve ciphered out there, on that paper.

Yes. True, it isnt ours, and weve got nothing to do with it. Go on!

A good deal of it can be ours, if youve got the pluck to go in with
me.

Horace frowned. Upon my word, Tenney, he said, impatiently, what do
you mean?

Jest what I said, was the sententious and collected response. The younger man laughed with an uneasy assumption of scorn. Is it
a burglary you do me the honor to propose, or only common or garden
robbery? Ought we to manage a little murder in the thing, or what do you
say to arson? Upon my word, man, I believe that you dont realize that
what youve said is an insult!

No, I dont. Youre right there, said the hardware merchant, in no
wise ruffled. But I do realize that you come pretty near being the
dod-blamedest fool in Dearborn County.

Much obliged for the qualification, Im sure, retorted Horace, who
felt the mists of his half-simulated, half-instinctive anger fading away
before the steady breath of the other mans purpose. Pray go on.

There aint no question of dishonesty about the thing, not the
slightest. I aint that kind of a man! Horace permitted himself a
shadowy smile, emphasized by a subdued little sniff, which Tenney caught
and was pleased to appear to resent, Thessaly knows me! he said, with
an air of pride. They aint a living man--nor a dead one nuther--can
put his finger on me. Ive lived aboveboard, sir, and owe no man a red
cent, and I defy anybody to so much as whisper a word about my
character.

Tenney on Faith Justified by Works, commented Horace, softly,
smiling as much as he dared, but in a less aggressive manner. Works--yes! said the hardware merchant, the Minster iron-works, in
particular. He seemed pleased with his little joke, and paused to dwell
upon it in his mind for an instant. Then he went on, sitting upright in
his chair now, and displaying a new earnestness:

Dishonesty is wrong, and it is foolish. It gets a man disgraced, and
it gets him in jail. A smart
man can get money in a good many ways without giving anybody a chance
to call him dishonest. I have thought out several plans--some of
them strong at one point, others at another, but all pretty middlin
good--how to feather our own nests out of this thing.

Well? said Horace, interrogatively. Tenney did not smile any more, and he had done with digressions. First of all, he said, with his intent gray eyes fixed on the young
mans face, what guarantee have I that you wont give me away?

What guarantee _can_ I give you? replied Horace, also sitting up. Perhaps you are right, said Tenney, thinking in his own swift-working
mind that it would be easy enough to take care of this poor creature
later on. Well, then, youve been appointed Mrs. Minsters lawyer in
the interest of the Thessaly Manufacturing Company--this company
here marked D, in which the family has one hundred and seventy-five
thousand dollars.

I gathered as much. Perhaps you wouldnt mind telling me what it is all
about.

Im as transparent as plate-glass when I think a man is acting square
with me, said the hardware merchant. Wendover and
me got hold of a little rolling-mill and nail-works at Cadmus, down on
the Southern Tier, a few years ago. Some silly people had put up the
money for it, and there was a sort of half-crazy inventor fellow running
it. They were making ducks and drakes of the whole thing, and I saw
a chance of getting into the concern--I used to buy a good deal of
hardware from them, and knew how they stood--and I spoke to Wendover,
and so we went in.

That means that the other people were put out, I suppose, commented
Horace. Well, no; but they kind o faded away like. I wouldnt exactly say they
were put out, but after a while they didnt seem to be able to stay in. The iron fields
around there had pretty well petered out, and we were way off the main
line of transportation. Business was fair enough; we made a straight ten
per cent, year in and year out, because the thing was managed carefully;
but that was in spite of a lot of drawbacks. So I got a scheme in my
head to move the whole concern up here to Thessaly, and hitch it up with
the Minster iron-works. We could save one dollar a ton, or forty-five
thousand dollars in all, in the mere matter of freight alone, if we
could use up their entire output. I may tell you, I didnt appear in the
business at all. Minster dont know to this day that Im
a kind of partner of hers. It happened that Wendover used to know her
when she was a girl--they both come from down the Hudson somewhere--and
so he worked the thing with her, and we moved over from Cadmus, hook,
line, bob, and sinker, and were the Thessaly Manufacturing Company. Do
you see?

So far, yes. She and her daughters have one hundred and seventy-five
thousand dollars cash in it. What is the rest of the company like?

Its stocked at four hundred thousand dollars. We put in all our plant
and machinery and business and good-will and so on at one hundred and
fifty thousand dollars, and then we furnished seventy-five thousand
dollars cash. So we hold two hundred and twenty-five shares to their one
hundred and seventy-five.

Who are the we?

Well, Pete Wendover and me are about the only people youre liable to
meet around the premises, I guess. There are some other names on the
books, but they dont amount to much. We can wipe them off whenever we
like.

I notice that this company has paid no dividends since it was formed.

Thats because of the expense of building. And we aint got what you
may call fairly to work yet. There is big money in
it.

I daresay, observed Horace. But, if you will excuse the remark, I
seem to have missed that part of your statement which referred to _my_
making something out of the company.

The hardware merchant allowed his cold eyes to twinkle for an instant. Youll be taken care of, he said, confidentially. Dont fret your
gizzard about _that!_

Horace smiled. It seemed to be easier to get on with Tenney than he had
thought. But what am I to do; that is, if I decide to do anything? he
asked. I confess I dont see your scheme.

Why, thats curious, said the other, with an air of candor. And you
lawyers have the name of being so cute, too!

I dont suppose we see through a stone wall much farther than other
people. Our chief advantage is in being able to recognize that it is a
wall. And this one of yours seems to be as thick and opaque as most, Im
bound to say.

We dont want you to do anything, just now, Mr. Things may turn up in which you can be of assistance, and then we want
to count on you, thats all.

This was a far less lucid explanation than Horace had looked for. Tenney
had been so anxious for a confidential talk, and had hinted of such
dazzling secrets, that this was a distinct disappointment. What did you mean by saying that I had the whole game in my hands?
 he demanded, not dissembling his annoyance. Thus far, you havent even
dealt me any cards!

Mr. Tenney lay back in his chair again, and surveyed Horace over his
finger-tips. There is to be a game, young man, and youve been put in
a position to play in it when the time comes. But I should be a
particularly simple kind of goose to tell you about it beforehand; now,
wouldnt I?

Thus candidly appealed to, Horace could not but admit that his
companions caution was defensible. Please yourself, he said. I daresay youre right enough. Ive got the
position, as you say. Perhaps it is through you that it came to me; Ill
concede that, for arguments sake. You are not a man who expects people
to act from gratitude alone. Therefore you dont count upon my doing
things for you in this position, even though you put me there, unless
you first convince me that they will also benefit me. That is clear
enough, isnt it? When the occasion
arises that you need me, you can tell me what it is, and what I am to
get out of it, and then well talk business.

Mr. Tenney had not lifted his eyes for a moment from his companions
face. Had his own countenance been one on which inner feelings were
easily reflected, it would just now have worn an expression of amused
contempt. Well, this much I might as well tell you straight off, he said. A
part of my notion, if everything goes smoothly, is to have Mrs. Minster
put you into the Thessaly Manufacturing Company as her representative
and to pay you five thousand dollars a year for it, which might be fixed
so as to stand separate from the other work you do for her. And then I am counting now on declaring
myself up at the Minster works, and putting in my time up there; so that
your father will be needed again in the store, and it might be so that
I could double his salary, and let him have back say a half interest
in the business, and put him on his feet. I say these things _might_ be
done. I dont say Ive settled on them, mind!

And you still think it best to keep me in the dark; not to tell me what
it is Im to do? Horace leant forward, and asked this question eagerly. No-o--Ill tell you this much. Your business will be to say ditto to
whatever me and Wendover say.

A full minutes pause ensued, during which Mr. Tenney gravely watched
Horace sip what remained of his drink. Do you go in with us? he asked, at last. Id better think it over, said Horace. Give me, say, till
Monday--thats five days. And of course, if I do say yes, it will
be understood that I am not to be bound to do anything of a shady
character.

Certainly; but you neednt worry about that, answered Tenney. Everything will be as straight as a die. There will be nothing but a
simple business transaction.

What did you mean by saying that we should take some of the Minster
money away? That had a queer sound.

All business consists in getting other peoples money, said the
hardware merchant, sententiously. Where do you suppose Steve Minster
got his millions? Didnt every dollar
pass through some other fellows pocket before it reached his? The
only difference was that when it got into his pocket it stuck there. Everybody is looking out to get rich; and when a man succeeds, it only
means that somebody else has got poor. Thats plain common-sense!

The conversation practically ended here. Tenney devoted some quarter
of an hour to going severally over all the papers in the Minster box,
but glancing through only those few which referred to the Thessaly
Manufacturing Company. The proceeding seemed to Horace to be irregular,
but he could not well refuse, and Tenney was not interrupted. When
he had finished his task he shook hands with Horace with a novel
cordiality, and it was not difficult to guess that the result of his
search had pleased him. You are sure those are all the papers Clarke left to be turned over?
 he asked. Upon being assured in the affirmative his eyes emitted a
glance which was like a flash of light, and his lip lifted in a smile of
obvious elation. Theres a fortune for both of us, he said, jubilantly, as he unlocked
the door, and shook hands again. When he had gone, Horace poured out another drink and sat down to
meditate. CHAPTER XIX.--NO MESSAGE FOR MAMMA. Four days of anxious meditation did not help Horace Boyce to clear his
mind, and on the fifth he determined upon a somewhat desperate step, in
the hope that its issue would assist decision. Two ways of acquiring a
fortune lay before him. One was to marry Kate Minster; the other was
to join the plot against her property and that of her family, which the
subtile Tenney was darkly shaping. The misery of the situation was that he must decide at once which of
the ways he would choose. In his elation at being selected as the legal
adviser and agent of these millionnaire women, no such contingency as
this had been foreseen. He had assumed that abundant time would be at
his disposal, and he had said to himself that with time all things may
be accomplished with all women. But this precious element of time had been harshly cut out of his plans,
here at the very start. The few days reluctantly granted him had gone
by, one by one, with cruel swiftness, and to-morrow would be Monday--and
still his mind was not made up. If he could be assured that Miss Minster would marry him, or at least
admit him to the vantage-ground of _quasi-recognition_ as a suitor, the
difficulty would be solved at once. He would turn around and defend
her and her people against the machinations of Tenney. Just what the
machinations were he could not for the life of him puzzle out, but he
felt sure that, whatever their nature, he could defeat them, if only
he were given the right to do battle in the name of the family, as a
prospective member of it. On the other hand, it might be that he had no present chance with Miss
Minster as an eligible husband. What would happen if he relied on a
prospect which turned out not to exist? His own opportunity to share
in the profits of Tenneys plan would be abruptly extinguished, and his
father would be thrown upon the world as a discredited bankrupt. Sometimes the distracted young man thought he caught glimpses of a safe
middle course. In these sanguine moments it seemed feasible to give in
his adhesion to Tenneys scheme, and go along with him for a certain
time, say until the intentions of the conspirators were revealed. Then
he might suddenly revolt, throw himself into a virtuous attitude, and
win credit and gratitude at the hands of the family by protecting them
from their enemies. Then the game would be in his own hands, and no
mistake! But there were other times when this course did not present so many
attractions to his mind--when it was borne in upon him that Tenney would
be a dangerous kind of man to betray. He had seen merciless and terrible
depths in the gray eyes of the hardware merchant--depths which somehow
suggested bones stripped clean of their flesh, sucked bare of their
marrow, at the bottom of a gloomy sea. In these seasons of doubt, which
came mostly in the early morning when he first awoke, the mere thought
of Tenneys hatred made him shudder. It was as if Hugos devil-fish had
crawled into his dreams. So Sunday afternoon came and found the young man still perplexed and
harassed. To do him justice, he had once or twice dwelt momentarily on
the plan of simply defying Tenney and doing his duty by the Minsters,
and taking his chances. The
case was too complicated for mere honesty. The days of martyrdom were
long since past. One needed to be smarter than ones neighbors in these
later times. To eat others was the rule now, if one would save himself
from being devoured. It was at least clear to his mind that he must be
smart, and play his hand so as to get the odd trick even if honors were
held against him. Horace decided finally that the wisest thing he could do would be to
call upon the Minsters before nightfall, and trust to luck for some
opportunity of discovering Miss Kates state of mind toward him. He
was troubled more or less by fears that Sunday might not be regarded
in Thessaly as a proper day for calls, as he dressed himself for
the adventure. But when he got upon the street, the fresh air and
exhilaration oc exercise helped to reassure him. Before he reached the
Minster gate he had even grown to feel that the ladies had probably had
a dull day of it, and would welcome his advent as a diversion. He was shown into the stately parlor to the left of the wide hall--a
room he had not seen before--and left to sit there in solitude for some
minutes. This term of waiting he employed in looking over the portraits
on the wall and the photographs on the mantels and tables. Aside from
several pictures of the dissipated Minster boy who had died, he could
see no faces of young men anywhere, and he felt this to be a good sign
as he tiptoed his way back to his seat by the window. Fortune smiled at least upon the opening of his enterprise. It was Miss
Kate who came at last to receive him, and she came alone. The young
mans cultured sense of beauty and breeding was caressed and captivated
as it had never been before--at least in America, he made mental
reservation--as she came across the room toward him, and held out her
hand. He felt himself unexpectedly at ease, as he returned her greeting
and looked with smiling warmth into her splendid eyes. He touched lightly upon his doubts
as to making calls on Sunday, and how they were overborne by the
unspeakable tedium of his own rooms. Then he spoke of the way the more
unconventional circles of London utilize the day, and of the contrasting
features of the Continental Sunday. Miss Kate seemed interested, and
besides explaining that her mother was writing letters and that her
sister was not very well, bore a courteous and affable part in the
exchange of small-talk. For a long time nothing was said which enabled Horace to feel that the
purpose of his visit had been or was likely to be served. Then, all at
once, through a most unlikely channel, the needed personal element was
introduced. Mamma tells me, she said, when a moments pause had sufficed to
dismiss some other subject, that she has turned over to you such of
her business as poor old Mr. Clarke used to take care of, and that your
partner, Mr. Tracy, has nothing to do with that particular branch
of your work. I thought partners always shared
everything.

Oh, not at all, replied Horace. Tracy, for example, has railroad
business which he keeps to himself. He is the attorney for this section
of the road, and of course that is a personal appointment. He couldnt
share it with me, any more than the man in the story could make his wife
and children corporals because he had been made one himself. Tracy was expressly mentioned by your mother as not to be included
in the transfer of business. It was her notion.

Ah, indeed! said that young woman, with a slight instantaneous lifting
of the black brows which Horace did not catch. Isnt he nice?

Well, yes; hes an extremely good fellow, in his way, the partner
admitted, looking down at his glossy boots in well-simulated hesitation. That little word nice means so many things upon feminine lips,
you know, he added with a smile. Perhaps he wouldnt answer your
definition of it all around. Hes very honest, and he is a prodigious
worker, but--well, to be frank, hes farm bred, and I daresay your
mother suspected the existence of--what shall I say?--an uncouth side? Really, I dont think that there was anything more than that in it.

So you furnish the polish, and he the honesty and industry? Is that
it?

The words were distinctly unpleasant, and Horace looked up swiftly to
the speakers face, feeling that his own was flushed. But Miss Kate was
smiling at him, with a quizzical light dancing in her eyes, and this
reassured him on the instant. Evidently she felt herself on easy terms
with him, and this was merely a bit of playful chaff. We dont put it quite in that way, he said, with an answering laugh. It would be rather egotistical, on both sides.

Nowadays everybody resents that imputation as if it were a cardinal
sin. There was a time when self-esteem was taken for granted. I suppose
it went out with chain-armor and farthingales. She spoke in a musing
tone, and added after a tiny pause, That must have been a happy time,
at least for those who wore the armor and the brocades.

Horace leaped with avidity at the opening. Those were the days of
romance, he said, with an effort at the cooing effect in his voice. Perhaps they were not so altogether lovely as our fancy paints them;
but, all the same, it is very sweet to have the fancy. Whether it be
historically true or not, those who possess it are rich in their own
minds right. They can always escape from the grimy and commercial
conditions of this present work-a-day life. All ones finer senses can
feed, for example, on a glowing account of an old-time tournament--with
the sun shining on the armor and burnished shields, and the waving
plumes and iron-clad horses and the heralds in tabards, and the rows of
fair ladies clustered about the throne--as it is impossible to do on the
report of a meeting of a board of directors, even when they declare you
an exceptionally large dividend.

The young man kept a close watch upon this flow of words as it
proceeded, and felt satisfied with it. The young woman seemed to like it
too, for she had sunk back into her chair with an added air of ease, and
looked at him now with what he took to be a more sympathetic glance, as
she made answer:

Why, you are positively romantic, Mr. Boyce!

Me? My dear Miss Minster, I am the most sentimental person alive,
 Horace protested gayly. Dont you find that it interferes with your profession? she asked,
with that sparkle of banter in her dark eyes which he began to find so
delicious. I thought lawyers had to eschew sentiment. Or perhaps you
supply _that_, too, in this famous partnership of yours!

Horace laughed with pleasure. Would you like me the less if I admitted
it? he queried. How could I? she replied on the instant, still with the smile which
kept him from shaping a harsh interpretation of her words. But isnt
Thessaly a rather incongruous place for sentimental people? We have no
tourney-field--only rolling-mills and button-factories and furnaces; and
there isnt a knight, much less a herald in a tabard, left in the whole
village. Their places have been taken by moulders and puddlers. So what
will the minstrel do then, poor thing?

Let him come here sometimes, said the young man, in the gravely ardent
tone which this sort of situation demanded. Let him come here, and
forget that this is the nineteenth century; forget time and Thessaly
altogether.

Oh, but mamma wouldnt like that at all; I mean about your forgetting
so much. She expects you particularly to remember both time _and_
Thessaly. No, decidedly; that would never do!

The smile and the glance were intoxicating. The young man made his
plunge. But _may_ I come? His voice had become low and vibrant, and it went on
eagerly: May I come if I promise to remember everything; if I swear
to remember nothing else save what you--and your mother--would have me
charge my memory with?

We are always glad to see our friends on Tuesdays, from two to five.

But I am not in the plural, he urged, gently. We are, she made answer, still watching him with a smile, from where
she half-reclined in the easy-chair. Her face was in the shadow of the
heavier under-curtains; the mellow light gave it a uniform tint of ivory
washed with rose, and enriched the wonder of her eyes, and softened into
melting witchery the lines of lips and brows and of the raven diadem of
curls upon her forehead. Yes; in that the graces and charms of a thousand perfect women are
centred here in one, murmured Horace. It was in his heart as well as
his head to say more, but now she rose abruptly at this, with a laugh
which for the instant disconcerted him. Oh, I foresee _such_ a future for this firm of yours, she cried, with
high merriment alike in voice and face. As they both stood in the full light of the window, the young man
somehow seemed to miss that yielding softness in her face which had
lulled his sense and fired his senses in the misleading shadows of the
curtain. It was still a very beautiful face, but there was a great deal
of self-possession in it. Perhaps it would be as well just now to go no
further. We must try to live up to your good opinion, and your kindly forecast,
 he said, as he momentarily touched the hand she offered him. You cannot
possibly imagine how glad I am to have braved the conventionalities in
calling, and to have found you at home. It has transformed the rural
Sunday from a burden into a beatitude.

How pretty, Mr. Is there any message for mamma?

Oh, why did you say that? He ventured upon a tone of mock vexation. I wanted so much to go away with the fancy that this was an enchanted
palace, and that you were shut up alone in it, waiting for--

Tuesdays, from two till five, she broke in, with a bow, in the same
spirit of amiable raillery, and so he said good-by and made his way out. Horace took a long
walk before he finally turned his steps homeward, and pondered these
problems excitedly in his mind. On the whole, he concluded that he could
win her. That she was for herself better worth the winning than even for
her million, he said to himself over and over again with rapture. *****

Miss Kate went up-stairs and into the sitting-room common to the
sisters, in which Ethel lay on the sofa in front of the fire-place. She
knelt beside this sofa, and held her hands over the subdued flame of the
maple sticks on the hearth. It is so cold down in the parlor, she remarked, by way of explanation. He stayed an unconscionable while, said Ethel. What could he have
talked about? I had almost a mind to waive my headache and come down to
find out. It was a full hour.

He wouldnt have thanked you if you had, my little girl, replied Kate
with a smile. Does he dislike little girls of nineteen so much? How unique!

No; but he came to make love to the big girl; that is why.

Ethel sat bolt upright. You dont mean it! she said, with her hazel
eyes wide open. _He_ did, was the sententious reply. Kate was busy warming the backs
of her hands now. And I lay here all the while, and never had so much as a
premonition. Was it very,
_very_ funny? Make haste and tell me.

Well, it _was_ funny, after a fashion. At least, we both laughed a good
deal.

How touching! Well?

That is all. I laughed at him, and he laughed--I suppose it must have
been at me--and he paid me some quite thrilling compliments, and
I replied, Tuesdays, from two to five, like an educated
jackdaw--and--that was all.

What a romance! How could you think of such a clever answer, right on
the spur of the moment, too? But I always said you were the bright
one of the family, Kate. Perhaps ones mind works better in the cold,
anyway. But I think he _might_ have knelt down. You should have put him
close to the register. I daresay the cold stiffened his joints.

Will you ever be serious, child?

Ethel took her sisters head in her hands and turned it gently, so that
she might look into the others face. Is it possible that _you_ are serious, Kate? she asked, in tender
wonderment. The elder girl laughed, and lifted herself to sit on the sofa beside
Ethel. No, no; of course it isnt possible, she said, and put her arm about
the invalids slender waist. But hes great fun to talk to. I chaffed
him to my hearts content, and he saw what I meant, every time, and
didnt mind in the least, and gave me as good as I sent. Its such a
relief to find somebody you can say saucy things to, and be quite sure
they understand them. I began by disliking him--and he _is_ as conceited
as a popinjay--but then he comprehended everything so perfectly, and
talked so well, that positively I found myself enjoying it. And he knew
his own mind, too, and was resolved to say nice things to me, and said
them, whether I liked or not.

But _did_ you like, Kate?

No-o, I think not, the girl replied, musingly. But, all the same,
there was a kind of satisfaction in hearing them, dont you know.

The younger girl drew her sisters head down to her shoulder, and
caressed it with her thin, white fingers. You are not going to let your mind drift into anything foolish, Kate?
 she said, with a quaver of anxiety in her tone. You dont know the man. You told me so, even from what you saw of him
on the train coming from New York. You said he patronized everybody and
everything, and didnt have a good word to say for any one. Dont you
know you did? And those first impressions are always nearest the truth.

This recalled something to Kates mind. You are right, puss, she said. It _is_ a failing of his. He spoke to-day almost contemptuously of
his partner--that Mr. Tracy whom I met in the milliners shop; and that
annoyed me at the time, for I liked Mr. Tracys looks and talk very much
indeed, _I_ shouldnt call him uncouth, at all.

That was that Boyce mans word, was it? commented Ethel. Well, then,
I think that beside his partner, he is a pretentious, disagreeable
monkey--there!

Kate smiled at her sisters vehemence. At least it is an unprejudiced
judgment, she said. You dont know either of them.

But Ive seen them both, replied Ethel, conclusively. CHAPTER XX.--THE MAN FROM NEW YORK. In the great field of armed politics in Europe, every now and again
there arises a situation which everybody agrees must inevitably result
in war. Yet just when the newspapers have reached their highest state
of excitement, and sensational incidents and significant occurrences
 are crowding one another in the hurly-burly of alarmist despatches with
utmost impressiveness, somehow the cloud passes away, and the sun comes
out again--and nothing has happened. The sun did not precisely shine for Horace Boyce in the weeks which now
ensued, but at least the crisis that had threatened to engulf him was
curiously delayed. Tenney did not even ask him, on that dreaded
Monday, what decision he had arrived at. A number of other Mondays went
by, and still no demand was made upon him to announce his choice. On the
few occasions when he met his fathers partner, it was the pleasure of
that gentleman to talk on other subjects. The young man began to regain his equanimity. The February term of Oyer
and Terminer had come and gone, and Horace was reasonably satisfied with
the forensic display he had made. It would have been much better, he
knew, if he had not been worried about the other thing; but, as it was,
he had won two of the four cases in which he appeared, had got on well
with the judge, who invited him to dinner at the Dearborn House, and
had been congratulated on his speeches by quite a number of lawyers. His
foothold in Thessaly was established. Matters about the office had not gone altogether to his liking, it was
true. For some reason, Reuben seemed all at once to have become more
distant and formal with him. Horace could not dream that this arose from
the discoveries his partner had made at the milliners shop, and so put
the changed demeanor down vaguely to Reubens jealousy of his success
in court. He was sorry that this was so, because he liked Reuben
personally, and the silly fellow ought to be glad that he had such a
showy and clever partner, instead of sulking. Horace began to harbor the
notion that a year of this partnership would probably be enough for him. The Citizens Club had held two meetings, and Horace felt that the
manner in which he had presided and directed the course of action at
these gatherings had increased his hold upon the town. Nearly fifty
men had now joined the club, and next month they were to discuss the
question of a permanent habitation. They all seemed to like him
as president, and nebulous thoughts about being the first mayor of
Thessaly, when the village should get its charter, now occasionally
floated across the young mans mind. He had called at the Minster house on each Tuesday since that
conversation with Miss Kate, and now felt himself to be on terms almost
intimate with the whole household. He could not say, even to himself,
that his suit had progressed much; but Miss Kate seemed to like him, and
her mother, whom he also had seen at other times on matters of business,
was very friendly indeed. Thus affairs stood with the rising young lawyer at the beginning of
March, when he one day received a note sent across by hand from Mr. Tenney, asking him to come over at once to the Dearborn House, and meet
him in a certain room designated by number. Horace was conscious of some passing surprise that Tenney should make
appointments in private rooms of the local hotel, but as he crossed the
street to the old tavern and climbed the stairs to the apartment named,
it did not occur to him that the summons might signify that the crisis
which had darkened the first weeks of February was come again. He found Tenney awaiting him at the door, and after he had perfunctorily
shaken hands with him, discovered that there was another man inside,
seated at the table in the centre of the parlor, under the chandelier. This man was past middle-age, and both his hair and the thick, short
beard which covered his chin and throat were nearly white. Horace noted
first that his long upper lip was shaven, and this grated upon him
afresh as one of the least lovely of provincial American customs. Then
he observed that this man had eyes like Tenneys in expression, though
they were blue instead of gray; and as this resemblance came to him,
Tenney spoke:

Judge Wendover, this is the young man weve been talking about--Mr. Horace Boyce, son of my partner, the General, you know.

The mysterious New Yorker had at last appeared on the scene, then. He
did not look very mysterious, or very metropolitan either, as he rose
slowly and reached his hand across the table for Horace to shake. It was
a fat and inert hand, and the Judge himself, now that he stood up, was
seen to be also fat and dumpy in figure, with a bald head, noticeably
high at the back of the skull, and a loose, badly fitted suit of
clothes. Sit down, he said to Horace, much as if that young man had been a
stenographer called in to report a conversation. Horace took the chair
indicated, not over pleased. I havent got much time, the Judge continued, speaking apparently to
the papers in front of him. Theres a good deal to do, and Ive got to
catch that 5.22 train.

New Yorkers generally do have to catch trains, remarked Horace. So
far as I could see, the few times Ive been there of late years, that is
always the chief thing on their minds.

Judge Wendover looked at the young man for the space of a second, and
then turned to Tenney and said abruptly:

I suppose he knows how the Thessaly Mfg. How its
stocked? He pronounced the three letters with a slurring swiftness,
as if to indicate that there was not time enough for the full word
manufacturing.

Horace himself answered the question: Yes, I know. You represent two
hundred and twenty-five to my clients one hundred and seventy-five.
 The young man held himself erect and alert in his chair, and spoke
curtly. The capital is four hundred thousand dollars--all paid up. Well, we need that much more to go on.

How go on? What do you mean?

Theres a new nail machine just out which makes our plant worthless. To
buy that, and make the changes, will cost a round four hundred thousand
dollars. Get hold of that machine, and we control the whole United
States market; fail to get it, we go under. Thats the long and short of
it. Thats why we sent for you.

Im very sorry, said Horace, but I dont happen to have four hundred
thousand dollars with me just at the moment. If youd let me known
earlier, now.

The Judge looked at him again, with the impersonal point-blank stare
of a very rich and pre-occupied old man. Evidently this young fellow
thought himself a joker. Dont fool, he said, testily. Business is business, time is money. We cant increase our capital by law, but we can borrow. You havent got
any money, but the Minster women have. Its to their interest to stand
by us. Theyve got almost as much in the concern as we have. Ive seen
the widow and explained the situation to her. But
she wont back our paper, because her husband on his death-bed made her
promise never to do that for anybody. Curious prejudice these countrymen
have about indorsing notes. Business would stagnate in a day without
indorsing. Let her issue four hundred
thousand dollars in bonds on the iron-works. Thats about a third what
they are worth. Shell consent to that if you talk to her.

Oh, _thats_ where I come in, is it? said Horace. Where else did you suppose? asked the Judge, puffing for breath, as he
eyed the young man. No answer was forthcoming, and the New Yorker went on:

The interest on those bonds will cost her twenty-four thousand dollars
per year for a year or two, but it will make her shares in the Mfg. Company a real property instead of a paper asset. Besides, Ive shown
her a way to-day, by going into the big pig-iron trust that is being
formed, of making twice that amount in half the time. Now, shes going
to talk with you about both these things. Your play is to advise her to
do what Ive suggested.

Why should I? Horace put the question bluntly. Ill tell you, answered the Judge, who seemed to like this direct
way of dealing. You can make a pot of money by it. Tenney and I are not fishing with pin-hooks and thread. Weve got nets,
young man. You tie up to us, and well take care of you. When you see a
big thing like this travelling your way, hitch on to it. Thats the way
fortunes are made. And youve got a chance that dont come to one young
fellow in ten thousand.

I should think he had, put in Mr. Tenney, who had been a silent but
attentive auditor. What will happen if I decline? asked Horace. She will lose her one hundred and seventy-five thousand dollars and
a good deal more, and you will lose your business with her and with
everybody else.

And your father will lose the precious little hes got left, put in
Mr. Upon my word, you are frank, he said. Theres no time to be anything else, replied the Judge. And why
shouldnt we be? A great commercial
transaction, involving profits to everybody, is outlined before you. It happens that by my recommendation you are in a place where you can
embarrass its success, for a minute or two, if you have a mind to. But
why in Gods name you should have a mind to, or why you take up time by
pretending to be offish about it, is more than I can make out. Damn it,
sir, youre not a woman, who wants to be asked a dozen times! Youre a
man, lucky enough to be associated with other men who have their heads
screwed on the right way, and so dont waste any more time.

Oh, that reminds me, said Horace, I havent thanked you for
recommending me.

You neednt, replied the Judge, bluntly. It was Tenneys doing. I
didnt know you from a side of sole-leather. But _he_ thought you were
the right man for the place.

I hope you are not disappointed, Horace remarked, with a questioning
smile. A minute will tell me whether I am or not, the New York man exclaimed,
letting his fat hand fall upon the table. Are you with us, or against us?

At all events not against you, I should hope.

Damn the man! Hasnt he got a yes or no in him?--Tenney, youre to
blame for this, snapped Wendover, pulling his watch from the fob in his
tightened waistband, and scowling at the dial. Ill have to run, as it
is.

He rose again from his chair, and bent a sharp gaze upon Horaces face. Well, young man, he demanded, what is your answer?

I think I can see my way to obliging you, said Horace, hesitatingly. But, of course, I want to know just how I am to stand in the--

That Tenney will see to, said the Judge, swiftly. He gathered up the
papers on the table, thrust them into a portfolio with a lock on it,
which he gave to Tenney, snatched his hat, and was gone, without a word
of adieu to anybody. Great man of business, that! remarked the hardware merchant, after a
moment of silence. Horace nodded assent, but his mind had not followed the waddling figure
of the financier. It was dwelling perplexedly upon the outcome of this
adventure upon which he seemed to be fully embarked, and trying to
establish a conviction that it would be easy to withdraw from it at
will, later on. He can make millions where other men only see thousands, and they
beyond their reach, pursued Tenney, in an abstracted voice. When hes
your friend, there isnt anything you cant do; and hes as straight
as a string, too, so long as he likes a man. But hes a terror to have
agin you.

Horace sat closeted with Tenney for a long time, learning the details of
the two plans which had been presented to Mrs. Minster, and which he
was expected to support. The sharpest scrutiny could detect nothing
dishonest in them. Both involved mere questions of expediency--to loan
money in support of ones stock, and to enter a trust which was to raise
the price of ones wares--and it was not difficult for Horace to argue
himself into the belief that both promised to be beneficial to his
client. At the close of the interview Horace said plainly to his companion that
he saw no reason why he should not advise Mrs. Minster to adopt both of
the Judges recommendations. They seem perfectly straightforward, he
added. Did you expect anything else, knowing me all this while? asked Tenney,
reproachfully. CHAPTER XXI.--REUBENS MOMENTOUS FIRST VISIT. SOME ten days later, Reuben Tracy was vastly surprised one afternoon to
receive a note from Miss Minster. The office-boy said that the messenger
was waiting for an answer, and had been warned to hand the missive to no
one except him. The note ran thus:

Dear Sir: I hope very much that you can find time to call here at our
house during the afternoon. Pray ask for me, and do not mention_ to any
one_ that you are coming. _It will not seem to you, I am sure, that I have taken a liberty either
in my request or my injunction, after you have heard the explanation. Sincerely yours,_

Kate Minster. Reuben sent back a written line to say that he would come within
an hour, and then tried to devote himself to the labor of finishing
promptly the task he had in hand. It was a very simple piece of
conveyancing--work he generally performed with facility--but to-day
he found himself spoiling sheet after sheet of legal cap, by stupid
omissions and unconscious inversions of the quaint legal phraseology. His thoughts would not be enticed away from the subject of the note--the
perfume of which was apparent upon the musty air of the office, even as
it lay in its envelope before him. There was nothing remarkable in
the fact that Miss Minster wanted to see him--of course, it was with
reference to Jessicas plan for the factory-girls--but the admonition
to secrecy puzzled him a good deal. The word explanation, too, had a
portentous look. Minster had been closeted in the library with her lawyer, Mr. Horace Boyce, for fully two hours that forenoon, and afterward, in the
hearing of her daughters, had invited him to stay for luncheon. He
had pleaded pressure of business as an excuse for not accepting the
invitation, and had taken a hurried departure forthwith. Boyce had never been
asked before to the family table, and there was something pre-occupied,
almost brusque, in his manner of declining the exceptional honor and
hurrying off as he did. They noted, too, that their mother seemed
unwontedly excited about something, and experience told them that her
calm Knickerbocker nature was not to be stirred by trivial matters. So, while they lingered over the jellied dainties of the light noonday
meal, Kate made bold to put the question:

Something is worrying you, mamma, she said. Is it anything that we
know about?

Mercy, no! Mrs. Of course, Im
not worried. What an idea!

I thought you acted as if there was something on your mind, said Kate. Well, you would act so, too, if-- There Mrs. If what, mamma? put in Ethel. _We knew_ there was something.

He sticks to it that issuing bonds is not mortgaging, and, of course,
he ought to know; but I remember that when they bonded our town for the
Harlem road, father said it _was_ a mortgage, answered the mother, not
over luminously. What mortgage? Kate spoke with emphasis. We have a right
to know, surely!

However, you can see for yourself, pursued Mrs. Minster, that the
interest must be more than made up by the extra price iron will bring
when the trust puts up prices. That is what trusts are for--to put up
prices. You can read that in the papers every day.

Mother, what have you done?

Kate had pushed back her plate, and leaned over the table now, flashing
sharp inquiry into her mothers face. What have you done? she repeated. I insist upon knowing, and so does
Ethel.

Mrs. Minsters wise and resolute countenance never more thoroughly
belied the condition of her mind than at this moment. She felt that
she did not rightly know just what she had done, and vague fears as to
consequences rose to possess her soul. If I had spoken to my mother in that way when I was your age, I should
have been sent from the room--big girl though I was. Im sure I cant
guess where you take your temper from. The Mauverensens were always----

This was not satisfactory, and Kate broke into the discourse about her
maternal ancestors peremptorily:

I dont care about all that. But some business step has been taken, and
it must concern Ethel and me, and I wish you would tell us plainly what
it is.

The Thessaly Company found it necessary to buy the right of a new nail
machine, and they had to have money to do it with, and so some bonds are
to be issued to provide it. It is quite the customary thing, I assure
you, in business affairs. Only, what I maintained was that it _was_
the same as a mortgage, but Judge Wendover and Mr. Boyce insisted it
wasnt.

It is, perhaps, an interesting commentary upon the commercial education
of these two wealthy young ladies, that they themselves were unable to
form an opinion upon this debated point. Bonds are something like stocks, Ethel explained. But mortgages must be different, for they are kept
in the county clerks office. I know that, because Ella Duponts father
used to get paid fifty cents apiece for searching after them there. They must have been very careless to lose them so often.

Mrs. Minster in some way regarded this as a defence of her action, and
took heart. Well, then, I also signed an agreement which puts us into
the great combination theyre getting up--all the iron manufacturers
of Pennsylvania and Ohio and New York--called the Amalgamated Pig-Iron
Trust. I was very strongly advised to do that; and it stands to reason
that prices will go up, because trusts limit production. Surely, that is
plain enough.

You ought to have consulted us, said Kate, not the less firmly because
her advice, she knew, would have been of no earthly value. You have a
power-of-attorney to sign for us, but it was really for routine matters,
so that the property might act as a whole. In a great matter like this,
I think we should have known about it first.

But you dont know anything about it now, even when I _have_ told you!
 Mrs. Minster pointed out, not without justification for her triumphant
tone. It is perfectly useless for us women to try and understand these
things. Our only safety is in being advised by men who do know, and in
whom we have perfect confidence.

But Mr. Boyce is a very young man, and you scarcely know him, objected
Ethel. He was strongly recommended to me by Judge Wendover, replied the
mother. And pray who recommended Judge Wendover? asked Kate, with latent
sarcasm. Why, he was bom in the same town with me! said Mrs. Minster, as if
no answer could be more sufficient. My grandfather Douw Mauverensens
sister married a Wendover.

But about the bonds, pursued the eldest daughter. What amount of
money do they represent?

Four hundred thousand dollars.

The girls opened their eyes at this, and their mother hastened to add:
But it really isnt very important, when you come to look at it. It is
only what Judge Wendover calls making one hand wash the other. The money
raised on the bonds will put the Thessaly Company on its feet, and so
then that will pay dividends, and so we will get back the interest,
and more too. The bonds we can buy back whenever we choose. _I_ managed
that, because when Judge Wendover said the bonds would be perfectly
good, I said, If they are so good, why dont you take them yourself?
And he seemed struck with that and said he would. They didnt get much
the best of me there!

Somehow this did not seem very clear to Kate. If he had the money to
take the bonds, what was the need of any bonds at all? she asked. Why
didnt he buy this machinery himself?

It wouldnt have been regular; there was some legal obstacle in the
way, the mother replied. He explained it to me, but I didnt quite
catch it. At all events, there _had_ to be bonds. Even _he_ couldnt see
any way ont of _that_.

Well, I hope it is all right, said Kate, and the conversation lapsed. But upon reflection, in her own room, the matter seemed less and less
all right, and finally, after a long and not very helpful consultation
with her sister, Kate suddenly thought of Reuben Tracy. A second later
she had fully decided to ask his advice, and swift upon this rose the
resolve to summon him immediately. Thus it was that the perfumed note came to be sent. *****

Reuben took the seat in the drawing-room of the Minsters indicated by
the servant who had admitted him, and it did not occur to this member of
the firm of Tracy & Boyce to walk about and look at the pictures, much
less to wonder how many of them were of young men. Even in this dull light he could recognize, on the opposite wall, a
boyhood portrait of the Stephen Minster, Junior, whose early death had
dashed so many hopes, and pointed so many morals to the profit of godly
villagers. He thought about this worthless, brief career, as his eyes
rested on the bright, boyish face of the portrait, with the clear dark
eyes and the fresh-tinted cheeks, and his serious mind filled itself
with protests against the conditions which had made of this heir to
millions a rake and a fool. There was no visible reason why Stephen
Minsters son should not have been clever and strong, a fit master of
the great part created for him by his father. There must be some blight,
some mysterious curse upon hereditary riches here in America, thought
Reuben, for all at once he found himself persuaded that this was the
rule with most rich mens sons. Therein lay a terrible menace to the
Republic, he said to himself. Vague musings upon the possibility of
remedying this were beginning to float in his brain--the man could never
contemplate injustices, great or small, without longing to set them
right--when the door opened and the tall young elder daughter of the
Minsters entered. Reuben rose and felt himself making some such obeisance before her in
spirit as one lays at the feet of a queen. What he did in reality or
what he said, left no record on his memory. He had been seated again for some minutes, and had listened with the
professional side of his mind to most of what story she had to tell,
before he regained control of his perceptions and began to realize
that the most beautiful woman he had ever seen was confiding to him her
anxieties, as a friend even more than as a lawyer. The situation was so
wonderful that it needed all the control he had over his faculties to
grasp and hold it. Always afterward he thought of the moment in which
his confusion of mind vanished, and he, sitting on the sofa facing her
chair, was able to lean back a little and talk as if he had known her a
long time, as the turning-point in his whole life. What it was in her power to tell him about the transaction which had
frightened her did not convey a very clear idea to his mind. A mortgage
of four hundred thousand dollars had been placed upon the Minsters
property to meet the alleged necessities of a company in which they were
large owners, and their own furnaces had been put under the control of
a big trust formed by other manufacturers, presumably for the benefit of
all its members. This was what he made out of her story. On their face, he said, these things seem regular enough. The
doubtful point, of course, would be whether, in both transactions, your
interests and those of your family were perfectly safe-guarded. This is
something I can form no opinion about. Boyce must have looked
out for that and seen that you got value received.

Ah, Mr. That is just the question, Kate answered, swiftly. _Has_ he looked out for it?

Curiously enough he has never spoken with me, even indirectly, about
having taken charge of your mothers business, replied Reuben, slowly. But he is a competent man, with a considerable talent for detail, and a
good knowledge of business, as well as of legal forms. I should say you
might be perfectly easy about his capacity to guard your interests; oh,
yes, entirely easy.

It isnt his capacity that I was thinking about, said the young woman,
hesitatingly. I wanted to ask you about him himself--about the _man_.

Reuben smiled in an involuntary effort to conceal his uneasiness. They
say that no man is a hero to his valet, you know, he made answer. In
the same way business men ought not to be cross-examined on the opinions
which the community at large may have concerning their partners. Boyce
and I occupy, in a remote kind of way, the relations of husband and
wife. We maintain a public attitude toward each other of great respect
and admiration, and are bound to do so by the same rules which govern
the heads of a family. And we mustnt talk about each other. You never
would go to one of a married couple for an opinion about the other. If
the opinion were all praise, you would set it down to prejudice; if it
were censure, the fact of its source would shock you. Oh, no, partners
mustnt discuss each other. That would be letting all the bars down with
a vengeance.

He had said all this with an effort at lightness, and ended, as he had
begun, with a smile. Kate, looking intently into his face, did not smile
in response. Perhaps I was wrong to ask you, she answered, after a little pause,
and in a colder tone. You men do stand by each other so splendidly. It is why your sex possesses the earth,
and the fulness thereof.

It was easier for Reuben to smile naturally this time. But I
illustrated my position by an example of a still finer reticence, he
said; the finest one can imagine--that of husband and wife.

You are not married, I believe, Mr. Tracy, was her comment, and its
edge was apparent. No, he said, and stopped short. No other words came to his tongue, and
his thoughts seemed to have gone away into somebody elses mind, leaving
only a formless blank, over which hung, like a canopy of cloud, a
depressing uneasiness lest his visit should not, after all, turn out a
success. Then you think I have needlessly worried myself, she was saying when
he came back into mental life again. Not altogether that, either, he replied, moving in his seat, and
sitting upright like a man who has shaken himself out of a disposition
to doze. So far as you have described them, the transactions may easily
be all right. The sum seems a large one to raise for the purchase of machinery, and
it might be well to inquire into the exact nature and validity of the
purchase. As for the terms upon which you lend the money to the company,
of course Mr. In the matter of the trust, I
cannot speak at all. All such
combinations excite my anger. But as a business operation it may
improve your property; always assuming that you are capably and fairly
represented in the control of the trust. Boyce has
attended to that.

But dont you see, broke in the girl, it is all Mr. It is
to be assumed that he will do this, to be taken for granted he will
do that, to be hoped that he has done the other. _That_ is what I am
anxious about. _Will_ he do them?

And that, of course, is what I cannot tell you, said Reuben. How can
I know?

But you can find out.

The lawyer knitted his ordinarily placid brows for a moment in thought. I am afraid not, he said, slowly. I
should be very angry if the railroad people, for example, set him to
examining what I had done for them; angry with him, especially, for
accepting such a commission.

I am sorry, Mr. Tracy, if I seem to have proposed anything dishonorable
to you, Miss Kate responded, with added formality in voice and manner. I did not mean to.

How could I imagine such a thing? said Reuben, more readily than was
his wont. I only sought to make a peculiar situation clear to you, who
are not familiar with such things. If I asked him questions, or meddled
in the matter at all, he would resent it; and by usage he would be
justified in resenting it. That is how it stands.

Then you cannot help me, after all! She spoke despondingly now, with
the low, rich vibration in her tone which Reuben had dwelt so often on
in memory since he first heard it. And I had counted so much upon your
aid, she added, with a sigh. I would do a great deal to be of use to you, the young man said,
earnestly, and looked her in the face with calm frankness; a great
deal, Miss Minster, but--

Yes, but that but means everything. I repeat, in this situation you
can do nothing.

I cannot take a brief against my partner.

I should not suggest that again, Mr. I can see
that I was wrong there, and you were right.

Dont put it in that way. I merely pointed out a condition of business relations which had not
occurred to you.

And there is no other way?

Another way had dawned on Reubens mind, but it was so bold and
precipitous that he hesitated to consider it seriously at first. When
it did take form and force itself upon him, he said, half quaking at his
own audacity:

No other way--while--he remains my partner. Bright women discover many
obscure things by the use of that marvellous faculty we call intuition,
but they have by no means reduced its employment to an exact science. Sometimes their failure to discover more obvious things is equally
remarkable. At this moment, for example, Kates feminine wits did not
in the least help her to read the mind of the man before her, or the
meaning in his words. In truth, they misled her, for she heard only
an obstinate reiteration of an unpleasant statement, and set her teeth
together with impatience as she heard it. And had she even kept these teeth tight clinched, and said nothing, the
man might have gone on in self-explanation, and made clear to her her
mistake. But her vexation was too imperative for silence. I am very sorry to have taken up your time, Mr. Tracy, she said,
stiffly, and rose from her chair. I am so little informed about these
matters, I really imagined you could help us. Pray forgive me.

If Reuben could have realized, as he stood in momentary embarrassment,
that this beautiful lady before him had fairly bitten her tongue to
restrain it from adding that he might treat this as a professional call,
or in some other way suggesting that he would be paid for his time, he
might have been more embarrassed still, and angry as well. But it did not occur to him to feel annoyance--at least, toward her. He
really was sorry that no way of being of help to her seemed immediately
available, and he thought of this more in fact than he did of the
personal aspects of his failure to justify her invitation. He noted that
the faint perfume which her dress exhaled as she rose was identical with
that of the letter of invitation, and thought to himself that he would
preserve that letter, and then that it would not be quite warranted by
the circumstances, and so found himself standing silent before
her, sorely reluctant to go away, and conscious that there must be a
sympathetic light in his eyes which hers did not reflect. I am truly grieved if you are disappointed, he managed to say at last. Oh, it is nothing, Mr. Tracy, she said, politely, and moved toward
the door. It was my ignorance of business rules. I am so sorry to have
troubled you.

Reuben followed her through the hall to the outer door, wondering if she
would offer to shake hands with him, and putting both his stick and hat
in his left hand to free the other in case she did. On the doorstep she did give him her hand, and in that moment, ruled by
a flash of impulse, he heard himself saying to her:

If anything happens, if you learn anything, if you need me, you _wont_
fail to call me, will you?

Then the door closed, and as Reuben walked away he did not seem able to
recall whether she had answered his appeal or not. In sober fact, it
had scarcely sounded like his appeal at all. The voice was certainly one
which had never been heard in the law-office down on Main Street or in
the trial-chamber of the Dearborn County Court-House over the way. It
had sounded more like the voice of an actor in the theatre--like a Romeo
murmuring up to the sweet girl in the balcony. Reuben walked straight to his office, and straight through to the little
inner apartment appropriated to his private uses. There were some people
in the large room talking with his partner, but he scarcely observed
their presence as he passed. He unlocked a tiny drawer in the top of
his desk, cleared out its contents brusquely, dusted the inside with his
hand kerchief, and then placed within it a perfumed note which he took
from his pocket. When he had turned the key upon this souvenir, he drew a long breath,
lighted a cigar, and sat down, with his feet on the table and his
thoughts among the stars. CHAPTER XXII.--SAY THAT THERE IS NO ANSWER.

 Reuben allowed his mind to drift at will in this novel, enchanted
channel for a long time, until the clients outside had taken their
departure, and his cigar had burned out, and his partner had sauntered
in to mark by some casual talk the fact that the day was done. What this mind shaped into dreams and desires and pictures in its
musings, it would not be an easy matter to detail. The sum of the
revery--or, rather, the central goal up to which every differing train
of thought somehow managed to lead him--was that Kate Minster was the
most beautiful, the cleverest, the dearest, the loveliest, the most to
be adored and longed for, of all mortal women. If he did not say to himself, in so many words, I love her, it was
because the phraseology was unfamiliar to him. That eternal triplet
of tender verb and soulful pronouns, which sings itself in our more
accustomed hearts to music set by the stress of our present senses--now
the gay carol of springtime, sure and confident; now the soft twilight
song, wherein the very weariness of bliss sighs forth a blessing;
now the vibrant, wooing ballad of a graver passion, with tears close
underlying rapture; now, alas! the dirge of hopeless loss, with wailing
chords which overwhelm like curses, smitten upon heartstrings strained
to the breaking--these three little words did not occur to him. But no
lover self-confessed could have dreamed more deliciously. He had spoken with her twice now--once when she was wrapped in furs and
wore a bonnet, and once in her own house, where she was dressed in
a creamy white gown, with a cord and tassels about the waist. These
details were tangible possessions in the treasure-house of his memory. The first time she had charmed and gratified his vague notions of what a
beautiful and generous woman should be; he had been unspeakably pleased
by the enthusiasm with which she threw herself into the plan for helping
the poor work-girls of the town. On this second occasion she had been
concerned only about the safety of her own money, and that of her
family, and yet his liking for her had flared up into something very
like a consuming flame. If there was a paradox here, the lawyer did not
see it. There floated across his mind now and again stray black motes of
recollection that she had not seemed altogether pleased with him on this
later occasion, but they passed away without staining the bright colors
of his meditation. It did not matter what she had thought or said. The
fact of his having been there with her, the existence of that little
perfumed letter tenderly locked up in the desk before him, the
breathing, smiling, dark-eyed picture of her which glowed in his
brain--these were enough. Once before--once only in his life--the personality of a woman had
seized command of his thoughts. Years ago, when he was still the
schoolteacher at the Burfield, he had felt himself in love with Annie
Fairchild, surely the sweetest flower that all the farm-lands of
Dearborn had ever produced. He had come very near revealing his
heart--doubtless the girl did know well enough of his devotion--but she
was in love with her cousin Seth, and Reuben had come to realize this,
and so had never spoken, but had gone away to New York instead. He could remember that for a time he was unhappy, and even so late as
last autumn, after nearly four years had gone by, the mere thought
that she commended her protge, Jessica Lawton, to his kindness, had
thrilled him with something of the old feeling. But now she seemed all
at once to have faded away into indistinct remoteness, like the figure
of some little girl he had known in his boyhood and had never seen
since. Curiously enough, the apparition of Jessica Law-ton rose and took form
in his thoughts, as that of Annie Fairchild passed into the shadows of
long ago. She, at least, was not a schoolgirl any more, but a full-grown
woman. He could remember that the glance in her eyes when she looked at
him was maturely grave and searching. She had seemed very grateful
to him for calling upon her, and he liked to recall the delightful
expression of surprised satisfaction which lighted up her face when she
found that both Miss Minster and he would help her. They two were to work together to further and
fulfil this plan of Jessicas! Now he came to think of it, the young lady had never said a word to-day
about Jessica and the plan--and, oddly enough, too, he had never once
remembered it either. But then Miss Minster had other matters on her
mind. She was frightened about the mortgages and the trust, and anxious
to have his help to set her fears at rest. Reuben began to wonder once more what there was really in those fears. As he pondered on this, all the latent distrust of his partner which
had been growing up for weeks in his mind suddenly swelled into a great
dislike. There came to him, all at once, the recollection of those
mysterious and sinister words he had overheard exchanged between his
partner and Tenney, and it dawned upon his slow-working consciousness
that that strange talk about a game in his own hands had never been
explained by events. Then, in an instant, he realized instinctively that
here _was_ the game. It was at this juncture that Horace strolled into the presence of his
partner. He had his hands in his trousers pockets, and a cigar between
his teeth. Ferguson has been here again, he said, nonchalantly, and brought his
brother with him. He cant make up his mind whether to appeal the case
or not. Hed like to try it, but the expense scares him. I told him at
last that I was tired of hearing about the thing, and didnt give a damn
what he did, as long as he only shut up and gave me a rest.

Reuben did not feel interested in the Fergusons. He looked his partner
keenly, almost sternly, in the eye, and said:

You have never mentioned to me that Mrs. Minster had put her business
in your hands.

Horace flushed a little, and returned the others gaze with one equally
truculent. It didnt seem to be necessary, he replied, curtly. It is private
business.

Nothing was said about your having private business when the firm was
established, commented Reuben. That may be, retorted Horace. But you have your railroad affairs--a
purely personal matter. Why shouldnt I have an equal right?

I dont say you havent. What I am thinking of is your secrecy in
the matter. I hate to have people act in that way, as if I couldnt be
trusted.

Horace had never heard Reuben speak in this tone before. The whole
Minster business had perplexed and harassed him into a state of nervous
irritability these last few weeks, and it was easy for him now to snap
at provocation. At least _I_ may be trusted to mind my own affairs, he said, with
cutting niceness of enunciation and a lowering scowl of the brows. There came a little pause, for Reuben saw himself face to face with
a quarrel, and shrank from precipitating it needlessly. Perhaps the
rupture would be necessary, but he would do nothing to hasten it out of
mere ill-temper. That isnt the point, he said at last, looking up with more calmness
into the others face. I simply commented on your having taken such
pains to keep the whole thing from me. Why on earth should you have
thought that essential?

Horace answered with a question. Who told you about it? he asked, in a
surly tone. Old Squire Gedney mentioned it first. Others have spoken of it
since.

Well, what am I to understand? Do you intend to object to my keeping
the business? I may tell you that it was by the special request of my
clients that I undertook it alone, and, as they laid so much stress on
that, it seemed to me best not to speak of it at all to you.

Why?

To be frank, said Horace, with a cold gleam in his eye, I didnt
imagine that it would be particularly pleasant to you to learn that the
Minster ladies desired not to have you associated with their affairs. It
seemed one of those things best left unsaid. However, you have it now.

Reuben felt the disagreeable intention of his partners words even
more than he did their bearing upon the dreams from which he had been
awakened. He had by this time perfectly made up his mind about Horace,
and realized that a break-up was inevitable. The conviction that this
young man was dishonest carried with it, however, the suggestion that it
would be wise to probe him and try to learn what he was at. I wish you would sit down a minute or two, he said. I want to talk to
you.

Horace took a chair, and turned the cigar restlessly around in his
teeth. He was conscious that his nerves were not quite what they should
be. It seems to me, pursued Reuben--Im speaking as an older lawyer
than you, and an older man--it seems to me that to put a four hundred
thousand dollar mortgage on the Minster property is a pretty big
undertaking for a young man to go into on his own hook, without
consulting anybody. Dont think I wish to
meddle. Only it seems to me, if I had been in your place, I should have
moved very cautiously and taken advice. I did take advice, said Horace. The discovery that Reuben knew of this
mortgage filled him with uneasiness. Schuyler Tenney? asked Reuben, speaking calmly enough, but
watching with all his eyes. Horace visibly flushed, and
then turned pale. I decline to be catechised in this way, he said, nervously shifting
his position on the chair, and then suddenly rising. Gedney is a
damned, meddlesome, drunken old fool, he added, with irrelevant
vehemence. Yes, Im afraid Cal does drink too much, answered Reuben, with
perfect amiability of tone. He evinced no desire to continue the
conversation, and Horace, after standing for an uncertain moment or
two in the doorway, went out and put on his overcoat. Am I to take it that you object to my continuing to act as attorney for
these ladies? he asked from the threshold of the outer room, his voice
shaking a little in spite of itself. I dont think I have said that, replied Reuben. No, you havent _said_ it, commented the other. To tell the truth, I havent quite cleared up in my own mind just what
I do object to, or how much, said Reuben, relighting his cigar, and
contemplating his boots crossed on the desk-top. Well talk of this
again.

As you like, muttered young Mr. Then he turned, and went away
without saying good-night. Twilight began to close in upon the winters day, but Reuben still sat
in meditation. He had parted with his colleague in anger, and it was
evident enough that the office family was to be broken up; but he
gave scarcely a thought to these things. His mind, in fact, seemed by
preference to dwell chiefly upon the large twisted silken cord which
girdled the waist of that wonderful young woman, and the tasselled ends
of which hung against the white front of her gown like the beads of a
nun. Many variant thoughts about her affairs, about her future, rose in
his mind and pleasantly excited it, but they all in turn merged vaguely
into fancies circling around that glossy rope and weaving themselves
into its strands. It was very near tea-time, and darkness had established itself for the
night in the offices, before Reubens vagrant musings prompted him to
action. Upon the spur of the moment, he all at once put down his feet,
lighted the gas over his desk, took out the perfumed letter from its
consecrated resting-place, and began hurriedly to write a reply to it. He had suddenly realized that the memorable interview that afternoon had
been, from her point of view, inconclusive. Five times he worked his way down nearly to the bottom of the page,
and then tore up the sheet. At first he was too expansive; then
the contrasted fault of over-reticence jarred upon him. At last he
constructed this letter, which obtained a reluctant approval from his
critical sense, though it seemed to his heart a pitifully gagged and
blindfolded missive:

Dear Miss Minster: Unfortunately, I was unable this afternoon to see my
way to helping you upon the lines which you suggested. Matters have assumed a somewhat different aspect since our talk. By the
time that you have mastered the details of what you had on your mind, I
may be in a position to consult with you freely upon the whole subject. I want you to believe that I am very anxious to be of assistance to you,
in this as in all other things. Faithfully yours,

Reuben TRacy. Reuben locked up the keepsake note again, fondly entertaining the idea
as he did so that soon there might be others to bear it company. Then he
closed the offices, went down upon the street, and told the first idle
boy he met that he could earn fifty cents by carrying a letter at once
to the home of the Minsters. The money would be his when he returned to
the Dearborn House. Will there be any answer? asked the boy. This opened up a new idea to the lawyer. You might wait and see, he
said. But the messenger came back in a depressingly short space of time, with
the word that no answer was required. He had hurried both ways with a stem concentration of purpose, and now
he dashed off once more in an even more strenuous face against time
with the half-dollar clutched securely inside his mitten. The Great
Occidental Minstrel Combination was in town, and the boy leaped over
snowbanks, and slid furiously across slippery places, in the earnestness
of his intention not to miss one single joke. The big man whom he left went wearily up the stairs to his room, and
walked therein for aimless hours, and almost scowled as he shook his
head at the waitress who came up to remind him that he had had no
supper. *****

The two Minster sisters had read Reubens note together, in the
seclusion of their own sitting-room. They had previously discussed
the fact of his refusal to assist them--for so it translated itself
in Kates account of the interview--and had viewed it with almost
displeasure. Ethel was, however, disposed to relent when the letter came. At least it might be well to write him a polite note, she said,
thanking him, and saying that circumstances might arise under which you
would be glad to--to avail yourself, and so on.

I dont think I shall write at all, Kate replied, glancing over the
lawyers missive again. He took no interest in the thing whatever. And you see how even now he infers that the lines I suggested were
dishonorable.

I didnt see that, Kate.

Here it is. He was unable to see his way, and that sort of thing. And
he _said_ himself that the business all seemed regular enough, so far
as he could see.--Say that there is no answer, she added to the maid at
the door. The two girls sat in silence for a moment in the soft, cosey light
between the fire-place and the lace-shaded lamp. Then Ethel spoke again:

And you really didnt like him, Kate? You know you were so enthusiastic
about him, that day you came back from the milliners shop. I never
heard you have so much to say about any other man before.

That was different, mused the other. Her voice grew even less kindly,
and the words came swifter as she went on. _Then_ it was a question of
helping the Lawton girl. He didnt
hum and haw, and talk about the lines suggested to him, then. He could
see his way very clearly indeed. And
I was childish enough to be taken in by it all. I am vexed with myself
when I think of it.

Are you sure you are being quite fair, Kate? pale Ethel asked, putting
her hand caressingly on the sisters knee. He _says_ he wants to help you; and he hints, too, that something has
happened, or is going to happen, to make him free in the matter. How can
we tell what that something is, or how he felt himself bound before? It seems to me that we oughtnt to leap at the idea of his being
unfriendly. I am sure that you believed him to be a wholly good man
before. Why assume all at once now that he is not, just because--Men
dont change from good to bad like that.

Ah, but _was_ he good before, or did we only think so?

Ethel went on: Surely, he knows more about business than we do. And if
he was unable to help you, it must have been for some real reason.

That is _it!_ I should like to be helped first, and let reasons come
afterward. The girls dark eyes flashed with an imperious light. What
kind of a hero is it who, when you cry for assistance, calmly says:
Upon the lines you suggest I do not see my way? It is high time the
books about chivalry were burned, if that is the modern man.

But you did not cry to a hero for assistance. You merely asked the
advice of a lawyer about a mortgage---if mamma is right about its being
a mortgage.

It is the same thing, said Kate, pushing the hassock impatiently with
her foot.. Whether the distressed maiden falls into the water or into
debt, the principle is precisely the same.

He couldnt do what you asked, because it would be unfair to his
partner. Now, isnt that it exactly? Now,
_be_ frank, Kate.

The partner would have gone into anything headlong, asking no
questions, raising no objections, if I had so much ais lifted my finger. He never would have given, partner a thought.

Kate, confided this answer to the firelight. She was conscious of a
desire just now not to meet her sisters glance. And you like the man without scruples better than the man with them?

At least, he is more interesting, the elder girl said, still with her
eyes on the burning logs. Ethel waited a little for some additional hint as to her sisters state
of mind. When the silence had begun to make itself felt, she said:

Kate Minster, you dont mean one word of what you are saying.

Ah, but I do.

No; listen to me. Tracy very much
for his action to-day.

For being so much less eager to help me than he was to help the
milliner?

No; for not being willing to help even you by doing an unfair thing.

Well--if you like--respect, yes. But so one respects John Knox, and
Increase Mather, and St. Simon Whats-his-name on top of the pillar--all
the disagreeable people, in fact. But it isnt respect that makes the
world go round. There is such a thing as caring too much for respect,
and too little for warmth of feeling, and generous impulses, and--and so
on.

Youre a queer girl, Kate, was all Ethel could think to say. This time the silence maintained itself so long that the snapping
of sparks on the hearth, and even the rushing suction of air in the
lamp-flame, grew to be obvious noises. At last Ethel slid softly from
the couch to the carpet, and nestled her head against her sisters
waist. Kate put her arm tenderly over the girls shoulder, and drew
her closer to her, and the silence had become vocal with affectionate
mur-murings to them both. It was the younger sister who finally spoke:

You _wont_ do anything rash, Kate? Nothing without talking it over
with me? she pleaded, almost sadly. Kate bent over and kissed her twice, thrice, on the forehead, and
stroked the silken hair upon this forehead caressingly. Her own eyes
glistened with the beginnings of tears before she made answer, rising as
she spoke, and striving to import into her voice the accent of gayety:

As if I ever dreamed of doing anything at all without asking you! And
please, puss, may I go to bed now?




CHAPTER XXIII.--HORACES PATH BECOMES TORTUOUS. Tracy has found out that Im doing the Minster business, and hes cut
up rough about it. I shouldnt be surprised if the firm came a cropper
over the thing.

Horace Boyce confided this information to Mr. Schuyler Tenney on the
forenoon following his scene with Reuben, and though the language in
which it was couched was in part unfamiliar, the hardware merchant had
no difficulty in grasping its meaning. He stopped his task of going
through the mornings batch of business letters, and looked up keenly at
the young man. Found out--how do you mean? I told you to tell him--told you the day
you came here to talk about the Generals affairs.

Well, I didnt tell him.

And why? Tenney demanded, sharply. I should like to know why?

Because it didnt suit me to do so, replied the young man; just as it
doesnt suit me now to be bullied about it.

Mr. Tenney looked for just a fleeting instant as if he were going to
respond in kind. Then he thought better of it, and began toying with one
of the envelopes before him. You must have got out of the wrong side of the bed this morning, he
said, smilingly. Why, man alive, nobody dreamed of bullying you. Only,
of course, it would have been better if youd told Tracy. And you say he
is mad about it?

Yes, he was deucedly offensive. I daresay it will come to an open row. I havent seen him yet to-day, but things looked very dickey indeed for
the partnership last night.

Then the firm hasnt got any specified term to run?

No, it is terminable at pleasure of both parties, which of course means
either party.

Well, there, you can tell him to go to the old Harry, if you like.

Precisely what I mean to do--if--

If what?

If there is going to be enough in this Minster business to keep me
going in the mean while. I dont think I could take much of his regular
office business away. I havent been there long enough, you know.

Enough? I Should think there _would_ be enough! You will have five
thousand dollars as her representative in the Thessaly Manufacturing
Company. I daresay you might charge something for acting as her agent in
the pig-iron trust, too, though Id draw it pretty mild if I were you. Women get scared at bills for that sort of thing. A young fellow like
you ought to save money on half of five thousand dollars. It never cost
me fifteen hundred dollars yet to live, and live well, too.

Horace smiled in turn, and the smile was felt by both to suffice,
without words. There was no need to express in terms the fact that
in matters of necessary expense a Boyce and a Tenney, were two widely
differentiated persons. Horace had more satisfaction out
of the thought than did his companion. Oh, by the way, he added, I ought to tell you, Tracy knows in
some way that you are mixed up with me in the thing. He mentioned your
name--in that slow, ox-like way of his so that I couldnt tell how much
he knew or suspected.

Mr. Tenney was interested in this; and showed his concern by separating
the letters on his desk into little piles, as if he were preparing to
perform a card tricks:

I guess it wont matter, much, he said at last. Everybodys going
to know it pretty soon, now. He thought again for a little, and then
added: Only, on second thought, youd better stick in with him a while
longer, if you can. Make some sort of apology to him, if he needs one,
and keep in the firm. It will be better so.

Why should I, pray? demanded the young man, curtly. Tenney again looked momentarily as if he were tempted to reply with
acerbity, and again the look vanished as swiftly as it came. He answered
in all mildness:

Because I dont want Tracy to be sniffing around, inquiring into
things, until we are fairly in the saddle. He might spoil everything.

But how will my remaining with him prevent that?

You dont know your man, replied Tenney. Hes one of those fellows
who would feel in honor bound to keep his hands off, simply because you
_were_ with him. Thats the beauty of that kind of chap.

This tribute to the moral value of his partner impressed Horace but
faintly. Well, Ill see how he talks to-day, he said, doubtfully. Perhaps we can manage to hit it off together a while longer. Then a
thought crossed his mind, and he asked with abruptness:

What are you afraid of his finding out, if he does sniff around as
you call it? Everything is above board, isnt
it?

Why, you know it is. Who should know it better than you? Mr. Horace reasoned to himself as he walked away that there really was no
cause for apprehension. Tenney was smart, and evidently Wendover was
smart too, but if they tried to pull the wool over his eyes they would
find that he himself had not been born yesterday. He had done everything
they had suggested to him, but he felt that the independent and even
captious manner in which he had done it all must have shown the schemers
that he was not a man to be trifled with. Thus far he could see no
dishonesty in their plans. He had been very nervous about the first
steps, but his mind was almost easy now. He was in a position where he
could protect the Minsters if any harm threatened them. And very
soon now, he said confidently to himself, he would be in an even more
enviable position--that of a member of the family council, a prospective
son-in-law. It was clear to his perceptions that Kate liked him, and
that he had no rivals. It happened that Reuben did not refer again to the subject of
yesterdays dispute, and while Horace acquiesced in the silence, he was
conscious of some disappointment over it. It annoyed him to even look at
his partner this morning, and he was sick and tired of the partnership. It required an effort to be passing civil with Reuben, and he said to
himself a hundred times during the day that he should be heartily glad
when the Thessaly Manufacturing Company got its new machinery in, and
began real operations, so that he could take up his position there
as the visible agent of the millions, and pitch his partner and the
pettifogging law business overboard altogether. In the course of the afternoon he went to the residence of the Minsters. The day was not Tuesday, but Horace regarded himself as emancipated from
formal conditions, and at the door asked for the ladies, and then made
his own way into the drawing-room, with entire self-possession. Minster came down, he had some trivial matter of business
ready as a pretext for his visit, but her manner was so gracious that
he felt pleasantly conscious of the futility of pretexts. He was on such
a footing in the Minster household that he would never need excuses any
more. The lady herself mentioned the plan of his attending the forthcoming
meeting of the directors of the pig-iron trust at Pittsburg, and told
him that she had instructed her bankers to deposit with his bankers a
lump sum for expenses chargeable against the estate, which he could
use at discretion. You mustnt be asked to use your own money on our
business, she said, smilingly. It is only natural to warm toward people who have such nice things as
this to say, and Horace found himself assuming a very confidential,
almost filial, attitude toward Mrs. Her kindness to him was so
marked that he felt really moved by it, and in a gracefully indirect
way said so. He managed this by alluding to his own mother, who had died
when he was a little boy, and then dwelling, with a tender inflection
in his voice, upon the painful loneliness which young men feel who are
brought up in motherless homes. It seems as if I had never known a home
at all, he said, and sighed. She was one of the Beekmans from Tyre, wasnt she? Ive heard Tabitha
speak of her often, said Mrs. The words were not important,
but the look which accompanied them was distinctly sympathetic. Perhaps it was this glance that affected Horace. He made a little
gulping sound in his throat, clinched his hands together, and looked
fixedly down upon the pattern of the carpet. We should both have been better men if she had lived, he murmured,
in a low voice. As no answer came, he was forced to look up after a time, and then
upon the instant he realized that his pathos had been wasted, for Mrs. Minsters face did not betray the emotion he had anticipated. She seemed
to have been thinking of something else. Have you seen any Bermuda potatoes in the market yet? she asked. Its
about time for them, isnt it?

Ill ask my father, Horace replied, determined not to be thrown off
the trail. He has been in the West Indies a good deal, and he knows all
about their vegetables, and the seasons, and so on. It is about him that
I wish to speak, Mrs. Minster.

The lady nodded her head, and drew down the comers of her mouth a
little. I feel the homeless condition of the General very much, Horace went
on. The death of my mother was a terrible blow to him, one he has never
recovered from.

Mrs. Minster had heard differently, but she nodded her head again in
sympathy with this new view. Horace had not been mistaken in believing
that filial affection was good in her eyes. So he has lived all these years almost alone in the big house, the son
proceeded, and the solitary life has affected his spirits, weakened
his ambition, relaxed his regard for the part he ought to play in the
community. Since I have been back, he has brightened up a good deal. He
has been a most loving father to me always, and I would do anything in
the world to contribute to his happiness. It is borne in upon me more
and more that if I had a cheerful home to which he could turn for warmth
and sunshine, if I had a wife whom he could reverence and be fond of, if
there were grandchildren to greet him when he came and to play upon his
knee--he would feel once more as if there was something in life worth
living for.

Horace awaited with deep anxiety the answer to this. The General was the
worst card in his hand, one which he was glad to be rid of at any risk. If it should turn out that it had actually taken a trick in the game,
then he would indeed be lucky. If it is no offence, how old are you, Mr. I shall be twenty-eight in April.

Mrs. I never have believed in
early marriages, she said. They make more than half the trouble there
is. The Mauverensens were never great hands for marrying early. My
grandfather, Major Douw, was almost thirty, and my father was past
that age. And, of course, people married then much earlier than they do
nowadays.

I hope you do not think twenty-eight too young, Horace pleaded, with
alert eyes resting on her face. He paused only for an instant, and then,
just as the tremor arising in his heart had reached his tongue, added
earnestly, For it is a Mauverensen I wish to marry.

Mrs. Minster looked at him with no light of comprehension in her glance. It cant be our people, she said, composedly, for Anthony has no
daughters. It must be some of the Schenectady lot. Were not related at
all. They try to make out that they are, but theyre not.

You are very closely and tenderly related to the young lady I have
learned to adore, the young man said, leaning forward on his low chair
until one knee almost touched the carpet. I called her a Mauverensen
because she is worthy of that historic blood, but it was her mothers,
not her fathers name. Minster, I love your daughter Kate!

Goodness me! was the astonished ladys comment. She stared at the young man in suppliant attitude before her, in
very considerable confusion of thought, and for what seemed to him an
intolerable time. I am afraid it wouldnt do at all, she said first, doubtingly. Then
she added, as if thinking aloud: I might have known Kate was keeping
something from me. She hasnt been herself at all these last few weeks.

But she has not been keeping _this_ from you, Mrs. Minster, urged the
young man, in his softest voice. It is my own secret--all my own--kept
locked in the inner tabernacle of my heart until this very moment, when
I revealed it to you.

You mean that Kate--my daughter--does not know of this?

She must know that I worship the ground she treads on--she would be
blind not to realize that--but I have never said a word to her about it. No, not a word!

Mrs. Minster uttered the little monosyllable oh! with a hesitating,
long-drawn-out sound. It was evident that this revelation altered
matters in her mind, and Horace hurried on:

No, he said; the relation between mother and child has always seemed
to pie the most sacred thing on earth--perhaps because my own mother
died so many, many years ago. I would rather stifle my own feelings than
let an act of mine desecrate or imperil that relation. It may be that
I am old-fashioned, Mrs. Minster, the young man continued, with a
deprecatory smile, but I like the old habit of the good families--that
of deferring to the parents. I say that to them the chief courtesy and
deference are due. I know it is out of date, but I have always felt that
way. I say to you with profound respect that
you have reared the loveliest and best of all the daughters of the sons
of men, and that if you will only entertain the idea of permitting me to
strive to win her love, I shall be the proudest and happiest mortal on
earth.

Whatever might betide with the daughter, the conquest of the mother was
easy and complete. I like your sentiments very much indeed, she said, with evident
sincerity. Of course I
havent the least idea what Kate will say.

Oh, leave that to me! said Horace, with ardent confidence. Then, after
this rapturous outburst, he went on more quietly: I would beg of you
not to mention the subject to her. Your favor has allowed me to come and go here on pleasant terms of
friendship. I will not ask your daughter
to commit herself until she has had time and chance to know me through
and through. To pick a husband
is the one grand, irrevocable step in a young girls life. Its success
means bliss, content, sunshine; its failure means all that is the
reverse. Therefore, I say, she cannot have too much information, too
many advantages, to help her in her choice.

Thus it came to be understood that Mrs. Minster was to say nothing, and
was not to seem to make more of Horace than she had previously done. Then he bowed over her hand and lightly kissed it, in a fashion which
the good lady fondly assumed to be European, and was gone. Minster spent the rest of the afternoon and evening in a semi-dazed
abstraction of mental power, from time to time fitfully remembering
some wealthy young man whom she had vaguely considered as a
possible son-in-law, and sighing impartially over each mustached
and shirt-fronted figure as she pushed it out into the limbo of the
might-have-been. She almost groaned once when she recalled that this
secret must be kept even from her friend Tabitha. As for Horace, he walked on air. The marvel of his great success
surrounded and lifted him, as angels bear the souls of the blessed
fleeting from earth in the artists dream. The young Bonaparte, home
from Italy and the reproduction of Hannibals storied feat, with Paris
on its knees before him and France resounding with his name, could not
have swung his shoulders more proudly, or gazed upon unfolding destiny
with a more exultant confidence. On his way homeward an instinctive desire to be alone with his joy led
him to choose unfrequented streets, and on one of these he passed a
milliners shop which he had never seen before. He would not have noted
it now, save that his eye was unconsciously caught by some stray
freak of color in the window where bonnets were displayed. Then, still
unconsciously, his vision embraced the glass door beside this window,
and there suddenly it was arrested and turned to a bewildered stare. In the dusk of the little shop nothing could be distinguished but two
figures which stood close by the door. The dying light from the western
sky, ruddily brilliant and penetrating in its final glow, fell full upon
the faces of these two as they were framed in profile by the door. One was the face of Kate Minster, the woman he was to wed. The other was
the face of Jessica Law-ton, the woman whose life he had despoiled. Horace realized nothing else so swiftly as that he had not been seen,
and, with an instinctive lowering of the head and a quickened step, he
passed on. It was not until he had got out of the street altogether that
he breathed a long breath and was able to think. Then he found himself
trembling with excitement, as if he had been through a battle or a
burning house. Reflection soon helped his nerves to quietude again. Evidently the girl
had opened a millinery shop, and evidently Miss Minster was buying a
bonnet of her. That was all there was of it, and surely there was no
earthly cause for perturbation in that. The young man had thought so
lightly of the Law-ton incident at Thanksgiving time that it had never
since occurred to him to ask Tracy about its sequel. It came to his mind now that Tracy had probably helped her to start the
shop. Damn Tracy! he said to himself. No, there was nothing to be uneasy about in the casual, commercial
meeting of these two women. He became quite clear on this point as he
strode along toward home. At his next meeting with Kate it might do no
harm to mention having seen her there in passing, and to drop a hint as
to the character of the girl whom she was dealing with. He would see
how the talk shaped itself, after the Law-ton womans name had been
mentioned. It was a great nuisance, her coming to Thessaly, anyway. He
didnt wish her any special harm, but if she got in his way here she
should be crushed like an insect. it was silly to conceive
injury or embarrassment coming from her. So with a laugh he dismissed the subject from his thoughts, and went
home to dine with his father, and gladdened the Generals heart by
a more or less elaborated account of the days momentous event, in
complete forgetfulness of the shock he had had. In the dead of the night, however, he did think of it again with a
vengeance. He awoke screaming, and cold with frightened quakings, under
the spell of some hideous nightmare. When he thought upon them, the
terrors of his dream were purely fantastic and could not be shaped into
any kind of coherent form. But the profile of the Lawton girl seemed to
be a part of all these terrors, a twisted and elongated side-face, with
staring, empty eyes and lips down-drawn like those of the Medusas head,
and yet, strangely enough, with a certain shifting effect of beauty upon
it all under the warm light of a winter sunset. Horace lay a long time awake, deliberately striving to exorcise this
repellent countenance by fixing his thoughts upon the other face--the
strong, beautiful, queenly face of the girl who was to be his wife. But
he could not bring up before his minds eye this picture that he wanted,
and he could not drive the other away. Sleep came again somehow, and there were no more bad dreams to be
remembered. In the morning Horace did not even recall very distinctly
the episode of the nightmare, but he discovered some novel threads of
gray at his temple as he brushed his hair, and for the first time in his
life, too, he took a drink of spirits before breakfast. CHAPTER XXIV.--A VEHEMENT RESOLVE. The sloppy snow went away at last, and the reluctant frost was forced
to follow, yet not before it had wreaked its spite by softening all
the country roads into dismal swamps of mud, and heaving into painful
confusion of holes and hummocks the pavements on Thessalys main
streets. But in compensation the birds came back, and the crocus and
hyacinth showed themselves, and buds warmed to life again along the
tender silk-brown boughs and melted into the pale bright green of a
springs new foliage. Overcoats disappeared, and bare-legged boys with
poles and strings of fish dawned upon the vision. The air was laden with
the perfume of lilacs and talk about baseball. From this to midsummer seemed but a step. The factory workmen walked
more wearily up the hill in the heat to their noonday dinners;
lager-beer kegs advanced all at once to be the chief staple of freight
traffic at the railway dpt. People who could afford to take travelling
vacations began to make their plans or to fulfil them, and those who
could not began musing pleasantly upon the charms of hop-picking in
September. it was autumn, and young men added with pride
another unit to the sum of their age, and their mothers and sisters
secretly subtracted such groups or fractions of units as were needful,
and felt no more compunction at thus hoodwinking Time than if he had
been a customs-officer. The village of Thessaly, which like a horizon encompassed most of the
individuals whom we know, could tell little more than this of the months
that had passed since Thanksgiving Day, now once again the holiday
closest at hand. The seasons of rest and open-air amusement lay behind
it, and in front was a vista made of toil. There had been many deaths,
and still more numerous births, and none in either class mattered much
save under the roof-tree actually blessed or afflicted. The year had
been fairly prosperous, and the legislature had passed the bill which at
New Years would enable the village to call itself a city. Of the people with whom this story is concerned, there is scarcely more
to record during this lapse of time. Jessica Lawton was perhaps the one most conscious of change. At the
very beginning of spring, indeed on the very day when Horace had his
momentary fright in passing the shop, Miss Minster had visited her, had
brought a reasonably comprehensive plan for the Girls Resting House, as
she wanted it called, and had given her a considerable sum of money to
carry out this plan. For a long time it puzzled Jessica a good deal that
Miss Minster never came again. The scheme took on tangible form; some
score of work-girls availed themselves of its privileges, and the
result thus far involved less friction and more substantial success
than Jessica had dared to expect. It seemed passing strange that Miss
Minster, who had been so deeply enthusiastic at first, should never have
cared to come and see the enterprise, now that it was in working order. Once or twice Miss Tabitha had dropped in, and professed to be greatly
pleased with everything, but even in her manner there was an indefinable
alteration which forbade questions about the younger lady. There were rumors about in the town which might have helped Jessica to
an explanation had they reached her. The village gossips did not fail
to note that the Minster family made a much longer sojourn this year at
Newport, and then at Brick Church, New Jersey, than they had ever done
before; and gradually the intelligence sifted about that young Horace
Boyce had spent a considerable portion of his summer vacation with them. Thessaly could put two and two together as well as any other community. The understanding little by little spread its way that Horace was going
to marry into the Minster millions. If there were repinings over this foreseen event, they were carefully
dissembled. People who knew the young man liked him well enough. His
professional record was good, and he had made a speech on the Fourth
of July which pleased everybody except Squire Gedney; but then, the
spiteful old Cal never liked anybodys speeches save his own. Even
more satisfaction was felt, however, on the score of the General. His
son was a showy young fellow, smart and well-dressed, no doubt, but
perhaps a trifle too much given to patronizing folks who had not been to
Europe, and did not scrub themselves all over with cold water, and put
on a clean shirt with both collar and cuffs attached, every morning. But
for the General there was a genuine affection. It pleased Thessaly to
note that, since he had begun to visit at the home of the Minsters,
other signs of social rehabilitation had followed, and that he himself
drank less and led a more orderly life than of yore. When his intimates
jokingly congratulated him on the rumors of his sons good fortune, the
General tacitly gave them confirmation by his smile. If Jessica had heard these reports, she might have traced at once to
its source Miss Minsters sudden and inexplicable coolness. Not hearing
them, she felt grieved and perplexed for a time, and then schooled
herself into resignation as she recalled Reuben Tracys warning about
the way rich people took up whims and dropped them again, just as fancy
dictated. It was on the first day of November that the popular rumor as to
Horaces prospects reached her, and this was a day memorable for vastly
more important occurrences in the history of industrial Thessaly. The return of cold weather had been marked, among other signs of the
season, by a renewed disposition on the part of Ben Lawton to drop in
to the millinery shop, and sit around by the fire in the inner room. Ben
came this day somewhat earlier than usual--the midday meal was in its
preliminary stages of preparation under Lucindas red hands--and it was
immediately evident that he was more excited over something that had
happened outside than by his expectation of getting a dinner. Theres the very old Nick to pay down in the village! he said, as he
put his feet on the stove-hearth. Heard about it, any of you?

Ben had scarcely ascended in the social scale during the scant year that
had passed, though the general average of whiteness in his paper collars
had somewhat risen, and his hair and straggling dry-mud- beard
were kept more duly under the subjection of shears. His clothes,
too, were whole and unworn, but they hung upon his slouching and
round-shouldered figure with poor white written in every misfitting
fold and on every bagging projection. Jessica had resigned all hope that
he would ever be anything but a canal boatman in mien or ambition, but
her affection for him had grown rather than diminished; and she was glad
that Lucinda, in whom there had been more marked personal improvements,
seemed also to like him better. No, Jessica said, she had heard nothing. Well, the Minster furnaces was all shut down this morning, and so was
the work out at the ore-beds at Juno, and the men, boys, and girls in
the Thessaly Companys mills all got word that wages was going to be
cut down. You can bet theres a buzz around town, with them three things
coming all together, smack!

I suppose so, answered Jessica, still bending over her work of
cleaning and picking out some plumes. That looks bad for business this
winter, doesnt it?

Bens relations with business, or with industry generally, were of the
most remote and casual sort, but he had a lively objective interest in
the topic. Why, its the worst thing that ever happened, he said, with
conviction. Theres seven hundred men thrown out already (the figure
was really two hundred and twelve), and more than a thousand more got
to git unless theyll work for starvation wages.

It seems very hard, the girl made reply. The idea came to her that
very possibly this would put an extra strain upon the facilities and
financial strength of the Resting House. Hard! her father exclaimed, stretching his hands over the stove-top;
them rich people are harder than Pharaohs heart. What do them Minsters
care about poor folks, whether they starve or freeze to death, or
anything?

Oh, it is the Minsters, you say! Jessica looked up now, with a new
interest. Sure enough, they own the furnaces. How could they have done
such a thing, with winter right ahead of us?

Its all to make more money, put in Lucinda. Them that dont need
itll do anything to get it. That Kate Minster of
yours, for instance, shell wear her sealskin and eat pie just the same. What does it matter to her?

No; she has a good heart. I know she has, said Jessica. She wouldnt
willingly do harm to any one. But perhaps she has nothing to do with
managing such things. Yes, that must be it.

I guess Schuyler Tenney and Hod Boyce about run the thing, from what I
hear, commented the father. Tenneys been bossing around since summer
begun, and Boyce is the lawyer, so they say.

Ben suddenly stopped, and looked first at Jessica, then at Lucinda. Catching the latters eye, he made furtive motions to her to leave the
room; but she either did not or would not understand them, and continued
stolidly at her work. That Kate you spoke about, he went on stum-blingly, nodding hints at
Lucinda to go away as he spoke, shes the tall girl, with the black
eyes and her chin up in the air, aint she?

Yes, the two sisters answered, speaking together. Well, as I was saying about Hod Boyce, Ben said, and then stopped in
evident embarrassment. Finally he added, confusedly avoiding Jessicas
glance, Cindy, wont you jest step outside for a minute? I want to
tell your sister something--something you dont know about.

She knows about Horace Boyce, father, said Jessica, flushing, but
speaking calmly. There is no need of her going.

Lucinda, however, wiped her hands on her apron, and went out into the
store, shutting the door behind her. Then Ben, ostentatiously regarding
the hands he held out over the stove, and turning them as if they
had been fowls on a spit, sought hesitatingly for words with which to
unbosom himself. You see, he began, as I was a-saying, Hod Boyce is the lawyer, and
hes pretty thick with Schuyler Tenney, his fathers partner, which,
of course, is only natural; and Tenney he kind of runs the whole
thing--and--and thats it, dont you see!

You didnt send Lucinda out in order to tell me _that_, surely?

Well, no. But Hod being the lawyer, as I said, why, dont you see, he
has a good deal to say for himself with the women-folks, and hes been
off with them down to the sea-side, and so its come about that they
say--

They say what? The girl had laid down her work altogether. They say hes going to marry the girl you call Kate--the big one with
the black eyes.

The story was out. Jessica sat still under the revelation for a moment,
and held up a restraining hand when her father offered to speak further. Then she rose and walked to and fro across the little room, in front
of the stove where Ben sat, her hands hanging at her side and her brows
bent with thought. At last she stopped before him and said:

Tell me all over again about the stopping of the works--all you know
about it.

Ben Lawton complied, and re-stated, with as much detail as he could
command, the facts already exposed. The girl listened carefully, but with growing disappointment. Somehow the notion had arisen in her mind that there would be something
important in this story--something which it would be of use to
understand. But her brain could make nothing significant out of this
commonplace narrative of a lockout and a threatened dispute about wages. Gradually, as she thought, two things rose as certainties upon the
surface of her reflections. That scoundrel is to blame for both things. He advised her to avoid me,
and he advised her to do this other mischief.

I thought youd like to know, Ben put in, deferentially. He felt a
very humble individual indeed when his eldest daughter paced up and down
and spoke in that tone. Yes, Im glad I know, she said, swiftly. She eyed her father in an
abstracted way for an instant, and then added, as if thinking aloud:
Well, then, my fine gentleman, you--simply--shall--_not_--marry Miss
Minster!

Ben moved uneasily in his seat, as if this warning had been personally
addressed to him. It _would_ be pretty rough, for a fact, wouldnt it?
 he said. Well, it wont _be_ at all! she made emphatic answer. I dont know as you can do much to pervent it, Jess, he ventured to
say. _Cant_ I! she exclaimed, with grim earnestness. Wait and
see.

Ben had waited all his life, and he proceeded now to take her at her
word, sitting very still, and fixing a ruminative gaze on the side
of the little stove. All right, he said, wrapped in silence and the
placidity of contented suspense. But Jessica was now all eagerness and energy. She opened the store door,
and called out to Lucinda with business-like decision of tone: Come in
now, and hurry dinner up as fast as you can. I want to catch the 1.20
train for Tecumseh.

The other two made no comment on this hasty resolve, but during the
brief and not over-inviting meal which followed, watched their kinswoman
with side-glances of uneasy surprise. The girl herself hastened through
her dinner without a word of conversation, and then disappeared within
the little chamber where she and Lucinda slept together. It was only when she came out again, with her hat and cloak on and a
little travelling-bag in her hand, that she felt impelled to throw some
light on her intention. She took from her purse a bank-note and gave it
to her sister. Shut up the store at half-past four or five today, she said; and
there are two things I want you to do for me outside. Go around the
furniture stores, and get some kind of small sofa that will turn into a
bed at night, and whatever extra bed-clothes we need for it--as cheap as
you can. Weve got a pillow to spare, havent we? You can put those two
chairs out in the Resting House; that will make a place for the bed in
this room. You must have it all ready when I get back to-morrow night. You neednt say anything to the girls, except that I am away for a day. And then--or no: _you_ can do it better, father.

The girl had spoken swiftly, but with ready precision. As she turned now
to the wondering Ben, she lost something of her collected demeanor, and
hesitated for a moment. I want you--I want you to see Reuben Tracy, and ask him to come here at
six to-morrow, she said. She deliberated upon this for an instant, and
held out her hand as if she had changed her mind. Then she nodded, and
said: Or no: tell him I will come to his office, and at six sharp. It
will be better that way.

When she had perfunctorily kissed them both, and gone, silence fell
upon the room. Ben took his pipe out of his pocket and looked at it with
tentative longing, and then at the stove. You can go out in the yard and smoke, if you want to, but not in here,
 said Lucinda, promptly. You wouldnt dare think of such a thing if she
were here, she added, with reproach. Ben put back his pipe and seated himself again by the fire. Mighty
queer girl, that, eh? he said. When she gets stirred up, shes a
hustler, eh?

It must be she takes it from you, said Lucinda, with a modified grin
of irony. No, said Ben, with quiet candor,
she gets it from my father. He used to count on licking a lock-tender
somewhere along the canal every time he made a trip. I remember there
was one particular fellow on the Montezuma Maash that he used to
whale for choice, but any of em would do on a pinch. He was jest
blue-mouldy for a fight all the while, your grandfather was. He was
Benjamin Franklin Lawton, the same as me, but somehow I never took
much to rassling round or fighting. Its more in my line to take things
easy.

Lucinda bore an armful of dishes out into the kitchen, without making
any reply, and Ben, presently wearying of solitude, followed to where
she bent over the sink, enveloped in soap-suds and steam. I suppose youve got an idea what shes gone for? he propounded, with
caution. Its a _who_ shes gone for, said Lucinda. Pronouns were not Bens strong point, and he said, Yes, I suppose it
is, rather helplessly. He waited in patience for more information, and
by and by it came. If I was her, I wouldnt do it, said Lucinda, slapping a plate
impatiently with the wet cloth. No, I dont suppose you would. In some ways you always had more sense
than people give you credit for, Cindy, remarked the father, with
guarded flattery. Jess, now, shes one of your hoity-toity kind--flare
up and whirl around like a wheel on a tree in the Fourth of July
fireworks.

Shes head and shoulders above all the other Lawtons there ever was or
ever will be, and dont you forget it! declared the loyal Lucinda, with
fervor. Thats what I say always, assented Ben. Only--I thought you said you
didnt think she was quite right in doing what shes going to do.

Its right enough; only she was happy here, and thisll make her
miserable again--though, of course, she was always letting her mind run
on it, and perhaps shell enjoy having it with her--only the girls may
talk--and--

Lucinda let her sentence die off unfinished in a rattle of knives and
spoons in the dish-pan. Well, Cindy, said Ben, in the frankness of despair, Im dot-rotted if
I know what you are talking about. He grew pathetic as he went on: Im
your father and Im her father, and there aint neither of you got a
better friend on earth than I be; but you never tell me anything, any
moren as if I was a last years birds-nest.

Lucindas reserve yielded to this appeal. Well, dad, she said, with
unwonted graciousness of tone, Jess has gone to Tecumseh to bring
back--to bring her little boy. She hasnt told me so, but I know it.

The father nodded his head in comprehension, and said nothing. He had
vaguely known of the existence of the child, and he saw more or less
clearly the reason for this present step. The shame and sorrow which
were fastened upon his family through this grandson whom he had never
seen, and never spoken of above a whisper, seemed to rankle in his heart
with a new pain of mingled bitterness and compassion. He mechanically took out his pipe, filled it from loose tobacco in his
pocket, and struck a match to light it. objected to his smoking in the house, on account of the wares
in her shop, and let the flame burn itself out in the coal-scuttle. A
whimsical query as to whether this calamitous boy had also been named
Benjamin Franklin crossed his confused mind, and then it perversely
raised the question whether the child, if so named, would be a hustler
 or not. Ben leaned heavily against the door-sill, and surrendered
himself to humiliation. What I dont understand, he heard Lucinda saying after a time, is why
she took this spurt all of a sudden.

Its all on account of that Gawd-damned Hod Boyce! groaned Ben. Yes; you told her something about him. What was it?

Only that they all say that hes going to marry that big Minster
girl--the black-eyed one.

Lucinda turned away from the sink, threw down her dish-cloth with a
thud, and put her arms akimbo and her shoulders well back. Watching her,
Ben felt that somehow this girl, too, took after her grandfather rather
than him. Oh, _is_ he! she said, her voice high-pitched and vehement. I guess
_well_ have something to say about _that_!




CHAPTER XXV.--A VISITATION OF ANGELS. REUBEN Tracy waited in his office next day for the visit of the
milliner, but, to tell the truth, devoted very little thought to
wondering about her errand. The whole summer and autumn, as he sat now and smoked in meditation upon
them, seemed to have been an utterly wasted period in his life. Through all the interval which lay between this November day and that
afternoon in March, when he had been for the only time inside the
Minster house, one solitary set thought had possessed his mind. Long
ago it had formulated itself in his brain; found its way to the silent,
spiritual tongue with which we speak to ourselves. He loved Kate
Minster, and had had room for no other feeling all these months. At first, when this thought was still new to him, he had hugged it to
his heart with delight. Now the melancholy days indeed were come, and he
had only suffering and disquiet from it. She had never even answered his
letter proffering assistance. She was as far away from him, as coldly
unattainable, as the north star. It made him wretched to muse upon her
beauty and charm; his heart was weary with hopeless longing for her
friendship--yet he was powerless to command either mind or heart. They
clung to her with painful persistency; they kept her image before him,
whispered her name in his ear, filled all his dreams with her fair
presence, to make each wakening a fresh grief. In his revolt against this weakness, Reuben had burned the little
scented note for which so reverential a treasure-box had been made in
his desk. He could never enter that small
inner room where he now sat without glancing at the drawer which had
once been consecrated to the letter. It was humiliating that he should prove to have so little sense and
strength. He bit his cigar fiercely with annoyance when this aspect
of the case rose before him. If love meant anything, it meant a mutual
sentiment. By all the lights of philosophy, it was not possible to love
a person who did not return that love. This he said to himself over and
over again, but the argument was not helpful. Still his mind remained
perversely full of Kate Minster. During all this time he had taken no step to probe the business which
had formed the topic of that single disagreeable talk with his partner
in the preceding March. Miss Minsters failure to answer his letter had
deeply wounded his pride, and had put it out of the question that he
should seem to meddle in her affairs. He had never mentioned the subject
again to Horace. The two young men had gone through the summer and
autumn under the same office roof, engaged very often upon the same
business, but with mutual formality and personal reserve. No controversy
had arisen between them, but Reuben was conscious now that they had
ceased to be friends, as men understand the term, for a long time. For his own part, his dislike for his partner had grown so deep and
strong that he felt doubly bound to guard himself against showing it. It
was apparent to the most superficial introspection that a good deal of
his aversion to Horace arose from the fact that he was on friendly terms
with the Minsters, and could see Miss Kate every day. He never looked
at his partner without remembering this, and extracting unhappiness from
the thought. But he realized that this was all the more reason why
he should not yield to his feelings. Both his pride and his sense of
fairness restrained him from quarrelling with Horace on grounds of that
sort. But the events of the last day or two had opened afresh the former
dilemma about a rupture over the Minster works business. Since Schuyler
Tenney had blossomed forth as the visible head of the rolling-mills,
Reuben had, in spite of his pique and of his resolution not to be
betrayed into meddling, kept a close watch upon events connected with
the two great iron manufacturing establishments. He had practically
learned next to nothing, but he was none the less convinced that a
swindle underlay what was going on. It was with this same conviction that he now strove to understand the
shutting-down of the furnaces and ore-fields owned by the Minsters, and
the threatened lockout in the Thessaly Manufacturing Companys mills. But it was very difficult to see where dishonesty could come in. The
furnaces and ore-supply had been stopped by an order of the pig-iron
trust, but of course the owners would be amply compensated for that. The other companys resolve to reduce wages meant, equally of course,
a desire to make up on the pay-list the loss entailed by the closing of
the furnaces, which compelled it to secure its raw material elsewhere. Taken by themselves, each transaction was intelligible. But considered
together, and as both advised by the same men, they seemed strangely in
conflict. What possible reason could the Thessaly Company, for example,
have for urging Mrs. Minster to enter a trust, the chief purpose of
which was to raise the price of pig-iron which they themselves bought
almost entirely? He racked his brain in
futile search for the missing clew to this financial paradox. Evidently
there was such a clew somewhere; an initial fact which would explain
the whole mystery, if only it could be got at. He had for his own
satisfaction collected some figures about the Minster business, partly
exact, partly estimated, and he had worked laboriously over these in the
effort to discover the false quantity which he felt sure was somewhere
concealed. But thus far his work had been in vain. Just now a strange idea for the moment fascinated his inclination. It
was nothing else than the thought of putting his pride in his pocket--of
going to Miss Minster and saying frankly: I believe you are being
robbed. In Heavens name, give me a chance to find out, and to protect
you if I am right! I shall not even ask ever to
see you again, once the rescue is achieved. do not send me away
until then--I pray you that!

While the wild project urged itself upon his mind the man himself
seemed able to stand apart and watch this battle of his own thoughts and
longings, like an outside observer. He realized that the passion he
had nursed so long in silence had affected his mental balance. He was
conscious of surprise, almost of a hysterical kind of amusement,
that Reuben Tracy should be so altered as to think twice about such a
proceeding. Then he fell to deploring and angrily reviling the change
that had come over him; and lo! all at once he found himself strangely
glad of the change, and was stretching forth his arms in a fantasy of
yearning toward a dream figure in creamy-white robes, girdled with a
silken cord, and was crying out in his soul, I love you!

The vision faded away in an instant as there came the sound of rapping
at the outer door. Reuben rose to his feet, his brain still bewildered
by the sun-like brilliancy of the picture which had been burned into
it, and confusedly collected his thoughts as he walked across the larger
room. His partner had been out of town some days, and he had sent the
office-boy home, in order that the Lawton girl might be able to talk
in freedom. The knocking; was that of a womans hand. Evidently it was
Jessica, who had come an hour or so earlier than she had appointed. He
wondered vaguely what her errand might be, as he opened the door. In the dingy hallway stood two figures instead of one, both thickly clad
and half veiled. The waning light of late afternoon did not enable him
to recognize his visitors with any certainty. The smaller lady of the
two might be Jessica--the the who stood farthest away. He had almost
resolved that it was, in this moment of mental dubiety, when the other,
putting out her gloved hand, said to him:

I am afraid you dont remember me, it is so long since we met. Tracy--Miss Ethel Minster.

The door-knob creaked in Reubens hand as he pressed upon it for
support, and there were eccentric flashes of light before his eyes. Oh, I am _so_ glad! was what he said. Do come in--do come in. He
led the way into the office with a dazed sense of heading a triumphal
procession, and then stopped in the centre of the room, suddenly
remembering that he had not shaken hands. To give
himself time to think, he lighted the gas in both offices and closed all
the shutters. Oh, I am _so_ glad! he repeated, as he turned to the two ladies. The
radiant smile on his face bore out his words. I am afraid the little
room--my own place--is full of cigar-smoke. Let me see about the fire
here. He shook the grate vehemently, and poked down the coals through
one of the upper windows. Perhaps it will be warm enough here. Let me
bring some chairs. He bustled into the inner room, and pushed out his
own revolving desk-chair, and drew up two others from different ends of
the office. The easiest chair of all, which was at Horaces table, he
did not touch. Then, when his two visitors had taken seats, he beamed
down upon them once more, and said for the third time:

I really _am_ delighted!

Miss Kate put up her short veil with a frank gesture. The unaffected
pleasure which shone in Reubens face and radiated from his manner was
something more exuberant than she had expected, but it was grateful to
her, and she and her sister both smiled in response. I have an apology to make first of all, Mr. Tracy, she said, and her
voice was the music of the seraphim to his senses. I dont think--I am
afraid I never answered your kind letter last spring. It is a bad habit
of mine; I am the worst correspondent in the world. And then we went
away so soon afterward.

I beg that you wont mention it, said Reuben; and indeed it seemed to
him to be a trivial thing now--not worth a thought, much less a word. He
had taken a chair also, and was at once intoxicated with the rapture of
looking Kate in the face thus again, and nervous lest the room was not
warm enough. Wont you loosen your wraps? he asked, with solicitude. I am afraid
you wont feel them when you go out. It was an old formula which he had
heard his mother use with callers at the farm, but which he himself
had never uttered before in his life. But then he had never before been
pervaded with such a tender anxiety for the small comforts of visitors. Miss Kate opened the throat of her fur coat. We shant stay long,
 she said. We must be home to dinner. She paused for a moment and then
asked: Is there any likelihood of our seeing your partner, Mr. Boyce,
here to-day?

Reubens face fell on the instant. Alas, poor fool, he thought, to
imagine there were angels visits for you! No, he answered, gloomily. He is out of town.

Oh, we didnt want to see him, put in Miss Ethel. Quite the
contrary.

Reubens countenance recovered all its luminous radiance. He stole a
glance at this younger girls face, and felt that he almost loved her
too. No, Miss Kate went on, in fact, we took the opportunity of his being
away to come and try to see you alone. Tracy, about the way things are going on.

The lawyer could not restrain a comprehending nod of the head, but he
did not speak. We do not understand at all what is being done, proceeded Kate. There
is nobody to explain things to us except the men who are doing those
things, and it seems to us that they tell us just what they like. We
maybe doing them an injustice, but we are very nervous about a good many
matters. That is why we came to you.

Reuben bowed again. There was an instants pause, and then he opened one
of the little mica doors in the stove. Im afraid this isnt going
to burn up, he said. If you dont mind smoke, the other room is much
warmer.

It was not until he had safely bestowed his precious visitors in the
cosier room, and persuaded them to loosen all their furs, that his mind
was really at ease. Now, he remarked, with a smile of relief, now go
ahead. Tell me everything.

We have this difficulty, said Kate, hesitatingly; when I spoke to you
before, you felt that you couldnt act in the matter, or learn
things, or advise us, on account of the partnership. And as that still
exists--why-- She broke off with an inquiring sigh. My dear Miss Minster, Reuben answered, in a voice so firm and full
of force that it bore away in front of it all possibility of suspecting
that he was too bold, when I left you I wanted to tell you, when I
wrote to you I tried to have you understand, that if there arose a
question of honestly helping you, of protecting you, and the partnership
stood between me and that act of honorable service, I would crush the
partnership like an eggshell, and put all my powers at your disposal. But I am afraid you did not understand.

The two girls looked at each other, and then at the strong face before
them, with the focussed light of the argand burner upon it. No, said Kate, I am afraid we didnt.

And so I say to you now, pursued Reuben, with a sense of exultation
in the resolute words as they sounded on his ear, I will not allow any
professional chimeras to bind me to inactivity, to acquiescence, if
a wrong is being done to you. And more, I will do all that lies in my
power to help you understand the whole situation. And if, when it is
all mapped out before us, you need my assistance to set crooked things
straight, why, with all my heart you shall have it, and the partnership
shall go out of the window.

If you had said that at the beginning, sighed Kate. Ah, then I did not know what I know now! answered Reuben, holding her
eyes with his, while the light on his face grew ruddier. Well, then, this is what I can tell you, said the elder girl, and I
am to tell it to you as our lawyer, am I not--our lawyer in the sense
that Mr. Boyce is mammas lawyer?

Reuben bowed, and settled himself in his chair to listen. It was a long
recital, broken now by suggestions from Ethel, now by questions from the
lawyer. From time to time he made notes on the blotter before him, and
when the narrative was finished he spent some moments in consulting
these, and combining them with figures from another paper, in new
columns. Then he said, speaking slowly and with deliberation:

This I take to be the situation: You are millionnaires, and are in a
strait for money. When I say you I speak of your mother and yourselves
as one. Your income, which formerly gave you a surplus of sixty thousand
or seventy thousand dollars a year for new investments, is all at once
not large enough to pay the interest on your debts, let alone your
household and personal expenses. It came from three sources--the furnaces, the telegraph stock, and a
group of minor properties. These furnaces and iron-mines, which were all
your own until you were persuaded to put a mortgage on them, have
been closed by the orders of outsiders with whom you were persuaded to
combine. Telegraph competition has
cut down your earnings from the Northern Union stock to next to nothing. No doubt we shall find that your income from the other properties has
been absorbed in salaries voted to themselves by the men into whose
hands you have fallen. That is a very old trick, and I shall be
surprised if it does not turn up here. In the second place, you are
heavily in debt. On the 1st of January next, you must borrow money,
apparently, to pay the interest on this debt. What makes it the harder
is that you have not, as far as I can discover, had any value received
whatever for this debt. In other words, you are being swindled out of
something like one hundred thousand dollars per year, and not even such
a property as your father left can stand _that_ very long. I should say
it was high time you came to somebody for advice.

Before this terribly lucid statement the two girls sat aghast. It was Ethel who first found something to say. We never dreamed of
this, Mr. Tracy, she said, breathlessly. Our idea in coming, what we
thought of most, was the poor people being thrown out of work in the
winter, like this, and it being in some way, _our_ fault!

People _think_ it is our fault, interposed Kate. Only to-day, as we
were driving here, there were some men standing on the corner, and one
of them called out a very cruel thing about us, as if we had personally
injured him. But what you tell me--is it really as bad as that?

I am afraid it is quite as bad as I have pictured it.

And what is to be done? There must be some way to stop it, said Kate. You will put these men in prison the first thing, wont you, Mr. Who are the men who are robbing
us?

Reuben smiled gravely, and ignored the latter question. There are a
good many first things to do, he said. I must think it all over very
carefully before any step is taken. But the very beginning will be, I
think, for you both to revoke the power of attorney your mother holds
for you, and to obtain a statement of her management of the trusteeship
over your property.

She will refuse it plump! You dont know mamma, said Ethel. She couldnt refuse if the demand were made regularly, could she, Mr. He shook his head, and she went on: But it seems
dreadful not to act _with_ mamma in the matter. Just think what a
situation it will be, to bring our lawyer up to fight her lawyer! It
sounds unnatural, doesnt it? Tracy, if you were to
speak to her now--

No, that could hardly be, unless she asked me, returned the lawyer. Well, then, if I told her all you said, or you wrote it out for me to
show her.

No, nor that either, said Reuben. To speak frankly, Miss Minster,
your mother is perhaps the most difficult and dangerous element in the
whole problem. I hope you wont be offended--but that any woman in
her senses could have done what she seems to have done, is almost
incredible.

Poor mamma! commented Ethel. She never would listen to advice.

Unfortunately, that is just what she has done, broke in Kate. Tracy, tell me candidly, is it possible that the man who advised her
to do these things--or rather the two men, both lawyers, who advised
her--could have done so honestly?

I should say it was impossible, answered Reuben, after a pause. Again the two girls exchanged glances, and then Kate, looking at her
watch, rose to her feet. Tracy, she said,
offering him her hand, and unconsciously allowing him to hold it in
his own as she went on: We are both deeply indebted to you. We want
you--oh, so much!--to help us. We will do everything you say; we will
put ourselves completely in your hands, wont we, Ethel?

The younger sister said Yes, indeed! and then smiled as she furtively
glanced up into Kates face and thence downward to her hand. Kate
herself with a flush and murmur of confusion withdrew the fingers which
the lawyer still held. Then you must begin, he said, not striving very hard to conceal the
delight he had had from that stolen custody of the gloved hand,
by resolving not to say a word to anybody--least of all to your
mother--about having consulted me. You must realize that we have to
deal with criminals--it is a harsh word, I know, but there can be no
other--and that to give them warning before our plans are laid would be
a folly almost amounting to crime itself. If I may, Miss Kate--there
was a little gulp in his throat as he safely passed this perilous first
use of the familiar name--I will write to you to-morrow, outlining my
suggestions in detail, telling you what to do, perhaps something of
what I am going to do, and naming a time--subject, of course, to your
convenience--when we would better meet again.

Thus, after some further words on the same lines, the interview ended. Reuben went to the door with them, and would have descended to the
street to bear them company, but they begged him not to expose himself
to the cold, and so, with gracious adieus, left him in his office and
went down, the narrow, unlighted staircase, picking their way. On the landing, where some faint reflection of the starlight and
gas-light outside filtered through the musty atmosphere, Kate paused
a moment to gather the weaker form of her sister protectingly close to
her. Are you utterly tired out, pet? she asked. Im afraid its been too
much for you.

Oh, no, said Ethel. Only--yes, I am tired of one thing--of your
slowness of perception. Tracy has been just
burning to take up our cause ever since he first saw you. You thought
he was indifferent, and all the while he was over head and ears in love
with you! I watched him every moment, and it was written all over his
face; and you never saw it!

The answering voice fell with a caressing imitation of reproof upon the
darkness: You silly puss, you think everybody is in love with me! it
said. Then the two young ladies, furred and tippeted, emerged upon the
sidewalk, stepped into their carriage, and were whirled off homeward
under the starlight. A few seconds later, two other figures, a woman and a child, also
emerged from this same stairway, and, there being no coachman in waiting
for them, started on foot down the street. The woman was Jessica Lawton,
and she walked wearily with drooping head and shoulders, never once
looking at the little boy whose hand she held, and who followed her in
wondering patience. She had stood in the stairway, drawn up against the wall to let these
descending ladies pass. She had heard all they said, and had on the
instant recognized Kate Minsters voice. For a moment, in this darkness
suddenly illumined by Ethels words, she had reflected. Then she, too,
had turned and come down the stairs again. It seemed best, under these
new circumstances, not to see Reuben Tracy just now. And as she slowly
walked home, she almost forgot the existence of the little boy, so
deeply was her mind engaged with what she had heard. As for Reuben, the roseate dreams had all come back. From the drear
mournfulness of chill November his heart had leaped, by a fairy
transition, straight into the bowers of June, where birds sang and
fountains plashed, and beauty and happiness were the only law. It would
be time enough to-morrow to think about this great struggle with cunning
scoundrels for the rescue of a princely fortune, which opened before
him. This evening his mind should dwell upon nothing but thoughts of
_her!_

And so it happened that an hour later, when he decided to lock up the
office and go over to supper, he had never once remembered that the
Lawton girls appointment remained unkept. CHAPTER XXVI.--OVERWHELMING DISCOMFITURE. Horace Boyce returned to Thessaly the next morning and drove at
once to his fathers house. There, after a longer and more luxurious
bath than usual, he breakfasted at his leisure, and then shaved and
dressed himself with great care. He had brought some new clothes from
New York, and as he put them on he did not regret the long detour to the
metropolis, both in going to and coming from Pittsburg, which had been
made in order to secure them. The frock coat was peculiarly to his
liking. No noble dandy in all the West End of London owed his tailor for
a more perfectly fitting garment. It was not easy to decide as to the
neckwear which should best set off the admirable upper lines of this
coat, but at last he settled on a lustreless, fine-ribbed tie of white
silk, into which he set a beautiful moonstone pin that Miss Kate had
once praised. Decidedly, the _ensemble_ left nothing to be desired. Horace, having completely satisfied himself, took off the coat again,
went down-stairs in his velveteen lounging-jacket, and sought out his
father in the library, which served as a smoking-room for the two men. The General sat in one chair, with his feet comfortably disposed on
another, and with a cup of coffee on still a third at his side. He was
reading that mornings Thessaly _Banner_, through passing clouds of
cigar-smoke. Hello, youre back, are you? was his greeting to his son. I see the
whole crowd of workmen in your rolling-mills decided last night not to
submit to the new scale; unanimous, the paper says. Seen it?

No, but I guessed they would, said Horace, nonchalantly. They can all
be damned.

The General turned over his paper. Theres an editorial, he went on,
taking the workmens side, out and out. Says theres something very
mysterious about the whole business. Winds up with a hint that
steps will be taken to test the legality of the trust, and probe
the conspiracy that underlies it. Those are the words--probe the
conspiracy. Evidently, youre going to have John Fairchild in your
wool. Hes a good fighter, once you get him stirred up.

He can be damned, too, said Horace, taking a chair and lighting a
cigar. These free-trade editors make a lot of noise, but they dont
do anything else. Theyre merely blue-bottle flies on a window-pane--a
deuce of a nuisance to nervous people, thats all. Im not nervous,
myself.

The General smiled with good-humored sarcasm at his offspring. Seems
to me it wasnt so long ago that you were tarred with the same brush
yourself, he commented. Most fellows are free-traders until it touches their own pockets, or
rather until they get something in their pockets to be touched. Then
they learn sense, replied Horace. You can count them by thousands, said the General. But what of the
other poor devils--the millions of consumers who pay through the nose,
in order to keep those pockets full, eh? They never seem to learn
sense.

Horace smiled a little, and then stretched out his limbs in a
comprehensive yawn. I cant sleep on the cars as well as I used to,
 he said, in explanation. I almost wish now Id gone to bed when I got
home. I dont want to be sleepy _this_ afternoon, of all times.

The General had returned to his paper. I see theres a story afloat
that you chaps mean to bring in French Canadian workmen, when the other
fellows are locked out. I thought there was a contract labor law against
that.

Horace yawned again, and then, rising, poured out a little glassful of
spirits from a bottle on the mantel, and tossed it off. No, he said,
its easy enough to get around that. Wendover is up to all those
dodges. Besides, I think they are already domiciled in Massachusetts.

Vane Boyce laid down the paper and took off his eye-glasses. I hope
these fellows havent got you into a scrape, he remarked, eyeing his
son. I dont more than half like this whole business.

Dont you worry, was Horaces easy response. Ill take good care of myself. If it comes to dog eat dog, theyll
find my teeth are filed down to a point quite as sharp as theirs are.

Maybe so, said the father, doubtfully. But that Tenney--hes got eyes
in the back of his head.

My dear fellow, said Horace, with a pleasant air of patronage, hes a
mere child compared with Wendover. But Im not afraid of them both. Im
going to play a card this afternoon that will take the wind out of both
their sails. When that is done, Ill be in a position to lay down the
law to them, and read the riot act too, if necessary.

The General looked inquiry, and Horace went on: I want you to call for
me at the office at three, and then well go together to the Minsters. I wouldnt smoke after luncheon, if I were you. Im not going down until
afternoon. Ill explain to you what my idea is as we walk out there. Youve got some heavy father business to do.

Horace lay at his ease for a couple of hours in the big chair his father
had vacated, and mused upon the splendor of his position. This afternoon
he was to ask Kate Minster to be his wife, and of the answer he had
no earthly doubt. His place thus made secure, he had some highly
interesting things to say to Wendover and Tenney. He had fathomed
their plans, he thought, and could at the right moment turn them to his
advantage. He had not paid this latest visit to the iron magnates of
Pennsylvania for nothing. He saw that Wendover had counted upon their
postponing all discussion of the compensation to be given the Minsters
for the closing of their furnaces until after January 1, in order that
when that date came, and Mrs. Minster had not the money to pay the
half-yearly twelve thousand dollars interest on the bonds, she would be
compelled to borrow still more from him, and thus tighten the hold which
he and Tenney had on the Minster property. It was a pretty scheme, but
Horace felt that he could block it. For one thing, he was certain that
he could induce the outside trust directors to pass upon the question
of compensation long before January. And even if this failed, he could
himself raise the money which Mrs. Then he would turn around and demand an accounting from these scoundrels
of the four hundred thousand dollars employed in buying the machinery
rights, and levy upon the plant of the Thessaly Manufacturing Company,
if necessary, to secure Mrs. It became all very
clear to his mind, now he thought it over, and he metaphorically snapped
his fingers at Wendover and Tenney as he went up-stairs and once more
carefully dressed himself. The young man stopped in the hall-way as he came down and enjoyed a
comprehensive view of himself in the large mirror which was framed
by the hat-rack. The frock coat and the white effect at the neck were
excellent. The heavy fur collar of the outer coat only heightened their
beauty, and the soft, fawn-tinted sude gloves were quite as charming
in the contrast they afforded under the cuffs of the same costly fur. Horace put his glossy hat just a trifle to one side, and was too happy
even to curse the climate which made rubbers over his patent-leather
shoes a necessity. He remembered that minute before the looking-glass, in the after-time,
as the culmination of his upward career. It was the proudest, most
perfectly contented moment of his adult life. *****

There is something I want to say to you before you go.

Reuben Tracy stood at the door of a small inner office, and looked
steadily at his partner as he uttered these words. There was little doing in the law in these few dead-and-alive weeks
between terms, and the exquisitely dressed Horace, having gone through
his letters and signed some few papers, still with one of his gloves
on, had decided not to wait for his father, but to call instead at the
hardware store. I am in a bit of a hurry just now. he said, drawing on the other
glove. I may look in again before dinner. Wont it keep till then?

It isnt very long, answered Reuben. Ive concluded that the
partnership was a mistake. It is open to either of us to terminate it at
will. I wish you would look around, and let me know as soon as you see
your way to--to--

To getting out, interposed Horace. In his present mood the idea rather
pleased him than otherwise. With the greatest pleasure in the world. You have not been alone in thinking that the partnership was a mistake,
I can assure you.

Then we understand each other?

Perfectly.

And you will be back, say at--

Say at half-past five.

Half-past five be it, said Reuben, turning back again to his desk. Horace made his way across the muddy high street and found his father,
who smelt rather more of tobacco than could have been wished, but
otherwise was in complete readiness. By the way, remarked the young man, as the two walked briskly along,
Ive given Tracy notice that Im going to leave the firm. I daresay we
shall separate almost immediately. The business hasnt been by any means
up to my expectations, and, besides, I have too much already to do for
the Minster estate, and am by way, now, of having a good deal more.

Im sorry, for all that, said the General. Tracy is a first-rate,
honest, straightforward fellow. It always did me good to feel that you
were with him. To tell you the truth, my boy, he went on after a pause,
Im damnably uneasy about your being so thick with Tenney and that
gang, and separating yourself from Tracy. It has an unsafe look.

Tracy is a tiresome prig, was Horaces comment. Ive stood him quite
long enough.

The conversation turned now upon the object of their expedition,
and when this had been explained to the General, and his part in it
outlined, he had forgotten his forebodings about his sons future. That son himself, as he strode along, with his head well up and his
shoulders squared, was physically an object upon which the paternal eye
could look with entire pride. The General said to himself that he
was not only the best-dressed, but the handsomest young fellow in
all Dearborn County; and from this it was but a mental flash to the
recollection that the Boyces had always been handsome fellows, and the
old soldier recalled with satisfaction how well he himself had felt that
he looked when he rode away from Thessaly at the head of his regiment
after the firing on Fort Sumter. Minster came down alone to the drawingroom to receive her visitors,
and showed by her manner some surprise that the General accompanied his
son. I rather wanted to talk with you about what you learned at Pittsburg,
 she said, somewhat bluntly, to Horace, after conversation on ordinary
topics had begun to flag. Pray let me go into the library for a time,
I beg of you, he said, in his courtly, cheery manner. I know the way,
and I can amuse myself there till you want me; that is, he added, with
a twinkle in his eye, if you decide that you want me at all.

Mrs. She did not quite understand
what this stout, red-faced man meant by being wanted, and she was
extremely anxious to know all that her lawyer had to tell her about the
trust. What he had to tell her was eminently satisfactory. The directors
had postponed the question of how much money should be paid for the
shutting-down of the Minster furnaces, simply because it was taken
for granted that so opulent a concern could not be in a hurry about
a settlement. He was sure that he could have the affair all arranged
before December. As to other matters, he was equally confident. A year
hence she would be in vastly better condition, financially, than she
had ever been before. Then Horace began to introduce the subject nearest his heart. The family
had been excessively kind to him during the summer, he said. He had
been privileged to meet them on terms of almost intimacy, both here and
elsewhere. Every day of this delightful intercourse had but strengthened
his original desire. True to his word, he had never uttered a syllable
of what lay on his heart to Miss Kate, but he was not without confidence
that she looked upon him favorably. They had seemed always the best
of friends, and she had accepted from him attentions which must have
shadowed forth to her, at least vaguely, the state of his mind. He had
brought his father--in accordance with what he felt to be the courtesy
due from one old family to another--to formally speak with her upon the
subject, if she desired it, and then he himself, if she thought it best,
would beg for an interview with Miss Kate. Minster think it
preferable to leave this latter to the sweet arbitrament of chance? Horace looked so well in his new clothes, and talked with such fluency
of feeling, and moreover had brought such comforting intelligence
about the business troubles, that Mrs. Minster found herself at the end
smiling on him maternally, and murmuring some sort of acquiescence to
his remarks in general. Then shall I bring in my father? He asked the question eagerly, and
rising before she could reply, went swiftly to the door of the hall and
opened it. Then he stopped with abruptness, and held the door open with a hand that
began to tremble as the color left his face. A voice in the hall was speaking, and with such sharply defined
distinctness and high volume that each word reached even the mother
where she sat. _You may tell your son, General Boyce,_ said this voice, _that I will
not see him. I am sorry to have to say it to you, who have always been
polite to me, but your son is not a good man or an honest man, and I
wish never to see him again. With all my heart I wish, too, that we
never had seen him, any of us._

An indistinct sound of pained remonstrance arose outside as the echoes
of this first voice died away. Then followed a noise of footsteps
ascending the carpeted stairs, and Horaces empty, staring eyes had a
momentary vision of a womans form passing rapidly upward, away from
him. Then he stood face to face with his father--a bleared, swollen,
indignant countenance it was that thrust itself close to his--and he
heard his father say, huskily:

I am going. Let us get out of this house.

Horace mechanically started to follow. Then he remembered that he had
left his hat behind, and went back into the drawing-room where Mrs. The absence of deep emotion on her statuesque face
momentarily restored his own presence of mind. You have heard your daughter? he said, his head hanging in spite of
himself, but his eyes keeping a strenuous scrutiny upon her face. Yes: I dont know what has come over Kate, lately, remarked Mrs. Minster; she always was the most curious girl.

Curious, indeed! He choked down the sneer which tempted him, and went
on slowly: You heard what she said--that I was dishonest, wicked. Where
she has suddenly got this new view of me, doesnt matter--at least, just
at this moment. But I surely ought to ask if you--if you share it. Of
course, if I havent your confidence, why, I must lay down everything.

Oh, mercy, no! You mustnt think of it, the lady said, with animation. Im sure I dont know in the least what it all means. It makes my head
ache sometimes wondering what they will do next--Kate, especially. No,
you mustnt mind her. You really mustnt.

The young mans manner had gradually taken on firmness, as if under
a coat of ice. Minster had a
novel glitter in it now. Then I am to remain your lawyer, in spite of this, as if it hadnt
happened?

Why, bless me, yes! You must see me through this
dreadful trust business, though, as you say, it must all be better in
the end than ever before.

Good-day, Mrs. I shall continue, then, to hold myself at your
service.

He spoke with the same grave slowness, and bowed formally, as if to go. The lady rose, and of her own volition offered him her hand. Perhaps
things will alter in her mind. I am so sorry! she said. The young man permitted himself a ghostly half-smile. It is only when I
have thought it all over that I shall know whether I am sorry or not,
 he said, and bowing again he left her. Out by the gate, standing on the gravel-path wet with November rain and
strewn with damp, fallen leaves, the General waited for him. The air had
grown chill, and the sky was spreading a canopy for the night of gloomy
gray clouds. The two men, without a word, fell into step, and walked
down the street together. Horace, striding silently along with his teeth tight set, his head bowed
and full of fierce confusion of thought, and his eyes angrily fixed
on the nothing straight ahead, became, all at once, aware that his
office-boy was approaching on the sidewalk, whistling dolefully to suit
the weather, and carrying his hands in his pockets. Where are you going, Robert? the lawyer demanded, stopping the lad,
and speaking with the aggressive abruptness of a man longing to affront
all about him. Minsters, answered the boy, wondering what was up, and
confusedly taking his hands out of his pockets. What for? This second question was even more sharply put. Tracy. The boy took a letter from the inside of
his coat, and then added: I said Mrs. Minster, but the letter is for
her daughter. Im to give it to her herself.

Ill take charge of it myself, said Horace, with swift decision,
stretching out his hand. But another hand was reached forth also, and grasped the young mans
extended wrist with a vehement grip. you wont! swore the General, his face purpling with the
rush of angry blood, and his little gray eyes flashing. No, sir, you
wont! he repeated; and then, bending a momentary glance upon the boy,
he snapped out: Well, you! Go and do your
errand as you were told!

The office-boy started with a run to obey his command, and did not
slacken his pace until he had turned a corner. He had never encountered
a real general in action before, and the experience impressed him. Father and son looked in silence into each others faces for an instant. Then the father said, with something between a curse and a groan:

My God! You _are_ a damned scoundrel!

Well, however that may be, replied Horace, frowning, Im not in the
mood just now to take any cheek, least of all from you!

As the General stared at him with swelling rage in his fat face, and
quivering, inarticulate lips, his son went on in a bitter voice, from
between clinched teeth:

I owe this to you! Everything I did was done to
lift you out of the gutter, to try and make a man of you again, to put
you back into decent society--to have the name of Boyce something else
once more besides a butt for bar-keepers and factory-girls. I had you
around my neck like a mill-stone, and youve pulled me down. I hope
youre satisfied!

For a moment it seemed as if the General would fall. His thick neck grew
scarlet, his eyes turned opaque and filled with tears, and he trembled
and almost tottered on his legs. Then the fit passed as suddenly as
it had come. He threw a sweeping glance up and down the figure of his
son--taking in the elegant line of the trousers, the costly fur, the
delicate, spotless gloves, the white jewelled neckwear, the shining
hat, the hardened and angry face beneath it--and then broke boisterously
forth into a loud guffaw of contemptuous laughter. When he had laughed his fill, he turned upon his heel without a word
and walked away, carrying himself with proud erectness, and thumping his
umbrella on the sidewalk with each step as he went. CHAPTER XXVII.--THE LOCKOUT. When Thessaly awoke one morning some fortnight later, and rubbed its
eyes, and, looking again, discovered in truth that everything outside
was white, the recognition of the familiar visitor was followed by a
sigh. The children still had a noisy friendliness of greeting for the
snow, and got out their sleds and bored anticipatory holes in their
boot-heels with a thrill of old-time enthusiasm; but even their delight
became subdued in its manifestations before noon had arrived--their
elders seemed to take the advent of winter so seriously. Villagers,
when they spoke to one another that morning, noted that the voice of
the community had suddenly grown graver in tone and lower in pitch. The
threat of the approaching season weighed with novel heaviness on the
general mind. For the first time since the place had begun its manufacturing career,
Thessaly was idle. The Minster furnaces had been closed for more than
two weeks; the mills of the Thessaly Manufacturing Company, for nearly
that length of time. Half the bread-winners in the town were out of work
and saw no prospect of present employment. Usage is most of all advantageous _in_ adversity; These artisans of
Thessaly lacked experience in enforced idleness and the trick of making
bricks without straw. Employment, regular and well requited, had become
so much a matter of course that its sudden cessation now bewildered
and angered them. Each day brought to their minds its fresh train of
calamitous consequences. Children needed shoes; the flour-barrel was
nearly empty; to lay in a pig for the winter might now be impossible. The question of rent quarter loomed black and menacing like a
thunder-cloud on the horizon; and there were those with mortgages
on their little homes, who already saw this cloud streaked with the
lightning of impending tempest. Anxious housewives began to retrench at
the grocers and butchers; but the saloons and tobacco shops had almost
doubled their average of receipts. Even on ordinary holidays the American workman, bitten as he is with the
eager habitude of labor, more often than not some time during the day
finds himself close to the place where at other times he is employed. There his thoughts are: thither his steps all unconsciously bend
themselves. So now, in this melancholy, indefinite holiday which
November had brought to Thessaly, the idlers instinctively hung about
the deserted works. The tall, smokeless chimneys, the locked gates,
the grimy windows--through which the huge dark forms of the motionless
machines showed dimly, like the fossils of extinct monsters in a
museum--the dreary stretches of cinder heaps and blackened waste
which surrounded the silent buildings--all these had a cruel kind of
fascination for the dispossessed toilers. They came each day and stood lazily about in groups: they smoked in
taciturnity, told sardonic stories, or discussed their grievance, each
according to his mood; but they kept their eyes on the furnaces and
mills whence wages came no more and where all was still. There was
something in it akin in pathos to the visits a mother pays to the
graveyard where her child lies hidden from sight under the grass and the
flowers. It was the tomb of their daily avocation that these men came to
look at. But, as time went on, there grew to be less and less of the pathetic
in what these men thought and said. The sense of having been wronged
swelled within them until there was room for nothing but wrath. In a
general way they understood that a trust had done this thing to them. But that was too vague and far-off an object for specific cursing. The
Minster women were nearer home, and it was quite clear that they were
the beneficiaries of the trusts action. There were various stories told
about the vast sum which these greedy women had been paid by the trust
for shutting down their furnaces and stopping the output of iron ore
from their fields, and as days succeeded one another this sum steadily
magnified itself. The Thessaly Manufacturing Company, which concerned a much larger number
of workmen, stood on a somewhat different footing. Mechanics who knew
men who were friendly with Schuyler Tenney learned in a roundabout
fashion that he really had been forced into closing the mills by the
action of the Minster women. When you came to think of it, this seemed
very plausible. Then the understanding sifted about among the men that
the Minsters were, in reality, the chief owners of the Manufacturing
Company, and that Tenney was only a business manager and minor partner,
who had been overruled by these heartless women. All this did not make
friends for Tenney. The lounging workmen on the street comers eyed him
scowlingly when he went by, but their active hatred passed him over and
concentrated itself upon the widow and daughters of Stephen Minster. On
occasion now, when fresh rumors of the coming of French Canadian workmen
were in the air, very sinister things were muttered about these women. Before the lockout had been two days old, one of the State officers of a
labor association had visited Thessaly, had addressed a hastily convened
meeting of the ejected workmen, and had promised liberal assistance
from the central organization. He had gone away again, but two or three
subordinate officials of the body had appeared in town and were still
there. They professed to be preparing detailed information upon which
their chiefs could act intelligently. They had money in their pockets,
and displayed a quite metropolitan freedom about spending it over
the various bars. Some of the more conservative workmen thought these
emissaries put in altogether too much time at these bars, but they were
evidently popular with the great bulk of the men. They had a large fund
of encouraging reminiscence about the way bloated capitalists had been
beaten and humbled and brought down to their knees elsewhere in the
country, and they were evidently quite confident that the workers would
win this fight, too. Just how it was to be won no one mentioned, but
when the financial aid began to come in it would be time to talk about
that. And when the French Canadians came, too, it would be time--The
rest of this familiar sentence was always left unspoken, but lowering
brows and significant nods told how it should be finished. So completely did this great paralytic stroke to industry monopolize
attention, that events in the village, not immediately connected with
it, passed almost unnoticed. Nobody gave a second thought, for example,
to the dissolution of the law firm of Tracy & Boyce, much less dreamed
of linking it in any way with the grand industrial drama which engaged
public interest. Horace, at the same time, took rooms at the new brick hotel, the
Central, which had been built near the railroad depot, and opened an
office of his own a block or two lower down Main Street than the one he
had vacated. This did not attract any special comment, and when, on the
evening of the 16th of November, a meeting of the Thessaly Citizens
Club was convened, fully half those who attended learned there for the
first time that the two young lawyers had separated. The club at last had secured a building for itself--or rather the
refusal of one--and this meeting was called to decide upon ratifying
the purchase. It was held in a large upper room of the building under
discussion, which had been the gymnasium of a German Turn Verein, and
still had stowed away in its comers some of the apparatus that the
athletes had used. When Horace, as president, called the gathering to order, there were
some forty men present, representing very fairly the business and
professional classes of the village. Schuyler Tenney was there as one
of the newer members; and Reuben Tracy, with John Fairchild, Dr. Lester,
Father Chance, and others of the founders, sat near one another farther
back in the hall. The president, with ready facility, laid before the meeting the business
at hand. The building they were in could be purchased, or rented on a
reasonably extended lease. It seemed to the committee better to take it
than to think of erecting one for themselves--at least for the present. So much money would be needed: so much for furniture, so much for
repairs, etc. ; so much for heating and lighting, so much for service,
and so on--a very compact and lucid statement, indeed. A half hour was passed in more or less inconclusive discussion before
Reuben Tracy rose to his feet and began to speak. The story that he and
Boyce were no longer friends had gone the round of the room, and some
men turned their chairs to give him the closer attention with eye and
ear. Before long all were listening with deep interest to every word. Reuben started by saying that there was something even more important
than the question of the new building, and that was the question of what
the club itself meant. In its inception, the idea of creating machinery
for municipal improvement had been foremost. Certainly he and those
associated with him in projecting the original meeting had taken that
view of their work. That meeting had contented itself with an indefinite
expression of good intentions, but still had not dissented from the idea
that the club was to mean something and to do something. Now it became
necessary, before final steps were taken, to ask what that something
was to be. So far as he gathered, much thought had been given as to
the probable receipts and expenditure, as to where the card-room, the
billiard-room, the lunch-room, and so forth should be located, and as to
the adoption of all modern facilities for making themselves comfortable
in their new club-house. But about the original objects of the club
he had not heard a syllable. To him this attitude was profoundly
unsatisfactory. At the present moment, the village was laboring under
a heavy load of trouble and anxiety. Nearly if not quite a thousand
families were painfully affected by the abrupt stoppage of the
two largest works in the section. If actual want was not already
experienced, at least the vivid threat of it hung over their poorer
neighbors all about them. This fact, it seemed to him, must appeal to
them all much more than any conceivable suggestion about furnishing a
place in which they might sit about at their ease in leisure hours. He
put it to the citizens before him, that their way was made exceptionally
clear for them by this calamity which had overtaken their village. If
the club meant anything, it must mean an organization to help these poor
people who were suddenly, through no fault of their own, deprived of
incomes and employment. That was something vital, pressing, urgent;
easy-chairs and billiard-tables could wait, but the unemployed artisans
of Thessaly and their families could not. This in substance was what Reuben said; and when he had finished there
succeeded a curious instant of dead silence, and then a loud confusion
of comment. Half a dozen men were on their feet now, among them both
Tenney and John Fairchild. The hardware merchant spoke first, and what he said was not so prudent
as those who knew him best might have expected. The novel excitement of
speaking in public got into his head, and he not only used language
like a more illiterate man than he really was, but he attacked Tracy
personally for striving to foment trouble between capital and labor,
and thereby created an unfavorable impression upon the minds of his
listeners. Editor Fairchild had ready a motion that the building be taken on a
lease, but that a special committee be appointed by the meeting to
devise means for using it to assist the men of Thessaly now out of
employment, and that until the present labor crisis was over, all
questions of furnishing a club-house proper be laid on the table. He
spoke vigorously in support of this measure, and when he had finished
there was a significant round of applause. Horace rose when order had been restored, and speaking with some
hesitation, said that he would put the motion, and that if it were
carried he would appoint such a committee, but----

I said to be appointed by the meeting! called out John Fairchild,
sharply. The president did not finish his sentence, but sat down again, and
Tenney pushed forward and whispered in his ear. Two or three others
gathered sympathetically about, and then still others joined the group
formed about the president, and discussed eagerly in undertones this new
situation. I must decline to put the motion. It is out of order, answered Horace at last, as a result of this
faction conference. Then I will put it myself, cried Fairchild, rising. But I beg
first to move that you leave the chair! Horace looked with angered
uncertainty down upon the men who remained seated about Fairchild. They
were as thirty to his ten, or thereabouts. He could not stand up against
this majority. For a moment he had a fleeting notion of trying to
conciliate it, and steer a middle course, but Tenneys presence had made
that impossible. He laid down his gavel, and, gathering up his hat and
coat, stepped off the platform to the floor. There is no need of moving that, he said. Ill go without it. So far
as I am concerned, the meeting is over, and the club doesnt exist.

He led the way out, followed by Tenney, Jones the match-manufacturer,
the Rev. One or two gentlemen rose
as if to join the procession, and then thinking better of it sat down
again. By general suggestion, John Fairchild took the chair thus vacated, but
beyond approving the outlines of his plan, and appointing a committee
with Tracy at its head to see what could be done to carry it out, the
meeting found very little to do. It was agreed that this committee
should also consider the question of funds, and should call a meeting
when it was ready to report, which should be at the earliest possible
date. Then the meeting broke up, and its members dispersed, not without
well-founded apprehensions that they had heard the last of the Thessaly
Citizens Club. CHAPTER XXVIII.--IN THE ROBBERS CAVE. HORACE Boyce was too enraged to preserve a polite demeanor toward the
sympathizers who had followed him out of the hall, and who showed
a disposition to discuss the situation with him now the street was
reached. After a muttered word or two to Tenney, the young man abruptly
turned his back on the group, and walked with a hurried step down the
street toward his hotel. Entering the building, he made his way direct to the bar-room back of
the office--a place where he had rarely been before--and poured out for
himself a heavy portion of whiskey, which he drank off without noticing
the glass of iced water placed for him beside the bottle. He turned to
go, but came back again to the bar after he had reached the swinging
screen-doors, and said he would take a bottle of the liquor up to his
room. I havent been sleeping well these last few nights, he explained
to the bar-keeper. Once in his room, Horace put off his boots, got into easy coat and
slippers, raked down the fire, looked for an aimless minute or two at
the row of books on his shelf, and then threw himself into the arm-chair
beside the stove. The earlier suggestion of gray in his hair at the
temples had grown more marked these last few weeks, and there were new
lines of care on his clear-cut face, which gave it a haggard look now as
he bent his brows in rumination. An important interview with Tenney and Wendover was to take place in
this room a half hour later; but, besides a certain hard-drawn notion
that he would briskly hold his own with them, Horace did not try to form
plans for this or even to fasten his mind upon it. The fortnight or more that had passed since that terrible momentary
vision of Kate Minster running up the stairs to avoid him, had been to
the young man a period of unexampled gloominess and unrest, full of
deep wrath at the fate which had played upon him such a group of scurvy
tricks all at once, yet having room for sustained exasperation over the
minor discomforts of his new condition. The quarrel with his father had forced him to change his residence, and
this was a peculiarly annoying circumstance coming at just such a time. He realized now that he had been very comfortable in the paternal house,
and that his was a temperament extremely dependent upon well-ordered and
satisfactory surroundings. These new rooms of his, though they cost a
good deal of money, were not at all to his liking, and the service was
execrable. The sense of being at home was wholly lacking; he felt as
disconnected and out of touch with the life about him as if he had been
travelling in a foreign country which he did not like. The great humiliation and wrong--the fact that he had been rejected with
open contumely by the rich girl he had planned to marry--lay steadily
day and night upon the confines of his consciousness, like a huge black
morass with danger signals hung upon all its borders. His perverse mind
kept returning to view these menacing signals, and torturing him with
threats to disregard them and plunge into the forbidden darkness. The
constant strain to hold his thoughts back from this hateful abyss wore
upon him like an unremitting physical pain. The resolve which had chilled and stiffened him into self-possession
that afternoon in the drawingroom, and had even enabled him to speak
with cold distinctness to Mrs. Minster and to leave the house of insult
and defeat with dignity, had been as formless and unshaped as poor,
heart-torn, trembling Lears threat to his daughters before Glosters
gate. Revenge he would have--sweeping, complete, merciless, but by what
means he knew not. Two weeks were gone, and the revenge seemed measurably nearer, though
still its paths were all unmapped. It was clear enough to the young
mans mind now that Tenney and Wendover were intent on nothing less than
plundering the whole Minster estate. Until that fatal afternoon in the
drawingroom, he had kept himself surrounded with an elaborate system of
self-deception. He had pretended to himself that the designs of these
associates of his were merely smart commercial plans, which needed only
to be watched with equal smartness. He knew the men to be villains, and openly rated them as such in his
thoughts. He had a stem satisfaction in the thought that their schemes were in
his hands. He would join them now, frankly and with all his heart,
only providing the condition that his share of the proceeds should
be safe-guarded. They should have his help to wreck this insolent,
purse-proud, newly rich family, to strip them remorselessly of their
wealth. His fellow brigands might keep the furnaces, might keep
everything in and about this stupid Thessaly. He would take his share in
hard coin, and shake the mud and slush of Dearborn County from off his
feet. He was only in the prime of his youth. Romance beckoned to him
from a hundred centres of summer civilization, where men knew how to
live, and girls added culture and dowries to beauty and artistic dress. The dream of a career in his native village had brought him delight only
so long as Kate Minster was its central figure. That vision now seemed
so clumsy and foolish that he laughed at it. He realized that he had
never liked the people here about him. Even the Minsters had been
provincial, only a gilded variation upon the rustic character of the
section. Nothing but the over-sanguine folly of youth could ever have
prompted him to think that he wanted to be mayor of Thessaly, or that it
would be good to link his fortunes with the dull, under-bred place. The two men for whom he had been waiting broke abruptly in upon his
revery by entering the room. They came in without even a show of
knocking on the door, and Horace frowned a little at their rudeness. Stout Judge Wendover panted heavily with the exertion of ascending the
stairs, and it seemed to have put him out of temper as well as breath. He threw off his overcoat with an impatient jerk, took a chair, and
gruffly grunted How-de-do! in the direction of his host, without
taking the trouble to even nod a salutation. Tenney also seated himself,
but he did not remove his overcoat. Even in the coldest seasons he
seemed to wear the same light, autumnal clothes, creaseless and gray,
and mouselike in effect. The two men looked silently at Horace, and he
felt that they disapproved his velveteen coat. Well? he asked, at last, leaning back in his chair and trying to equal
them in indifference. What is new in New York, Judge?

Never mind New York! Thessaly is more in our line just now, said
Wendover, sternly. Youre welcome to my share
of the town, Im sure, he said; Im not very enthusiastic about it
myself.

How much has Reuben Tracy got to work on? How much have you blabbed
about our business to him? asked the New Yorker. I neither know nor care anything about Mr. Tracy, said Horace, coldly. As for what you elegantly describe as my blabbing to him, I daresay
you understand what it means. I dont.

It means that you have made a fool of us; got us into trouble; perhaps
ruined the whole business, by your God Amighty stupidity! Thats
what it means! said Wendover, with his little blue-bead eyes snapping
angrily in the lamplight. I hope it wont strike you as irrelevant if I suggest that this is my
room, drawled Horace, and that I have a distinct preference for civil
conversation in it. If you have any criticisms to offer upon my conduct,
as you seem to think that you have, I must beg that you couch them in
the language which gentlemen--

Gentlemen be damned! broke in the Judge, sharply. Weve had too much
gentleman in this whole business! What
does Tracy mean by his applications?

I havent the remotest idea what you are talking about. Ive already
told you that I know nothing of Mr. Tracy or his doings.

Schuyler Tenney interposed, impassively: He may not have heard of the
application, Judge. You must remember that, for the sake of appearances,
he then being in partnership, you were made Mrs. Minsters attorney, in
both the agreements. That is how notices came to be served on you.

The Judge had not taken his eyes off the young man in the velveteen
jacket. Do you mean to tell me that you havent learned from Mrs. Minster that this man Tracy has made applications on behalf of the
daughters to upset the trust agreement, and to have a receiver appointed
to overhaul the books of the Mfg. Company?

Horace sat up straight. Good God, no! he stammered. Ive heard
nothing of that.

You never do seem to hear about things. What did you suppose you were
here for, except to watch Mrs. Minster, and keep track of what was going
on? demanded Wendover. I may tell you, answered Horace, speaking hesitatingly, that
circumstances have arisen which render it somewhat difficult for me
to call upon Mrs. Minster at her house--for that matter, out of the
question. She has only been to my office office within the--the last
fortnight.

Schuyler Tenney spoke again. The circumstances means, Judge, that
he--

Pardon me, Mr. Tenney, said Horace, with decision: what the
circumstances mean is neither your business nor that of your friend. That is something that we will not discuss, if you please.

Wont we, though! burst in Wendover, peremptorily. You make a fool of
us. You go sneaking around one of the girls up there. You think youll
set yourself in a tub of butter, and let our schemes go to the devil. You get kicked out of the house
for your impudence. And then you sit here, dressed like an Italian
organ-grinder, by God, and tell me that we wont discuss the subject!

Horace rose to his feet, with all his veins tingling. You may leave
this room, both of you, he said, in a voice which he with difficulty
kept down. Judge Wendover rose, also, but it was not to obey Horaces command. Instead, he pointed imperiously to the chair which the young man had
vacated. Sit down there, he shouted. I warn you, Im in
no mood to be fooled with. You deserve to have your neck wrung for what
youve done already. If I have another word of cheek from you, by God,
it _shall_ be wrung! Well throw you on the dungheap as we would a dead
rat.

Horace had begun to listen to these staccato sentences with his arms
folded, and lofty defiance in his glance. Somehow, as he looked into his
antagonists blazing eyes, his courage melted before their hot menace. The pudgy figure of the Judge visibly magnified itself under his gaze,
and the threat in that dry, husky voice set his nerves to quaking. All right, he said, in an altered voice. Im willing enough to talk,
only a man doesnt like to be bullied in that way in his own house.

Its a tarnation sight better than being bullied by a warder in Auburn
States prison, said the Judge, as he too resumed his chair. Take my
word for that.

Schuyler Tenney crossed his legs nervously at this, and coughed. Horace
looked at them both in a mystified but uneasy silence. You heard what I said? queried Wendover, brusquely, after a moments
pause. Undoubtedly I did, answered Horace. But--but its application escaped
me.

What I mean is--the Judge hesitated for a moment to note Tenneys mute
signal of dissuasion, and then went on: We might as well not beat about
the bush--what I mean is that theres a penitentiary job in this thing
for somebody, unless we all keep our heads, and have good luck to boot. Youve done your best to get us all into a hole, with your confounded
airs and general foolishness. If worse comes to worst, perhaps we can
save ourselves, but there wont be a ghost of a chance for you. Ill see
to that myself. If we come to grief, you shall pay for it.

What do you mean? asked Horace, in a subdued tone, after a period of
silent reflection. Where does the penitentiary part come in?

I dont agree with the Judge at all, interposed Tenney, eagerly. I
dont think theres any need of looking on the dark side of the thing. We dont _know_ that Tracy knows anything. And then, why shouldnt we be
able to get our own man appointed receiver?

This is the situation, said Wendover, speaking deliberately. Minster to borrow four hundred thousand dollars for the
purchase of certain machinery patents, and you drew up the papers for
the operation. It happens that she already owned--or rather that the
Mfg. Company already owned--these identical rights and patents. They
were a part of the plant and business we put into the company at one
hundred and fifty thousand dollars when we moved over from Cadmus. But
nobody on her side, except old Clarke, knew just what it was that we put
in. He died in Florida, and it was arranged that his papers should
pass to you. There was no record that we had sold the right of the nail
machine.

Horace gazed with bewilderment into the hard-drawn, serious faces of
the two men who sat across the little table from him. In the yellow
lamplight these countenances looked like masks, and he searched them in
vain for any sign of astonishment or emotion. The thing which was now
for the first time being put into words was strange, but as it shaped
itself in his mind he did not find himself startled. It was as if he had
always known about it, but had allowed it to lapse in his memory. These
men were thieves--and he was their associate! The room with its central
point of light where the three knaves were gathered, and its deepening
shadows round about, suggested vaguely to him a robbers cave. Primary
instincts arose strong within him. Terror lest discovery should come
yielded precedence to a fierce resolve to have a share of the booty. It
seemed minutes to him before he spoke again. Then she was persuaded to mortgage her property, to buy over again at
four times its value what she had already purchased? he asked, with an
assumption of calmness. That seems to be about what you managed to induce her to do, said the
Judge, dryly. Then you admit that it was I who did it--that you owe the success of
the thing to me! The young man could not restrain his eagerness to
establish this point. He leaned over the table, and his eyes sparkled
with premature triumph. No: I said _seems_, answered Wendover. _We_
know that from the start you have done nothing but swell around at our
expense, and create as many difficulties for us and our business
as possible. But the courts and the newspapers would look at it
differently. _They_ would be sure to regard you as the one chiefly
responsible.

I should think we were pretty much in the same boat, my friend, said
Horace, coldly. I daresay, replied the New Yorker, only with this difference: we can
swim, and you cant. By that I mean, weve got money, and you havent. See the point?

Horace saw the point, and felt himself revolted at the naked selfishness
and brutality with which it was exposed. The disheartening fact that
these men would not hesitate for an instant to sacrifice him--that they
did not like him, and would not lift a finger to help him unless it was
necessary for their own salvation--rose gloomily before his mind. Still, it would be better for all of us that the boat shouldnt be
capsized at all, he remarked. Thats it--thats the point, put in Tenney, with animation; thats
what I said to the Judge.

This Tracy of yours, said Wendover, has got hold of the Minster
girls. He has been before Judge Waller with a
whole batch of applications. First, in chambers, hes brought an action
to dissolve the trust, and asked for an order returnable at Supreme
Court chambers to show cause why, in the mean time, the furnaces
shouldnt be opened. His grounds are, first, that the woman was
deceived; and second, that the trust is against public policy. Now,
it seems to me that our State courts cant issue an order binding on
a board of directors at Pittsburg. Isnt it a thing that belongs to a
United States court? How is that?

Im sure I dont know, answered Horace. Its a new question to me.

Tenney told me you knew something as a lawyer, was Wendovers angry
comment. Id like to know where it comes in.

The hardware merchant hastened to avert the threatened return to
personalities. Tell him about the receiver motion, he said. Then Tracy, before the same judge, but in special term, has applied for
a receiver for the Thessaly Mfg. Company, on the ground of fraud.

Thats the meanest thing about the whole business, commented Tenney. Well, what do you advise doing? asked Horace, despondently. There are two things, said Wendover. First, to delay everything until
after New Year, when Mrs. Minsters interest becomes due and cant be
paid. That can be done by denying jurisdiction of the State court in the
trust business, and by asking for particulars in the receiver matter. The next thing is to make Thessaly too hot for those women, and for
Tracy, too, before New Year. If a mob should smash all the widows
windows for her, for instance, perhaps burn her stable, shed be mighty
glad to get out of town, and out of the iron business, too.

But that wouldnt shut Tracy up, observed Tenney. He sticks at things
like a bull-dog, once he gets a good hold.

Im thinking about Tracy, mused the Judge. Horace found himself regarding these two visitors of his with something
like admiration. The resourcefulness and resolution of their villainy
were really wonderful. Such
men would be sure to win, if victory were not absolutely impossible. At
least, there was nothing for it but to cordially throw in his lot with
them. Whatever is decided upon, Ill do my share, he said, with decision. Upon reflection, he added: But if I share the risks, I must be clearly
understood to also share the profits.

Judge Wendover looked at the young man sternly, and breathed hard as he
looked. Upon my word, he growled at last, youre the cheekiest young
cub Ive seen since before the war!

Horace stood to his guns. However that may be, he said, you see what
I mean. This is a highly opportune time, it strikes me, to discover just
how I stand in this matter.

Youll stand where youre put, or it will be the worse for you!

Surely, Schuyler Tenney interposed, you ought to have confidence that
we will do the fair thing.

My bosom may be simply overflowing with confidence in you both--Horace
ventured upon a suggestion of irony in his intonation--but experience
seems to indicate the additional desirability of an understanding. If you will think it over, I daresay you will gather the force of my
remark.

The New Yorker seemed not to have heard the remark, much less to have
understood it. He addressed the middle space between Horace and Tenney
in a meditative way: Those two speech-making fellows who are here from
the Amalgamated Confederation of Labor, or whatever it is, can both be
had to kick up a row whenever we like. They
notified me that they were coming here ten days ago. We can tell them
to keep their hands off the Canadians when they come next week, and
lead their crowd instead up to the Minster house. Well go over that
together, Tenney, later on. But about Tracy--perhaps these fellows
might--

Wendover followed up the train of this thought in silence, with a
ruminative eye on vacancy. What I was saying, insisted Horace, was that I wanted to know just
how I stand.

I suppose its out of the question to square Tracy, pursued Wendover,
thinking aloud, and that Judge Waller that hes applied to, hes just
another such an impracticable cuss. Theres no security for business at
all, when such fellows have the power to muddle and interfere with it. Tenney, _you_ know this Tracy. Why cant you think of something?

As I remarked before, Horace interposed once more, what am I to get
out of this thing?

This time the New Yorker heard him. He slowly turned his round,
white-framed face toward the speaker, and fixed upon him a penetrating
glance of wrath, suspicion, and dislike. Oh, _that_ is what you want to know, is it? he said, abruptly, after a
momentary silence. Well, sir, if you had your deserts, youd get
about seven years hard labor. As it is, youve had over seven thousand
dollars out of the concern, and youve done seven hundred thousand
dollars worth of damage. If you can make a speech before Judge Waller
this week that will stave off all these things until after New Years,
perhaps I may forgive you some of the annoyance and loss your infernal
idiocy and self-conceit have caused us. When youve done that, it will
be time enough to talk to me about giving you another chance to keep
your salary. You never made a bigger mistake
in your life than in thinking you could dictate terms to Peter Wendover,
now or any other time! Why, you poor empty-headed creature, who do you
suppose _you_ could frighten? Youre as helpless as a June-bug in a
cistern with the curb shut down.

The Judge had risen while speaking, and put on his overcoat. He took his
hat now, and glanced to note that Tenney was also on his feet. Then he
added these further words to the young man, whose head was drooping in
spite of himself, and whose figure had sunk into a crouching posture in
the easy-chair:

Let me give you some advice. Take precious good care not to annoy me
any more while this business is on. It was Tenney who picked you out, and who thought you could be useful. I didnt believe in you from the start. Now that Ive summered and
wintered you, I stand amazed, by God! that I could ever have let you get
mixed up in my affairs. But here you are, and it will be easier for us
to put up with you, and carry you along, than throw you out. Besides,
you may be able to do some good, if what Ive said puts any sense into
your head. But dont run away with the idea that you are necessary to
us, or that you are going to share anything, as you call it, or that you
can so much as lift your finger against us without first of all crushing
yourself. This is plain talk, and it may help you to size yourself up as
you really are. According to your own notion of yourself, God Almightys
overcoat would have about made you a vest. My idee of you is different,
you see, and Im a good deal nearer right than you are. Ill send the
papers over to you to-morrow, and let us see what you will do with
them.

The New York magnate turned on his heel at this, and, without any word
of adieu, he and Tenney left the room. Horace sat until long after midnight in his chair, with the bottle
before him, half-dazed and overwhelmed amidst the shapeless ruins of his
ambition. CHAPTER XXIX.--THE MISTS CLEARING AWAY. REUBEN Tracy rose at an unwontedly early hour next morning, under the
spur of consciousness that he had a very busy day before him. While he
was still at his breakfast in the hotel dining-room, John Fairchild came
to keep an appointment made the previous evening, and the two men were
out on the streets together before Thessaly seemed wholly awake. Their first visit was to the owner of the building which the Citizens
Club had thought of hiring, and their business here was promptly
despatched; thence they made their way to the house of a boss-carpenter,
and within the hour they had called upon a plumber, a painter, and one
or two other master artisans. By ten oclock those of this number with
whom arrangements had been made had put in an appearance at the building
in question, and Tracy and Fairchild explained to them the plans which
they were to carry out. The discussion and settlement of these consumed
the time until noon, when the lawyer and the editor separated, and
Reuben went to his office. Here, as had been arranged, he found old Squire Gedney waiting
for him. A long interview behind the closed door of the inner office
followed, and when the two men came out the justice of the peace was
putting a roll of bills into his pocket. This is Tuesday, he said to Tracy. I daresay I can be back by
Thursday. The bother about it is that Cadmus is such an out-of-the-way
place to get at.

At all events, Ill count on seeing you Friday morning, answered
Reuben. Then, if youve got what I expect, we can go before the county
judge and get our warrants by Saturday, and that will be in plenty of
time for the grand jury next week.

If they dont all eat their Christmas dinner in Auburn prison, call me
a Dutchman! was Gedneys confident remark, as he took his departure. Reuben, thus left alone, walked up and down the larger room in
pleased excitement, his hands in his pockets and his eyes aglow with
satisfaction. So all-pervasive was his delight that it impelled him
to song, and he hummed to himself as he paced the floor a faulty
recollection of a tune his mother had been fond of, many years before. Reuben had no memory for music, and knew neither the words nor the air,
but no winged outburst of exultation from a triumphant Viking in the
opera could have reflected a more jubilant mood. He had unearthed the conspiracy, seized upon its avenues of escape,
laboriously traced all its subterranean burrowings. Even without the
proof which it was to be hoped that Gedney could bring from Cadmus,
Reuben believed he had information enough to justify criminal
proceedings. Nothing could be clearer than guilty collusion between this
New Yorker, Wendover, and some of the heads of the pig-iron trust to rob
Mrs. At almost every turn and corner in the
ramification of the huge swindle, Tenney and Boyce also appeared. Reuben Tracy was the softest-hearted of men, but
it did not occur to him to relent when he thought of his late partner. To the contrary, there was a decided pleasure in the reflection that
nothing could avert well-merited punishment from this particular young
man. The triumph had its splendid public side, moreover. Great and lasting
good must follow such an exposure as he would make of the economic and
social evils underlying the system of trusts. A staggering blow would be
dealt to the system, and to the sentiment back of it that rich men might
do what they liked in America. With pardonable pride he thrilled at the
thought that his arm was to strike this blow. The effect would be felt
all over the country. It could not but affect public opinion, too, on
the subject of the tariff--that bomb-proof cover under which these
men had conducted their knavish operations. Reuben sang with increased
fervor as this passed through his mind. On his way back from luncheon--which he still thought of as
dinner--Reuben Tracy stopped for a few moments at the building he and
Fairchild had rented. The carpenters were already at work, ripping down
the partitions on the ground floor, in a choking and clamorous confusion
of dust and sound of hammering. The visible energy of these workmen and
the noise they made were like a sympathetic continuation of his song of
success. He would have enjoyed staying for hours, watching and listening
to these proofs that he at last was doing something to help move the
world around. When he came out upon the street again, it was to turn his steps to the
house of the Minsters. He had not been there since his visit in March,
and there was a certain embarrassment about his going now. Minsters house, and he had been put in the position of acting
against her, as counsel for her daughters. It was therefore a somewhat
delicate business. But Miss Kate had asked him to come, and he would
be sincerely glad of the opportunity of telling Mrs. Minster the whole
truth, if she would listen to it. Just what form this opportunity might
take he could not foresee; but his duty was so clear, and his arguments
must carry such absolute conviction, that he approached the ordeal with
a light heart. Miss Kate came down into the drawing-room to receive him, and Reuben
noted with a deep joy that she again wore the loose robe of creamy
cloth, girdled by that same enchanted rope of shining white silk. Something made him feel, too, that she observed the pleased glance of
recognition he bestowed upon her garments, and understood it, and
was not vexed. Their relations had been distinctly cordial--even
confidential--for the past fortnight; but the reappearance of this
sanctified and symbolical gown--this mystical robe which he had
enshrined in his heart with incense and candles and solemn veneration,
as does the Latin devotee with the jewelled dress of the Bambino--seemed
of itself to establish a far more tender intimacy between them. He
became conscious, all at once, that she knew of his love. I have asked mamma to see you, she said, when they were seated, and
I think she will. Since it was first suggested to her, she has wavered a
good deal, sometimes consenting, sometimes not. The poor lady is almost
distracted with the trouble in which we have all become involved, and
that makes it all the more difficult for her to see things in their
proper connection. I hope you may be able to show her just how matters
stand, and who her real friends are.

The girl left at this, and in a few moments reappeared with her mother,
to whom she formally presented Mr. Minster had suffered great mental anguish since the troubles
came on, her countenance gave no hint of the fact. It was as regular and
imperturbable and deceptively impressive as ever, and she bore herself
with perfect self-possession, bowing with frosty precision, and seating
herself in silence. Reuben himself began the talk by explaining that the steps which he had
felt himself compelled to take in the interest of the daughters implied
not the slightest hostility to the mother. They had had, in fact, the
ultimate aim of helping her as well. He had satisfied himself that she
was in the clutch of a criminal conspiracy to despoil her estate
and that of her daughters. It was absolutely necessary to act
with promptness, and, as he was not her lawyer, to temporarily and
technically separate the interest of her daughters from her own, for
legal purposes. All that had been done was, however, quite as much to
her advantage as to that of her daughters, and when he had explained to
her the entire situation he felt sure she would be willing to allow him
to represent her as well as her daughters in the effort to protect the
property and defeat the conspiracy. Minster offered no comment upon this expression of confidence, and
Reuben went on to lay before her the whole history of the case. He
did this with great clearness--as if he had been talking to a
child--pointing out to her how the scheme of plunder originated, where
its first operations revealed themselves, and what part in turn each of
the three conspirators had played. She listened to it all with an expressionless face, and though she must
have been startled and shocked by a good deal of it, Reuben could gather
no indication from her manner of her feelings or her opinions. When he
had finished, and his continued silence rendered it clear that he was
not going to say any more, she made her first remark. Im much obliged to you, Im sure, she said, with no sign of emotion. It was very kind of you to explain it to me. But of course _they_
explain it quite differently.

No doubt, answered Reuben. That is just what they would do. The
difference is that they have lied to you, and that I have told you what
the books, what the proofs, really show.

I have known Peter Wendover since we were children together, she said,
after a momentary pause, and _he_ never would have advised my daughters
to sue their own mother!

Reuben suppressed a groan. Minster; least
of all, your daughters, he tried to explain. The actions I have
brought--that is, including the applications--are directed against the
men who have combined to swindle you, not at all against you. They might
just as well have been brought in your name also, only that I had no
power to act for you.

It is the same as suing me. Judge Wendover said so, was her reply. What I seek to have you realize is that Judge Wendover purposely
misleads you. He is the head and front of the conspiracy to rob you. I am going to have him indicted for it. The proofs are as plain as a
pikestaff. How, then, can you continue to believe what he tells you?

I quite believe that you mean well, Mr. But
lawyers, you know, always take opposite sides. One lawyer tells you one
thing; then the other swears to precisely the contrary. Dont think I
blame them. But you know what I mean.

A little more of this hopeless conversation ensued, and then Mrs. Dont let me drive you away, Mr. Tracy, she said, as
he too got upon his feet. But if you will excuse me--Ive had so much
worry lately--and these headaches come on every afternoon now.

As Reuben walked beside her to open the door, he ventured to say: It
is a very dear wish of mine, Mrs. Minster, to remove all this cause for
worry, and to get you back control over your property, and to rid you
of these scoundrels, root and branch. For your own sake and that of your
daughters, let me beg of you to take no step that will embarrass me in
the fight. There is nothing that you could do now to specially help me,
except to do nothing at all.

If you mean for me not to sue my daughters, she said, as he opened the
door, you may rest easy. Nothing would tempt me to do _that!_ The very
idea of such a thing is too dreadful. Good-day, sir.

Reuben this time did not repress the groan, after he had closed the door
upon Mrs. He realized that he had made no more impression on
her mind than ordnance practice makes on a sandbank. He did not attempt
to conceal his dejection as he returned to where Kate sat, and resumed
his chair in front of her. The daughters smiling face, however,
partially reassured him, Thats mamma all over, she said. Isnt it
wonderful how those old race types reappear, even in our day? She is
as Dutch as any lady of Haarlem that Franz Hals ever painted. Her mind
works sidewise, like a crab. Im _so_ glad you told her everything!

If I could only feel that it had had any result, said Reuben. Oh, but it will have! the girl insisted confidently. Im sure she
liked you very much.

That reminds me-- the lawyer spoke musingly--I think I was told
once that she didnt like me; that she stipulated that I was not to be
consulted about her business by--by my then partner. Do you know?

I have an idea, said Kate. Then she stopped, and a delicate shadowy
flush passed over her face. But it was nothing, she added, hastily,
after a long pause. She could not bring herself to mention that year-old
foolish gossip about the Lawton girl. Reuben did not press for an answer, but began telling her about the work
he and Fairchild had inaugurated that morning. We are not going to wait
for the committee, he said. The place can be in some sort of
shape within a week, I hope, and then we are going to open it as a
reading-room first of all, where every man of the village who behaves
himself can be free to come. There will be tea and coffee at low prices;
and if the lockout continues, Ive got plans for something else--a kind
of soup-kitchen. We shant attempt to put the thing on a business basis
at all until the men have got to work again. Then we will leave it to
them, as to how they will support it, and what shall be done with the
other rooms. By the way, I havent seen much lately of the Lawton girls
project. Ive heard vaguely that a start had been made, and that it
seemed to work well. Are you pleased with it?

Kate answered in a low voice: I have never been there but once since we
met there last winter. I did what I promised, in the way of assistance,
but I did not go again. I too have heard vaguely that it was a success.

Reuben looked such obvious inquiry that that young lady felt impelled to
explain: The very next day after I went there last with the money and
the plan, I heard some very painful things about the girl--about her
present life, I mean--from a friend, or rather from one whom I took then
to be a friend; and what he said prejudiced me, I suppose--

A swift intuition helped Reuben to say: By a friend you mean Horace
Boyce!

Kate nodded her head in assent. As for Reuben, he rose abruptly from his
seat, motioning to his companion to keep her chair. He thrust his hands
into his pockets, and began pacing up and down along the edge of the
sofa at her side, frowning at the carpet. Miss Kate, he said at last, in a voice full of strong feeling, there
is no possibility of my telling you what an infernal blackguard that man
is.

Yes, he has behaved very badly, she said. I suppose I am to blame for
having listened to him at all. But he had seen me there at her place,
through the glass door, and he seemed so anxious to keep me from being
imposed upon, and possibly compromised, that--

My dear young lady, broke in Reuben, you have no earthly idea of the
cruelty and meanness of what he did by saying that to you. I cant--or
yes, why shouldnt I? The fact is that that poor girl--and when she was
at my school she was as honest and good and clever a child as I ever saw
in my life--owed her whole misery and wretchedness to Horace Boyce. I
never dreamed of it, either at the time or later; in fact, until the
very day I met you at the milliners shop. Somehow I mentioned that he
was my partner, and then she told me. And then, knowing that, I had
to sit still all summer and see him coming here every day, on intimate
terms with you and your sister and mother. Reuben stopped himself with
the timely recollection that this was an unauthorized emotion, and
added hurriedly: But I never could have imagined such baseness, to
deliberately slander her to you!

Kate did not at once reply, and when she did speak it was to turn the
talk away from Horace Boyce. I will go and see her to-morrow, she
said. I am very glad to hear you say that, was Reubens comment. It is like
you to say it, he went on, with brightening eyes. It is a benediction
to be the friend of a young woman like you, who has no impulses that are
not generous, and whose only notion of power is to help others.

I shall not like you if you begin to flatter, she replied, with mock
austerity, and an answering light in her eyes. I am really a very
perverse and wrong-headed girl, distinguished only for having never done
any good at all. And anybody who says otherwise is not a friend, but a
flatterer, and I am weary of false tongues.

Miss Ethel came in while Reuben was still turning over in his mind the
unexpressed meanings of these words, and with her entrance the talk
became general once more. The lawyer described to the two sisters the legal steps he had taken,
and their respective significance, and then spoke of his intention to
make a criminal complaint as soon as some additional proof, now being
sought, should come to hand. And Horace Boyce will go to prison, then? she
asked, eagerly. There is a strong case against him, answered Reuben. The graveness of his tone affected the girls spirits, and led her to
say in an altered voice: I dont want to be unkind, and I daresay I
shall be silly enough to cry in private if the thing really happens; but
when I think of the trouble and wickedness he has been responsible for,
and of the far more terrible mischief he might have wrought in this
family if I--that is, if we had not come to you as we did, I simply
_hate_ him.

Dont let us talk about him any more, puss, said Kate, soberly, rising
as she spoke. CHAPTER XXX.--JESSICAS GREAT DESPAIR. It was on the following day that a less important member of society
than Miss Minster resolved to also pay a visit to the milliners shop. Ben Lawtons second wife--for she herself scarcely thought of Mrs. Lawton as a title appertaining to her condition of ill-requited
servitude--had become possessed of some new clothes. Their monetary
value was not large, but they were warm and respectable, with bugle
trimming on the cloak, and a feather rising out of real velvet on the
bonnet; and they were new all together at the same time, a fact which
impressed her mind by its novelty even more than did the inherent charm
of acquisition. To go out in this splendid apparel was an obvious duty. The notion of going shopping loomed in the background of
Mrs. Lawtons thoughts for a while, but in a formless and indistinct
way, and then disappeared again. Her mind was not civilized enough to
assimilate the idea of loitering around among the stores when she had no
money with which to buy anything. Gradually the conception of a visit to her step-Jessica took shape in
her imagination. Perhaps the fact that she owed her new clothes to the bounty of this
girl helped forward this decision. There was also a certain curiosity to
see the child who was Bens grandson, and so indirectly related to her,
and for whose anomalous existence there was more than one precedent in
her own family, and who might turn out to resemble her own little lost
Alonzo. But the consideration which primarily dictated her choice was
that there was no other place to go to. Her reception by Jessica, when she finally found her way by Samanthas
complicated directions to the shop, was satisfactorily cordial. She was
allowed to linger for a time in the show-room, and satiate bewilderment
over the rich plumes, and multi- velvets and ribbons there
displayed; then she was taken into the domestic part of the building,
where she was asked like a real visitor to take off her cloak and
bonnet, and sat down to enjoy the unheard-of luxury of seeing somebody
else getting a meal of victuals ready. The child was playing by
himself back of the stove with some blocks. He seemed to take no
interest in his new relation, and Mrs. Lawton saw that if Alonzo
had lived he would not have looked like this boy, who was blonde
and delicate, with serious eyes and flaxen curls, and a high, rather
protuberant forehead. The brevet grandmother heard with surprise from Lucinda that this
five-year-old child already knew most of his letters. She stole furtive
glances at him after this, from time to time, and as soon as Jessica had
gone out into the store and closed the door she asked:

Dont his head look to you like water on the brain?

Lucinda shook her head emphatically: Hes healthy enough, she said. And his names Horace, you say?

Yes, thats what I said, replied the girl. Lawton burned to ask what other name the lad bore, but the
peremptory tones of her daughter warned her off. Instead she remarked:
And so hes been livin in Tecumseh all this while? They seem to have
brung him up pretty good--teachin him his A B Cs and curlin his
hair.

He had a good home. Jess paid high, and the people took a liking to
him, said Lucinda. I spose they died or broke up housekeepin, tentatively suggested
Mrs. No: Jess wanted him here, or thought she did. Lucindas loyalty to her
sister prompted her to stop the explanation at this. But she herself
had been sorely puzzled and tried by the change which had come over
the little household since the night of the boys arrival, and the
temptation to put something of this into words was too strong to be
mastered. I wish myself he hadnt come at all, she continued from the table
where she was at work. Not but that hes a good enough young-one, and
lots of company for us both, but Jess aint been herself at all since
she brought him here. It aint his fault--poor little chap--but she
fetched him from Tecumseh on account of something special; and then
that something didnt seem to come off, and shes as blue as a whetstone
about it, and that makes everything blue. And there we are!

Lucinda finished in a sigh, and proceeded to rub grease on the inside of
her cake tins with a gloomy air. *****

In the outer shop, Jessica found herself standing surprised and silent
before the sudden apparition of a visitor whom she had least of all
expected--Miss Kate Minster. The bell which formerly jangled when the street door opened had been
taken off because it interfered with the childs mid-day sleep, and
Jessica herself had been so deeply lost in a brown study where she sat
sewing behind the counter that she had not noted the entrance of the
young lady until she stood almost within touch. Then she rose hurriedly,
and stood confused and tongue-tied, her work in hand. She dropped this
impediment when Miss Minster offered to shake hands with her, but even
this friendly greeting did not serve to restore her self-command or
induce a smile. I have a thousand apologies to make for leaving you alone all this
while, said Kate. But--we have been so troubled of late--and, selfish
like, I have forgotten everything else. Or no--I wont say that--for I
have thought a great deal about you and your work. And now you must tell
me all about both.

Miss Minster had seated herself as she spoke, and loosened the boa
about her throat, but Jessica remained standing. She idly noted that no
equipage and coachman were in waiting outside, and let the comment drift
to her tongue. You walked, I see, she said. It isnt pleasant to take out the horses now. The
streets are full of men out of work, and they blame us for it, and to
see us drive about seems to make them angry. I suppose its a natural
enough feeling; but the boys pelted our coachman with snowballs the
other day, while my sister and I were driving, and the men on the corner
all laughed and encouraged them. But if I walk nobody molests me.

The young lady, as she said this with an air of modest courage, had
never looked so beautiful before in Jessicas eyes, or appealed so
powerfully to her liking and admiration. But the milliner was conscious
of an invasion of other and rival feelings which kept her face smileless
and hardened the tone of her voice. Yes, the men feel very bitterly, she said. I know that from the
girls. A good many of them--pretty nearly all, for that matter--have
stopped coming here, since the lockout, because _your_ money furnished
the Resting House. That shows how strong the feeling is.

You amaze me!

There was no pretence in Miss Kates emotion. She looked at Jessica with
wide-open eyes, and the astonishment in the gaze visibly softened and
saddened into genuine pain. Oh, I _am_ so sorry! she said. I never
thought of _that_. How can we get that cruel
notion out of their heads? I did so _truly_ want to help the girls. Surely there must be some way of making them realize this. The closing
of the works, that is a business matter with which I had nothing to do,
and which I didnt approve; but this plan of yours, _that_ was really
a pet of mine. It is only by a stupid accident that I did not come here
often, and get to know the girls, and show them how interested I was in
everything. Tracy spoke of you yesterday, I resolved to come at
once, and tell you how ashamed I was.

Jessicas heart was deeply stirred by this speech, and filled with
yearnings of tenderness toward the beautiful and good patrician. But
some strange, undefined force in her mind held all this softness in
subjection. The girls are gone, she said, almost coldly. They will not come
back--at least for a long time, until all this trouble is forgotten.

They hate me too much, groaned Kate, in grieved self-abasement. They dont know _you!_ What they think of is that it is the Minster
money; that is what they hate. To take away from the men with a shovel,
and give back to the girls with a spoon--they wont stand that! The
latent class-feeling of a factory town flamed up in Jessicas bosom,
intolerant and vengeful, as she listened to her own words. I would
feel like that myself, if I were in their place, she said, in curt
conclusion. The daughter of the millions sat for a little in pained irresolution. She was conscious of impulses toward anger at the coldness, almost the
rudeness, of this girl whom she had gone far out of and beneath her way
to assist. Her own class-feeling, too, subtly prompted her to dismiss
with contempt the thought of these thick-fingered, uncouth factory-girls
who were rejecting her well-meant bounty. But kindlier feelings strove
within her mind, too, and kept her for the moment undecided. She looked up at Jessica, as if in search for help, and her womans
heart suddenly told her that the changes in the girls face, vaguely
apparent to her before, were the badges of grief and unrest. All the
annoyance she had been nursing fled on the instant. Her eyes moistened,
and she laid her hand softly on the others arm. _You_ at least mustnt think harshly of me, she said with a smile. That would be _too_ sad. I would give a great deal if the furnaces
could be opened to-morrow--if they had never been shut. Not even the
girls whose people are out of work feel more deeply about the thing
than I do. But--after all, time must soon set that right. Is there nothing I can do for you?

An answering moisture came into Jessicas eyes as she met the others
look. She shook her head, and withdrew her wrist from the kindly
pressure of Kates hand. I spoke of you at length with Mr. Tracy, Kate went on, gently. _Do_
believe that we are both anxious to do all we can for you, in whatever
form you like. You have never spoken about more money for the Resting
House. If it is, dont hesitate for a
moment to let me know. And maynt I go and see the house, now that I am
here? You know I have never been inside it once since you took it.

For a second or two Jessica hesitated. It cost her a great deal
to maintain the unfriendly attitude she had taken up, and she was
hopelessly at sea as to why she was paying this price for unalloyed
unhappiness. Yet still she persisted doggedly, and as it were in spite
of herself. Its a good deal run down just now, she said. Since the trouble came,
Lucinda and I havent kept it up. Youd like better to see it some time
when it was in order; that is, if I--if it isnt given up altogether!

The despairing intonation of these closing words was not lost upon Kate. Why do you speak like that? she said. Oh, I hope it isnt as bad as that!

Im thinking a good deal of going away. You and Miss Wilcox can put
somebody else here, and keep open the house. My
heart isnt in it any more.

The girl forced herself through these words with a mournful effort. The
hot tears came to her eyes before she had finished, and she turned away
abruptly, walking behind the counter to the front of the shop. There is something you are not
telling me, my child, she urged with tender earnestness. _Let_ me help you!

There is nothing--nothing at all, Jessica made answer. Only I am not
happy here. And there are--other things--that
were a mistake, too.

Why not confide in me, dear? Why not let me help you?

How could _you_ help me? The girl spoke with momentary impatience. There are things that _money_ cant help.

The rich young lady drew herself up instinctively, and tightened the fur
about her neck. The words affected her almost like an affront. Im very sorry, she said, with an obvious cooling of manner. I did
not mean money alone. I had hoped you felt I was your friend. And I
still want to be, if occasion arises. I shall be very much grieved,
indeed, if you do not let me know, at any and all times, when I can be
of use to you.

She held out her hand, evidently as an indication that she was going. Jessica saw the hand through a mist of smarting tears, and took it, not
daring to look up. She was filled with longings to kiss this hand, to
cry out for forgiveness, to cast herself upon the soft shelter of this
sweet friendship, so sweetly proffered. But there was some strange spell
which held her back, and, still through the aching film of tears, she
saw the gloved hand withdrawn. A soft good-by spread its pathos upon
the silence about her, and then Miss Minster was gone. Jessica stood for a time, looking blankly into the street. Then she
turned and walked with unconscious directness, as in a dream, through
the back rooms and across the yard to the Resting House. She had passed
her stepmother, her sister, and her child without bestowing a glance
upon them, and she wandered now through the silent building aimlessly,
without power to think of what she saw. Although the furniture was
still of the most primitive and unpretentious sort, there were many
little appliances for the comfort of the girls, in which she had had
much innocent delight. The bath-rooms on the upper floor, the willow
rocking-chairs in the sitting-room, the neat row of cups and saucers
in the glassfaced cupboard, the magazines and pattern books on the
table--all these it had given her pleasure to contemplate only a
fortnight ago. She noted that the fire in
the base-burner had gone out, though the reservoir still seemed full of
coal. She was conscious of a vague sense of fitness in its having gone
out. The fire that had burned within her heart was in ashes, too. She
put her apron to her eyes and wept vehemently, here in solitude. Lucinda came out, nearly an hour later, to find her sister sitting
disconsolate by the fireless stove, shivering with the cold, and staring
into vacancy. She put her broad arm with maternal kindness around Jessicas waist, and
led her unresisting toward the door. Never mind, sis, she murmured,
with clumsy sympathy. Come in and play with Horace.

Jessica, shuddering again with the chill, buried her face on her
sisters shoulder, and wept supinely. There was not an atom of courage
remaining in her heart. You are low down and miserable, pursued Lucinda, compassionately. Ill make you up some boneset tea. Itll be lucky if you havent caught
your death a-cold out here so long. She had taken a shawl, which hung
in the hallway, and wrapped it about her sisters shoulders. I half wish I had, sobbed Jessica. Theres no fight left in me any
more.

Whats the matter, anyway?

If I knew myself, the girl groaned in answer, perhaps I could do
something; but I dont. I cant think, I cant eat or sleep or work. what is the matter with me?




CHAPTER XXXI.--A STRANGE ENCOUNTER. A SOMBRE excitement reigned in Thessaly next day, when it became known
that the French-Cana-dian workmen whom the rolling-mill people were
importing would arrive in the village within the next few hours. They
were coming through from Massachusetts, and watchful eyes at Troy had
noted their temporary halt there and the time of the train they took
westward. The telegraph sped forward the warning, and fully a thousand
idle men in Thessaly gathered about the dpt, both inside and on the
street without, to witness the unwelcome advent. Some indefinite rumors of the sensation reached the secluded milliners
shop on the back street, during the day. Ben Lawton drifted in to warm
himself during the late forenoon, and told of the stirring scenes that
were expected. He was quick to observe that Jessica was not looking
well, and adjured her to be careful about the heavy cold which she said
she had taken. The claims upon him of the excitement outside were too
strong to be resisted, but he promised to look in during the afternoon
and tell them the news. The daylight of the November afternoon was beginning imperceptibly
to wane before any further tidings of the one topic of great public
interest reached the sisters. One of the better class of factory-girls
came in to gossip with Lucinda, and she brought with her a veritable
budget of information. The French Canadians had arrived, and with them
came some Pinkerton detectives, or whatever they were called, who were
said to be armed to the teeth. The crowd had fiercely hooted these
newcomers and their guards, and there had been a good deal of angry
hustling. For awhile it looked as if a fight must ensue; but, somehow,
it did not come off. The Canadians, in a body, had gone with their
escort to the row of new cottages which the company had hired for them,
followed by a diminishing throng of hostile men and boys. There were
numerous personal incidents to relate, and the two sisters listened with
deep interest to the whole recital. When it was finished the girl still sat about, evidently with something
on her mind. At last, with a blunt Can I speak to you for a moment?
 she led Jessica out into the shop. There, in a whisper, with repeated
affirmations and much detail, she imparted the confidential portion of
her intelligence. The effect of this information upon Jessica was marked and immediate. As soon as the girl had gone she hastened to the living-room, and began
hurriedly putting on her boots. The effort of stooping to button them
made her feverish head ache, and she was forced to call the amazed
Lucinda to her assistance. Youre crazy to think of going out such a day as this, protested the
girl, and you with such a cold, too.

Its got to be done, said Jessica, her eyes burning with eagerness,
and her cheeks flushed. If it killed me, it would have to be done. But
Ill bundle up warm. Ill be all right. Refusing
to listen to further dissuasion she hastily put on her hat and cloak,
and then with nervous rapidity wrote a note, sealed it up tightly with
an envelope, and marked on it, with great plainness, the address: Miss
Kate Minster.

Give this to father when he comes, she cried, and tell him--

Ben Lawtons appearance at the door interrupted the directions. He was
too excited about the events of the day to be surprised at seeing the
daughter he had left an invalid now dressed for the street; but she
curtly stopped the narrative which he began. Weve heard all about it, she said. I want you to come with me now.

Lucinda watched the dominant sister drag on and button her gloves with
apprehension and solicitude written all over her honest face. Now, do
be careful, she repeated more than once. As Jessica said Im ready now, and turned to join her father, the
little boy came into the shop through the open door of the living-room. A swift instinct prompted the mother to go to him and stoop to kiss him
on the forehead. The child smiled at her; and when she was out in
the street, walking so hurriedly that her father found the gait
unprecedented in his languid experience, she still dwelt curiously in
her mind upon the sweetness of that infantile smile. And this, by some strange process, suddenly brought clearness and order
to her thoughts. Under the stress of this nervous tension, perhaps
because of the illness which she felt in every bone, yet which seemed to
clarify her senses, her mind was all at once working without confusion. She saw now that what had depressed her, overthrown her self-control,
impelled her to reject the kindness of Miss Minster, had been the
humanization, so to speak, of her ideal, Reuben Tracy. The bare thought
of his marrying and giving in marriage--of his being in love with the
rich girl--this it was that had so strangely disturbed her. Looking at
it now, it was the most foolish thing in the world. What on earth had
she to do with Reuben Tracy? There could never conceivably have entered
her head even the most vagrant and transient notion that he--no, she
would not put _that_ thought into form, even in her own mind. And were
there two young people in all the world who had more claim to her good
wishes than Reuben and Kate? She answered this heartily in the negative,
and said to herself that she truly was glad that they loved each other. She bit her lips, and insisted on repeating this to
her own thoughts. But why, then, had the discovery of this so unnerved her? It must have been because the idea of their
happiness made the isolation of her own life so miserably clear; because
she felt that they had forgotten her and her work in their new-found
concern for each other. She was all over
that weak folly now. She had it in her power to help them, and dim,
half-formed wishes that she might give life itself to their service
flitted across her mind. She had spoken never a word to her father all this while, and had seemed
to take no note either of direction or of what and whom she passed; but
she stopped now in front of the doorway in Main Street which bore the
law-sign of Reuben Tracy. Wait for me here, she said to Ben, and
disappeared up the staircase. Jessica made her way with some difficulty up the second flight. Her head
burned with the exertion, and there was a novel numbness in her limbs;
but she gave this only a passing thought. On the panel was tacked a white
half-sheet of paper. It was not easy to decipher the inscription in the
failing light, but she finally made it out to be:

_Called away until noon to-morrow (Friday)_.

The girl leaned against the door-sill for support. In the first moment
or two it seemed to her that she was going to swoon. Then resolution
came back to her, and with it a new store of strength, and she went down
the stairs again slowly and in terrible doubt as to what should now be
done. The memory suddenly came to her of the one other time she had been in
this stairway, when she had stood in the darkness with her little boy,
gathered up against the wall to allow the two Minster ladies to pass. Upon the heels of this chased the recollection--with such lack of
sequence do our thoughts follow one another--of the singularly sweet
smile her little boy had bestowed upon her, half an hour since, when she
kissed him. The smile had lingered in her mind as a beautiful picture. Walking down
the stairs now, in the deepening shadows, the revelation dawned upon her
all at once--it was his fathers smile! Yes, yes--hurriedly the fancy
reared itself in her thoughts--thus the lover of her young girlhood had
looked upon her. The delicate, clever face; the prettily arched lips;
the soft, light curls upon the forehead; the tenderly beaming blue
eyes--all were the same. very often--this resemblance had forced itself upon her
consciousness before. But now, lighted up by that chance babyish smile,
it came to her in the guise of a novelty, and with a certain fascination
in it. Her head seemed to have ceased to ache, now that this almost
pleasant thought had entered it. It was passing strange, she felt, that
any sense of comfort should exist for her in memories which had fed
her soul upon bitterness for so long a time. Yet it was already on the
instant apparent to her that when she should next have time to think,
that old episode would assume less hateful aspects than it had always
presented before. At the street door she found her father leaning against a shutter and
discussing the events of the day with the village lamplighter, who
carried a ladder on his shoulder, and reported great popular agitation
to exist. Jessica beckoned Ben summarily aside, and put into his hands the letter
she had written at the shop. I want you to take this at once to Miss
Minster, at her house, she said, hurriedly. See to it that she gets it
herself. Dont say a word to any living
soul. Ive said you can be depended
upon. If you show yourself a man, it may make your fortune. Now, hurry;
and I do hope you will do me credit!

Under the spur of this surprising exhortation, Ben walked away with
unexampled rapidity, until he had overtaken the lamplighter, from whom
he borrowed some chewing tobacco. The girl, left to herself, began walking irresolutely down Main Street. The flaring lights in the store windows seemed to add to the confusion
of her mind. It had appeared to be important to send her father away at
once, but now she began to regret that she had not kept him to help her
in her search. For Reuben Tracy must be found at all hazards. How to go to work to trace him she did not know. She had no notion
whatever as to who his intimate friends were. The best device she could
think of would be to ask about him at the various law-offices; for she
had heard that however much lawyers might pretend to fight one another
in court, they were all on very good terms outside. Some little distance down the street she came upon the door of another
stairway which bore a number of lawyers signs. The windows all up the
front of this building were lighted, and without further examination she
ascended the first flight of stairs. The landing was almost completely
dark, but an obscured gleam came from the dusty transoms over three or
four doors close about her. She knocked on one of these at random, and
in response to an inarticulate vocal sound from within, opened the door
and entered. It was a square, medium-sized room in which she found herself, with
a long, paper-littered table in the centre, and tall columns of light
leather-covered books rising along the walls. At the opposite end of the
chamber a man sat at a desk, his back turned to her, his elbows on the
desk, and his head in his hands. The shaded light in front of him made a
mellow golden fringe around the outline of his hair. A sudden bewildering tumult burst forth in the girls breast as she
looked at this figure. Then, as suddenly, the recurring mental echoes of
the voice which had bidden her enter rose above this tumult and stilled
it. A gentle and comforting warmth stole through her veins. This was
Horace Boyce who sat there before her--and she did not hate him! During that instant in which she stood by the door, a whole flood of
self-illumination flashed its rays into every recess of her mind. This,
then, was the strange, formless opposing impulse which had warred with
the other in her heart for this last miserable fortnight, and dragged
her nearly to distraction. The bringing home of her boy had revived for her, by occult and subtle
processes, the old romance in which his father had been framed, as might
a hero be by sunlit clouds. She hugged the thought to her heart, and
stood looking at him motionless and mute. What is wanted? he called out, querulously, without
changing his posture. It was as if a magic voice drew her
forward in a dream--herself all rapt and dumb. Irritably impressed by the continued silence, Horace lifted his head,
and swung abruptly around in his chair. His own shadow obscured the
features of his visitor. He saw only that it was a lady, and rose
hesitatingly to his feet. Excuse me, he mumbled, I was busy with my thoughts, and did not know
who it was.

Do you know now? Jessica heard herself ask, as in a trance. The balmy
warmth in her own heart told her that she was smiling. Horace took a step or two obliquely forward, so that the light fell on
her face. He peered with a confounded gaze at her for a moment, then let
his arms fall limp at his sides. In the name of the dev-- he began, confusedly, and then bit the word
short, and stared at her again. Is it really you? he asked at last,
reassured in part by her smile. Are you sorry to see me? she asked in turn. Her mind could frame
nothing but these soft little meaningless queries. The young man seemed in doubt how best to answer this question. He
turned around and looked abstractedly at his desk; then with a slight
detour he walked past her, opened the door, and glanced up and down the
dark stairway. When he had closed the door once more, he turned the key
in the lock, and then, after momentary reflection, concluded to unlock
it again. Why, no; why should I be? he said in a more natural voice, as he
returned and stood beside her. Evidently her amiability was a more
difficult surprise for him to master than her original advent, and he
studied her face with increasing directness of gaze to make sure of it. Come and sit down here, he said, after a few moments of this puzzled
inspection, and resumed his own chair. I want a good look at you, he
explained, as he lifted the shade from the lamp. Jessica felt that she was blushing under this new radiance, and it
required an effort to return his glance. But, when she did so, the
changes in his face and expression which it revealed drove everything
else from her mind. She rose from her chair upon a sudden impulse,
and bent over him at a diffident distance. As she did so, she had the
feeling that this bitterness in which she had encased herself for years
had dropped from her on the instant like a discarded garment. Why, Horace, your hair is quite gray! she said, as if the fact
contained the sublimation of pathos. Theres been trouble enough to turn it white twenty times over! You
dont know what Ive been through, my girl, he said, sadly. The
novel sensation of being sympathized with, welcome as it was, greatly
accentuated his sense of deserving compassion. I am very sorry, she said, softly. She had seated herself again, and
was gradually recovering her self-possession. The whole situation was
so remarkable, not to say startling, that she found herself regarding it
from the outside, as if she were not a component part of it. Her pulses
were no longer strongly stirred by its personal phases. Most clear of
all things in her mind was that she was now perfectly independent of
this or any other man. She was her own master, and need ask favors from
nobody. Therefore, if it pleased her to call bygones bygones and make a
friend of Horace--or even to put a bandage across her eyes and cull from
those bygones only the rose leaves and violet blossoms, and make for her
weary soul a bed of these--what or who was to prevent her? Some inexplicable, unforeseen revulsion of feeling had made him pleasant
in her sight again. There was no doubt about it--she had genuine
satisfaction in sitting here opposite him and looking at him. Had she
so many pleasures, then, that she should throw this unlooked-for boon
deliberately away? Moreover--and here the new voices called most loudly in her heart--he
was worn and unhappy. The iron had palpably entered his soul too. He
looked years older than he had any chronological right to look. There
were heavy lines of anxiety on his face, and his blonde hair was
powdered thick with silver. Yes, I am truly sorry, she said again. Is it business that has gone
wrong with you?

Business--family--health--sleep--everything! he groaned, bitterly. It
is literally a hell that I have been living in this last--these last few
months!

I had no idea of that, she said, simply. Of course it would be
ridiculous to ask if there was anything she could do, but she had
comfort from the thought that he must realize what was in her mind. So help me God, Jess! he burst out vehemently, under the incentive of
her sympathy, Im coming to believe that every man is a scoundrel, and
every woman a fool!

There was a long time when _I_ thought that, she said with a sigh. He looked quickly at her from under his brows, and then as swiftly
turned his glance away. Yes, I know, he answered uneasily, tapping
with his fingers on the desk. But we wont talk of that, she urged, with a little tremor of anxiety
in her tone. We neednt talk of that at all. It was merely by accident
that I came here, Horace. I wanted to ask a question, and nothing was
further from my head than finding you here.

Lets see--Mart Jocelyn had this place up to a couple of months ago. I didnt know you knew him.

No, you foolish boy! she said, with a smile which had a ground tone
of sadness. It was simply any lawyer I was
looking for. But what I wanted to say was that I am not angry with you
any more. Ive learned a host of bitter lessons since we were--young
together, and Im too much alone in the world to want to keep you an
enemy. You dont seem so very happy yourself, Horace. Why shouldnt
we two be friends again? Im not talking of anything else,
Horace--understand me. But it appeals to me very strongly, this idea of
our being friends again.

Horace looked meditatively at her, with softening eyes. Youre the best
of the lot, dear old Jess, he said at last, smiling candidly. Truly
Im glad you came--gladder than I can tell you. I was in the very slough
of despond when you entered; and now--well, at least Im going to play
that I am out of it.

Jessica rose with a beaming countenance, and laid her hand frankly on
his shoulder. Im glad I came, too, she said. And very soon I want to
see you again--when you are quite free--and have a long, quiet talk.

All right, my girl, he answered, rising as well. The prospect seemed
entirely attractive to him. He took her hand in his, and said again:
All right. And must you go now?

Oh, mercy, yes! she exclaimed, with sudden recollection. I had no
business to stay so long! Perhaps you can tell me--or no-- She vaguely
put together in her mind the facts that Tracy and Horace had been
partners, and seemed to be so no longer. No, you wouldnt know.

Have I so poor a legal reputation as all that? he said, lightly
smiling. Ones friends, at least, ought to dissemble their
bad opinions.

No, it wasnt about law, she explained, stum-blingly. Its of no
importance. Good-by for the time.

He would have drawn her to him and kissed her at this, but she gently
prevented the caress, and released herself from his hands. Not that, she said, with a smile in which still some sadness lingered. And--good-by, Horace, for the
time.

He went with her to the door, lighting the hall gas that she might
see her way down the stairs. When she had disappeared, he walked for
a little up and down the room, whistling softly to himself. It was
undeniable that the world seemed vastly brighter to him than it had only
a half-hour before. Mere contact with somebody who liked him for himself
was a refreshing novelty. A damned decent sort of girl--considering everything! he mused aloud,
as he locked up his desk for the day. CHAPTER XXXII.--THE ALARM AT THE FARMHOUSE. To come upon the street again was like the confused awakening from a
dream. With the first few steps Jessica found herself shivering in an
extremity of cold, yet still uncomfortably warm. A sudden passing spasm
of giddiness, too, made her head swim so that for the instant she feared
to fall. Then, with an added sense of weakness, she went on, wearily and
desponding. The recollection of this novel and curious happiness upon which she
had stumbled only a few moments before took on now the character of
self-reproach. The burning headache had returned, and with it came a
pained consciousness that it had been little less than criminal in
her to weakly dally in Horaces office when such urgent responsibility
rested upon her outside. If the burden of this responsibility appeared
too great for her to bear, now that her strength seemed to be so
strangely leaving her, there was all the more reason for her to set her
teeth together, and press forward, even if she staggered as she went. The search had been made cruelly
hopeless by that shameful delay; and she blamed herself with fierceness
for it, as she racked her brain for some new plan, wondering whether she
ought to have asked Horace or gone into some of the other offices. There were groups of men standing here and there on the comers--a little
away from the full light of the street-lamps, as if unwilling to court
observation. These knots of workmen had a sinister significance to her
feverish mind. She had the clew to the terrible mischief which some of
them intended--which no doubt even now they were canvassing in furtive
whispers--and only Tracy could stop it, and she was powerless to find
him! There came slouching along the sidewalk, as she grappled with this
anguish of irresolution, a slight and shabby figure which somehow
arrested her attention. It was a familiar enough figure--that of old
Cal Gedney; and there was nothing unusual or worthy of comment in
the fact that he was walking unsteadily by himself, with his gaze fixed
intently on the sidewalk. He had passed again out of the range of her
cursory glance before she suddenly remembered that he was a lawyer, and
even some kind of a judge. She turned swiftly and almost ran after him, clutching his sleeve as she
came up to him, and breathing so hard with weakness and excitement that
for the moment she could not speak. The squire looked up, and angrily shook his arm out of her grasp. Leave me alone, you hussy, he snarled, or Ill lock you up!

His misconstruction of her purpose cleared her mind. Dont be foolish,
 she said, hurriedly. Its a question of perhaps life and death! Do you
know where Reuben Tracy is? Or can you tell me where I can find out?

He dont want to be bothered with _you_, wherever he is, was the surly
response. Be off with you!

I told you it was a matter of life and death, she insisted, earnestly. Hell never forgive you--youll never forgive yourself--if you know and
wont tell me.

The sincerity of the girls tone impressed the old man. It was not easy
for him to stand erect and unaided without swaying, but his mind was
evidently clear enough. What do you want with him? he asked, in a less unfriendly voice. Then
he added, in a reflective undertone: Curoust I shd want see Tracy,
too.

Then you do know where he is?

Hes drove out to s mothers farm. Seems word come old womans sick. Youre one of that Lawton tribe, arent you?

If I get a cutter, will you drive out there with me? She asked the
question with swift directness. She added in explanation, as he stared
vacantly at her: I ask that because you said you wanted to see him,
thats all. I shall go alone if you wont come. Hes _got_ to be back
here this evening, or God only knows whatll happen! I mean what I say!

Do you know the road? the squire asked, catching something of her
own eager spirit. I was bom half a mile from where his mother lives.

But you wont tell me what your business is?

Ill tell you this much, she whispered, hastily. There is going to
be a mob at the Minster house to-night. A girl who knows one of the men
told--

The old squire cut short the revelation by grasping her arm with
fierce energy. Come on--come on! he said, hoarsely. Dont waste a minute. Well gallop the horses both ways. He muttered to himself with
excitement as he dragged her along. Jessica waited outside the livery stable for what seemed an interminable
period, while old Cal was getting the horses--walking up and down the
path in a state of mental torment which precluded all sense of bodily
suffering. When she conjured up before her frightened mind the
terrible consequences which delay might entail, every minute became an
intolerable hour of torture. There was even the evil chance that the old
man had been refused the horses because he had been drinking. Finally, however, there came the welcome sound of mailed hoofs on the
plank roadway inside, and the reverberating jingle of bells; and then
the squire, with a spacious double-seated sleigh containing plenty of
robes, drew up in front of a cutting in the snow. She took the front seat without hesitation, and gathered the lines into
her own hands. Let me drive, she said, clucking the horses into a
rapid trot. I _should_ be home in bed. Im too ill to sit up, unless
Im doing something that keeps me from giving up.

*****

Reuben Tracy felt the evening in the sitting-room of the old farmhouse
to be the most trying ordeal of his adult life. Ordinarily he rather enjoyed than otherwise the company of his brother
Ezra--a large, powerfully built, heavily bearded man, who sat now beside
him in a rocking-chair in front of the wood stove, his stockinged feet
on the hearth, and a last weeks agricultural paper on his knee. Ezra
was a worthy and hard-working citizen, with an original way of looking
at things, and considerable powers of expression. As a rule, the
lawyer liked to talk with him, and felt that he profited in ideas and
suggestions from the talk. But to-night he found his brother insufferably dull, and the task of
keeping down the fidgets one of incredible difficulty. His mother--on
whose account he had been summoned--was so much better that Ezras wife
had felt warranted in herself going off to bed, to get some much-needed
rest. Ezra had argued for a while, rather perversely, about the tariff
duty on wool, and now was nodding in his chair, although the dim-faced
old wooden clock showed it to be barely eight oclock. The kerosene lamp
on the table gave forth only a feeble, reddened light through its smoky
chimney, but diffused a most powerful odor upon the stuffy air of the
over-heated room. A ragged and strong-smelling old farm dog groaned
offensively from time to time in his sleep behind the stove. Even the
draught which roared through the lower apertures in front of the stove
and up the pipe toward the chimney was irritating by the very futility
of its vehemence, for the place was too hot already. Reuben mused in silence upon the chances which had led him so far
away from this drowsy, unfruitful life, and smiled as he found himself
wondering if it would be in the least possible for him to return to it. The bright boys, the restless boys, the boys
of energy, of ambition, of yearning for culture or conquest or the mere
sensation of living where it was really life--all went away, leaving
none but the Ezras behind. Some succeeded; some failed; but none of them
ever came back. And the Ezras who remained on the farms--they seemed to
shut and bolt the doors of their minds against all idea of making their
own lot less sterile and barren and uninviting. The mere mental necessity for a great contrast brought up suddenly
in Reubens thoughts a picture of the drawing-room in the home of the
Minsters. It seemed as if the whole vast swing of the minds pendulum
separated that luxurious abode of cultured wealth from this dingy and
barren farmhouse room. And he, who had been born and reared in this
latter, now found himself at a loss how to spend so much as a single
evening in its environment, so completely had familiarity with the other
remoulded and changed his habits, his point of view, his very character. Curious slaves of habit--creatures of their surroundings--men were! A loud, peremptory knocking at the door aroused Reuben abruptly from his
revery, and Ezra, too, opened his eyes with a start, and sitting upright
rubbed them confusedly. Now I think of it, I heard a sleigh stop, said Reuben, rising. It
cant be the doctor this time of night, can it?

It ud be jest like him, commented Ezra, captiously. Hes a great
hand to keep dropping in, sort of casual-like, when theres sickness in
the house. It all goes down in his bill.

The farmer brother had also risen, and now, lamp in hand, walked
heavily in his stocking feet to the door, and opened it half way. Some
indistinct words passed, and then, shading the flickering flame with his
huge hairy hand, Ezra turned his head. Somebody to see you, Rube, he said. On second thought he added to the
visitor in a tone of formal politeness: Wont you step in, maam?

Jessica Lawton almost pushed her host aside in her impulsive response to
his invitation. But when she had crossed the threshold the sudden change
into a heated atmosphere seemed to go to her brain like chloroform. She
stood silent, staring at Reuben, with parted lips and hands nervously
twitching. Even as he, in his complete surprise, recognized his visitor,
she trembled violently from head to foot, made a forward step, tottered,
and fell inertly into Ezras big, protecting arm. I guessed she was going to do it, said the farmer, not dissembling his
pride at the alert way in which the strange woman had been caught, and
holding up the lamp with his other hand in triumph. Hannah keeled over
in that same identical way when Suky run her finger through the cogs of
the wringing-machine, and I ketched her, too!

Reuben had hurriedly come to his brothers assistance. The two men
placed the fainting girl in the rocking-chair, and the lawyer began
with anxious fumbling to loosen the neck of her cloak and draw off her
gloves. Her fingers were like ice, and her brow, though it felt now
almost equally cold, was covered with perspiration. Reuben rubbed her
hands between his broad palms in a crudely informed belief that it was
the right thing to do, while Ezra rummaged in the adjoining pantry for
the household bottle of brandy. Jessica came out of her swoon with the first touch of the pungent spirit
upon her whitened lips. She looked with weak blankness at the unfamiliar
scene about her, until her gaze fell upon the face of the lawyer. Then
she smiled faintly and closed her eyes again. She is an old friend of mine, whispered Reuben to his brother, as he
pressed the brandy once more upon her. Shell come to in a minute. It
must be something serious that brought her out here.

The girl languidly opened her eyes. Cal Ged-neys asleep in the
sleigh, she murmured. Youd better bring him in. Hell tell you.

It was with an obvious effort that she said this much; and now, while
Ezra hastily pulled on his boots, her eyes closed again, and her
head sank with utter weariness sideways upon the high back of the
old-fashioned chair. Reuben stood looking at her in pained anxiety--once or twice holding
the lamp close to her pale face, in dread of he knew not what--until
his brother returned. Ezra had brought the horses up into the yard, and
remained outside now to blanket them, while the old squire, benumbed
and drowsy, found his way into the house. It was evident enough to the
young lawyers first glance that Gedney had been drinking heavily. Well, what does this all mean? he demanded, with vexed asperity. Youve got to get on your things and race back with us, helly-to-hoot!
 said the squire. Quick--there aint a minute to lose! The old man
almost gasped in his eagerness. In Heavens name, whats up? Have you been to Cadmus?

Yes, and got my pocket full of affidavits. We can send all three of
them to prison fast enough. But thatll do to-morrow; for to-night
theres a mob up at the Minster place. _Look there!_

The old man had gone to the window and swept the stiff curtain aside. He
held it now with a trembling hand, so that Reuben could look out. The whole southern sky overhanging Thessaly was crimson with the
reflection of a fire. its the rolling mill, ejaculated Reuben, breathlessly. Quite as likely its the Minster house; its the same direction, only
farther off, and fires are deceptive, said Gedney, his excitement
rising under the stimulus of the spectacle. Reuben had kicked off his slippers, and was now dragging on his shoes. Tell me about it, he said, working furiously at the laces. Squire Gedney helped himself generously to the brandy on the table as
he unfolded, in somewhat incoherent fashion, his narrative. The Lawton
girl had somehow found out that a hostile demonstration against the
Minsters was intended for the evening, and had started out to find
Tracy. By accident she had met him (Gedney), and they had come off in
the sleigh together. She had insisted upon driving, and as his long
journey from Cadmus had greatly fatigued him, he had got over into the
back seat and gone to sleep under the buffalo robes. He knew nothing
more until Ezra had roused him from his slumber in the sled, now at a
standstill on the road outside, and he had awakened to discover Jessica
gone, the horses wet and shivering in a cloud of steam, and the sky
behind them all ablaze. Looks as if the whole town was burning, said Ezra,
coming in as this recital was concluded. Them horses would a-got their
death out there in another ten minutes. Guess Id better put em in
the barn, eh?

No, no! Ive got to drive them back faster than
they came, said Reuben, who had on his overcoat and hat. Hurry, and
get me some thick gloves to drive in. We
wont wake mother up. Ill get you to run in to-morrow, if you will, and
let me know how she is. Tell her I _had_ to go.

When Ezra had found the gloves and brought them, the two men for the
first time bent an instinctive joint glance at the recumbent figure of
the girl in the rocking-chair. Ill get Hannah up, said the farmer, and she can have your room. I
guess shes too sick to try to go back with you. If shes well enough,
Ill bring her in in the morning. I was going to take in some apples,
anyway.

To their surprise Jessica opened her eyes and even lifted her head at
these words. No, she said; I feel better now--much better. I really must. She rose to her feet as she spoke, and, though
she was conscious of great dizziness and languor, succeeded by her smile
in imposing upon her unskilled companions. Perhaps if Hannah had been
got up she would have seen through the weak pretence of strength, and
insisted on having matters ordered otherwise. But the men offered no
dissent. Jessica was persuaded to drink another glass of brandy, and
Squire Gedney took one without being specially urged; and then Reuben
impatiently led the way out to the sleigh, which Ezra had turned around. No; Id rather be in front with you, the girl said, when Reuben had
spread the robes for her to sit in the back seat. Let the Judge sit
there; he wants to sleep. Im not tired now, and I want to keep awake.

Thus it was arranged, and Reuben, with a strong hand on the tight reins,
started the horses on their homeward rush toward the flaming horizon. CHAPTER XXXIII.--PACING TOWARD THE REDDENED SKY. For some time there was no conversation in the sleigh. The horses sped
evenly forward, with their heads well in the air, as if they too were
excited by the unnatural glare in the sky ahead. Before long there was
added to the hurried regular beating of their hoofs upon the hard-packed
track another sound--the snoring of the squire on the seat behind. There was a sense of melting in the air. Save where the intense glow
of the conflagration lit up the sky with a fan-like spread of ruddy
luminance--fierce orange at the central base, and then through an
expanse of vermilion, rose, and cherry to deepening crimsons and dull
reddish purples--the heavens hung black with snow-laden clouds. A
pleasant, moist night-breeze came softly across the valley, bearing ever
and again a solitary flake of snow. The effect of this mild wind was so
grateful to Jessicas face, now once more burning with an inner heat,
that she gave no thought to a curious difficulty in breathing which was
growing upon her. The scoundrels shall pay dear for this, Reuben said to her, between
set teeth, when there came a place in the road where the horses must be
allowed to walk up hill. Im sure I hope so, she said, quite in his spirit. The husky note in her voice caught his attention. Are you sure you
are bundled up warm enough? he asked with solicitude, pulling the robe
higher about her. I caught a heavy cold yesterday, she
answered. But it will be nothing, if only we can get there in time.

It struck her as strange when Reuben presently replied, putting the whip
once more to the horses: God only knows what can be done when I do
get there! It had seemed to her a matter of course that Tracy would be
equal to any emergency--even an armed riot. There was something almost
disheartening in this confession of self-doubt. But at any rate they shall pay for it to-morrow, he broke out,
angrily, a moment later. Down to the last pennyweight we will have our
pound of flesh! My girl, he added, turning to look into her face, and
speaking with deep earnestness, I never knew what it was before to feel
wholly merciless--absolutely without bowels of compassion. But I will
not abate so much as the fraction of a hair with these villains. I swear
that!

By an odd contradiction, his words raised a vague spirit of compunction
within her. They feel very bitterly, she ventured to suggest. It is
terrible to be turned out of work in the winter, and with families
dependent on that work for bare existence. And then the bringing in of
these strange workmen. I suppose that is what--

Reuben interrupted her with an abrupt laugh. Im not thinking of them,
 he said. Poor foolish fellows, I dont wish them any harm. I only
pray God they havent done too much harm to themselves. No: its the
swindling scoundrels who are responsible for the mischief--_they_ are
the ones Ill put the clamps onto to-morrow.

The words conveyed no meaning to her, and she kept silent until he spoke
further: I dont know whether he told you, but Gedney has brought me
to-night the last links needed for a chain of proof which must send all
three of these ruffians to State prison. I havent had time to
examine the papers yet, but he says hes got them in his pocket
there--affidavits from the original inventor of certain machinery, about
its original sale, and from others who were a party to it--which makes
the whole fraud absolutely clear. Ill go over them to-night, when weve
seen this thing through--pointing vaguely with his whip toward the
reddened sky--and if tomorrow I dont lay all three of them by the
heels, you can have my head for a foot-ball!

I dont understand these things very well, said Jessica. Who is it
you mean? It was growing still harder for her to breathe, and sharp
pain came in her breast now with almost every respiration. Her head
ached, too, so violently that she cared very little indeed who it was
that should go to prison tomorrow. There are three of them in the scheme, said the lawyer; as
cold-blooded and deliberate a piece of robbery as ever was planned. First, theres a New York man named Wendover--they call him a Judge--a
smart, subtle, slippery scoundrel if ever there was one. Then theres
Schuyler Tenney--perhaps you know who he is--hes a big hardware
merchant here; and with him in the swindle was--Good heavens! Why, I
never thought of it before!

Reuben had stopped short in his surprise. He began whipping the horses
now with a seeming air of exultation, and stole a momentary smile-lit
glance toward his companion. Its just occurred to me, he said. Curious--I hadnt given it a
thought. Why, my girl, its like a special providence. You, too, will
have your full revenge--such revenge as you never dreamt of. The third
man is Horace Boyce!

A great wave of cold stupor engulfed the girls reason as she took in
these words, and her head swam and roared as if in truth she had been
plunged headlong into unknown depths of icy water. When she came to the surface of consciousness again, the horses were
still rhythmically racing along the hill-side road overlooking the
village. The firelight in the sky had faded down now to a dull pinkish
effect like the northern lights. Reuben was chewing an unlighted cigar,
and the squire was steadily snoring behind them. You will send them all to prison--surely? she was able to ask. As surely as God made little apples! was the sententious response. The girl was cowering under the buffalo-robe in an anguish of mind so
terribly intense that her physical pains were all forgotten. Only her
throbbing head seemed full of thick blood, and there was such an
awful need that she should think clearly! She bit her lips in tortured
silence, striving through a myriad of wandering, crowding ideas to lay
hold upon something which should be of help. They had begun to descend the hill--a steep, uneven road full of drifts,
beyond which stretched a level mile of highway leading into the village
itself--when suddenly a bold thought came to her, which on the instant
had shot up, powerful and commanding, into a very tower of resolution. She laid her hand on Reubens arm. If you dont mind, Ill change into the back seat, she said, in a
voice which all her efforts could not keep from shaking. Im feeling
very ill. Itll be easier for me there.

Reuben at once drew up the horses, and the girl, summoning all her
strength, managed without his help to get around the side of the sleigh,
and under the robe, into the rear seat. The squire was sunk in such a
profound sleep that she had to push him bodily over into his own half of
the space, and the discovery that this did not waken him filled her
with so great a delight that all her strength and self-control seemed
miraculously to have returned to her. She had need of them both for the task which she had imposed upon
herself, and which now, with infinite caution and trepidation, she set
herself about. This was nothing less than to secure the papers which
the old squire had brought from Cadmus, and which, from something she
remembered his having said, must be in the inner pocket of one of his
coats. Slowly and deftly she opened button after button of his overcoat,
and gently pushed aside the cloth until her hand might have free
passage to and from the pocket, where, after careful soundings, she had
discovered a bundle of thick papers to be resting. Then whole minutes
seemed to pass before, having taken off her glove, she was able to draw
this packet out. Once during this operation Reuben half turned to speak
to her, and her fright was very great. But she had had the presence of
mind to draw the robe high about her, and answer collectedly, and he had
palpably suspected nothing. As for Gedney, he never once stirred in his
drunken sleep. The larceny was complete, and Jessica had been able to wrap the old man
up again, to button the parcel of papers under her own cloak, and to
draw on and fasten her glove once more, before the panting horses had
gained the outskirts of the village. She herself was breathing almost
as heavily as the animals after their gallop, and, now that the deed was
done, lay back wearily in her seat, with pain racking her every joint
and muscle, and a sickening dread in her mind lest there should be
neither strength nor courage forthcoming for what remained to do. For a considerable distance down the street no person was visible from
whom the eager Tracy could get news of what had happened. At last,
however, when the sleigh was within a couple of blocks of what seemed
in the distance to be a centre of interest, a man came along who shouted
from the sidewalk, in response to Reubens questions, sundry leading
facts of importance. A fire had started--probably incendiary--in the basement of the office
of the Minster furnaces, some hour or so ago, and had pretty well gutted
the building. The firemen were still playing on the ruins. An immense
crowd had witnessed the fire, and it was the drunkenest crowd he had
ever seen in Thessaly. Where the money came from to buy so much drink,
was what puzzled him. The crowd had pretty well cleared off now; some
said they had gone up to the Minster house to give its occupants a
horning. He himself had got his feet wet, and was afraid of the
rheumatics if he stayed out any longer. Probably he would get them, as
it was. Everybody said that the building was insured, and some folks
hinted that the company had it set on fire themselves. Reuben impatiently whipped up the jaded team at this, with a curt Much
obliged, and drove at a spanking pace down the street to the scene of
the conflagration. The outer walls
of the office building were still gloomily erect, but within nothing
was left but a glowing mass of embers about level with the ground. Some firemen were inside the yard, but more were congregated about the
water-soaked space where the engine still noisily throbbed, and where
hot coffee was being passed around to them. Here, too, there was a
report that the crowd had gone up to the Minster house. The horses tugged vehemently to drag the sleigh over the impedimenta of
hose stretched along the street, and over the considerable area of bare
stones where the snow had been melted by the heat or washed away by the
streams from the hydrants. Then Reuben half rose in his seat to lash
them into a last furious gallop, and, snorting with rebellion, they tore
onward toward the seminary road. At the corner, three doors from the home of the Minster ladies, Reuben
deemed it prudent to draw up. There was evidently a considerable throng
in the road in front of the house, and that still others were on the
lawn within the gates was obvious from the confused murmur which came
therefrom. Some boys were blowing spasmodically on fish-horns, and
rough jeers and loud boisterous talk rose and fell throughout the dimly
visible assemblage. The air had become thick with large wet snowflakes. Reuben sprang from the sleigh, and, stepping backward, vigorously shook
old Gedney into a state of semi-wakefulness. Hold these lines, he said, and wait here for me.--Or, he turned to
Jessica with the sudden thought, would you rather he drove you home?

The girl had been in a half-insensible condition of mind and body. At
the question she roused herself and shook her head. No: let me stay
here, she said, wearily. But when Reuben, squaring his broad shoulders and shaking himself to
free his muscles after the long ride, had disappeared with an energetic
stride in the direction of the crowd, Jessica forced herself to sit
upright, and then to rise to her feet. Youd better put the blankets on the horses, if he doesnt come back
right off, she said to the squire. Where are you going? Gedney asked, still stupid with sleep. Ill walk up and down, she answered, clambering with difficulty out of
the sleigh. Im tired of sitting still.

Once on the sidewalk, she grew suddenly faint, and grasped a
fence-picket for support. The hand which she instinctively raised to her
heart touched the hard surface of the packet of papers, and the thought
which this inspired put new courage into her veins. With bowed head and a hurried, faltering step, she turned her back upon
the Minster house and stole off into the snowy darkness. CHAPTER XXXIV.--THE CONQUEST OF THE MOB. Even before he reached the gates of the carriage-drive opening upon
the Minster lawn, Reuben Tracy encountered some men whom he knew, and
gathered that the people in the street outside were in the main peaceful
on-lookers, who did not understand very clearly what was going on, and
disapproved of the proceedings as far as they comprehended them. There
was a crowd inside the grounds, he was told, made up in part of men who
were out of work, but composed still more largely, it seemed, of boys
and young hoodlums generally, who were improving the pretext to indulge
in horseplay. There was a report that some sort of deputation had gone
up on the doorstep and rung the bell, with a view to making some remarks
to the occupants of the house; but that they had failed to get any
answer, and certainly the whole front of the residence was black as
night. Reuben easily obtained the consent of several of these citizens to
follow him, and, as they went on, the number swelled to ten or a dozen. Doubtless many more could have been incorporated in the impromptu
procession had it not been so hopelessly dark. The lawyer led his friends through the gate, and began pushing his
way up the gravelled path through the crowd. No special opposition was
offered to his progress, for the air was so full of snow now that only
those immediately affected knew anything about it. Although the path
was fairly thronged, nobody seemed to have any idea why he was standing
there. Those who spoke appeared in the main to regard the matter as a
joke, the point of which was growing more and more obscure. Except for
some sporadic horn-blowing and hooting nearer to the house, the activity
of the assemblage was confined to a handful of boys, who mustered
among them two or three kerosene oil torches treasured from the last
Presidential campaign, and a grotesque jack-o-lantem made of a pumpkin
and elevated on a broom-stick. These urchins were running about among
the little groups of bystanders, knocking off one anothers caps,
shouting prodigiously, and having a good time. As Reuben and those accompanying him approached the house, some of
these lads raised the cry of Heres the coppers! and the crowd at
this seemed to close up with a simultaneous movement, while a murmur ran
across its surface like the wind over a field of corn. This sound was
one less of menace or even excitement than of gratification that at last
something was going to happen. One of the boys with a torch, in the true spirit of his generation,
placed himself in front of Reuben and marched with mock gravity at the
head of the advancing group. This, drolly enough, lent the movement a
semblance of authority, or at least of significance, before which the
men more readily than ever gave way. At this the other boys with
the torches and jack-o-lantem fell into line at the rear of Tracys
immediate supporters, and they in turn were followed by the throng
generally. Thus whimsically escorted, Reuben reached the front steps of
the mansion. A more compact and apparently homogeneous cluster of men stood here,
some of them even on the steps, and dark and indistinct as everything
was, Reuben leaped to the conclusion that these were the men at least
visibly responsible for this strange gathering. Presumably they were
taken by surprise at his appearance with such a following. At any
rate, they, too, offered no concerted resistance, and he mounted to the
platform of the steps without difficulty. Then he turned and whispered
to a friend to have the boys with the torches also come up. This was
a suggestion gladly obeyed, not least of all by the boy with the
low-comedy pumpkin, whose illumination created a good-natured laugh. Tracy stood now, bareheaded in the falling snow, facing the throng. The
gathering of the lights about him indicated to everybody in the grounds
that the aimless demonstration had finally assumed some kind of form. Then there were
admonitory shouts here and there, under the influence of which the
horn-blowing gradually ceased, and Tracys name was passed from mouth to
mouth until its mention took on almost the character of a personal cheer
on the outskirts of the crowd. In answer to this two or three hostile
interrogations or comments were bawled out, but the throng did not favor
these, and so there fell a silence which invited Reuben to speak. My friends, he began, and then stopped because he had not pitched his
voice high enough, and a whole semicircle of cries of louder! rose
from the darkness of the central lawn. Hes afraid of waking the fine ladies, called out an anonymous voice. Shut up, Tracy, and let the pumpkin talk, was another shout. Begorrah, its the pumpkin that _is_ talkin now! cried a shrill third
voice, and at this there was a ripple of laughter. My friends, began Reuben, in a louder tone, this time without
immediate interruption, although I dont know precisely why you have
gathered here at so much discomfort to yourselves, I have some things to
say to you which I think you will regard as important. I have not seen
the persons who live in this house since Tuesday, but while I can easily
understand that your coming here to-night might otherwise cause them
some anxiety, I am sure that they, when they come to understand it,
will be as glad as I am that you _are_ here, and that I am given this
opportunity of speaking for them to you. If you had not taken this
notion of coming here tonight, I should have, in a day or two, asked you
to meet me somewhere else, in a more convenient place, to talk matters
over. First of all let me tell you that the works are going to be opened
promptly, certainly the furnaces, and unless I am very much mistaken
about the law, the rolling mills too. I give you my word for that, as
the legal representative of two of these women.

Yes; theyll be opened with the Frenchmen! came a swift answering
shout. Or will you get Chinamen? cried another, amid derisive laughter. Reuben responded in his clearest tones: No man who belongs to Thessaly
shall be crowded out by a newcomer. I give you my word for that, too.

Some scattered cheers broke out at this announcement, which promised
for the instant to become general, and then were hushed down by the
prevalent anxiety to hear more. In this momentary interval Reuben caught
the sound of a window being cautiously raised immediately above the
front door, and guessed with a little flutter of the heart who this new
auditor might be. Secondly, he went on, you ought to be told the truth about the
shutting down of the furnaces and the lockout. These women were not at
all responsible for either action. I know of my own knowledge that both
things caused them genuine grief, and that they were shocked beyond
measure at the proposal to bring outside workmen into the town to
undersell and drive away their own neighbors and fellow-townsmen. I
want you to realize this, because otherwise you would do a wrong in your
minds to these good women who belong to Thessaly, who are as fond of our
village and its people as any other soul within its borders, and who,
for their own sake as well as that of Stephen Minsters memory, deserve
respect and liking at your hands. I may tell you frankly that they were misled and deceived by agents, in
whom, mistakenly enough, they trusted, into temporarily giving power
to these unworthy men. The result was a series of steps which they
deplored, but did not know how to stop. A few days ago I was called
into the case to see what could be done toward undoing the mischief from
which they, and you, and the townspeople generally, suffer. Since then I
have been hard at work both in court and out of it, and I believe I can
say with authority that the attempt to plunder the Minster estate and to
impoverish you will be beaten all along the line.

This time the outburst of cheering was spontaneous and prolonged. When
it died away, some voice called out, Three cheers for the ladies! and
these were given, too, not without laughter at the jack-o-lantem boy,
who waved his pumpkin vigorously. One word more, called out Tracy, and I hope you will take in good
part what I am going to say. When I made my way up through the grounds,
I was struck by the fact that nobody seemed to know just why he had come
here. I gather now that word was passed around during the day that there
would be a crowd here, and that something, nobody understood just what,
would be done after they got here. I do not know who started the idea,
or who circulated the word. It might be worth your while to find out. Meanwhile, dont you agree with me that it is an unsatisfactory and
uncivil way of going at the thing? This is a free country, but just
because it _is_ free, we ought to feel the more bound to respect one
anothers rights. There are countries in which, I dare say, if I were a
citizen, or rather a subject, I might feel it my duty to head a mob or
join a riot. But here there ought to be no mob; there should be no room
for even thought of a riot. Our very strength lies in the idea that we
are our own policemen--our own soldiery. I say this not because one in
a hundred of you meant any special harm in coming here, but because the
notion of coming itself was not American. Beware of men who suggest that
kind of thing. Beware of men who preach the theory that because you are
puddlers or moulders or firemen, therefore you are different from the
rest of your fellow-citizens. I, for one, resent the idea that because I
am a lawyer, and you, for example, are a blacksmith, therefore we belong
to different classes. I wish with all my heart that everybody resented
it, and that that abominable word classes could be wiped out of the
English language as it is spoken in America. I am glad if
you feel easier in your minds than you did when you came. If you do,
I guess theres been no harm done by your coming which isnt more than
balanced by the good that has come out of it. Only next time, if you
dont mind, well have our meeting somewhere else, where it will be
easier to speak than it is in a snowstorm, and where we wont keep our
neighbors awake. And now good-night, everybody.

Out of the satisfied and amiable murmur which spread through the crowd
at this, there rose a sharp, querulous voice:

Give us the names of the men who, you say, _were_ responsible.

No, I cant do that to-night. But if you read the next list of
indictments found by the grand jury of Dearborn County, my word as a
lawyer youll find them all there.

The loudest cheer of the evening burst upon the air at this, and there
was a sustained roar when Tracys name was shouted out above the tumult. Some few men crowded up to the steps to shake hands with him, and many
others called out to him a personal good-night. The last of those to
shake the accumulated snow from their collars and hats, and turn their
steps homeward, noted that the whole front of the Minster house had
suddenly become illuminated. Thus Reubens simple and highly fortuitous conquest of what had been
planned to be a mob was accomplished. It is remembered to this day as
the best thing any man ever did single-handed in Thessaly, and it is
always spoken of as the foundation of his present political eminence. But he himself would say now, upon reflection, that he succeeded
because the better sense of his auditors, from the outset, wanted him
to succeed, and because he was lucky enough to impress a very decent and
bright-witted lot of men with the idea that he wasnt a humbug. *****

At the moment he was in no mood to analyze his success. His hair was
streaming with melted snow, his throat was painfully hoarse and sore,
and the fatigue from speaking so loud, and the reaction from his great
excitement, combined to make him feel a very weak brother indeed. So utterly wearied was he that when the door of the now lighted hallway
opened behind him, and Miss Kate herself, standing in front of the
servant on the threshold, said: We want you to come in, Mr. Tracy, he
turned mechanically and went in, thinking more of a drink of some sort
and a chance to sit down beside her, than of all the possible results of
his speech to the crowd. The effect of warmth and welcome inside the mansion was grateful to
all his senses. He parted with his hat and overcoat, took the glass of
claret which was offered him, and allowed himself to be led into the
drawing-room and given a seat, all in a happy daze, which was, in truth,
so very happy, that he was dimly conscious of the beginnings of tears
in his eyes. It seemed now that the strain upon his mind and heart--the
anger, and fright, and terrible anxiety--had lasted for whole weary
years. Trial by soul-torture was new to him, and this ordeal through
which he had passed left him curiously flabby and tremulous. He lay back in the easy-chair in an ecstasy of physical lassitude and
mental content, surrendering himself to the delight of watching the
beautiful girl before him, and of listening to the music of her voice. The liquid depths of brown eyes into which he looked, and the soft tones
which wooed his hearing, produced upon him vaguely the sensation of
shining white robes and celestial harps--an indefinitely glorious
recompense for the travail that lay behind in the valley of the shadow
of death. Nothing was further from him than the temptation to break this bright
spell by speech. We heard almost every word of what you said, Kate was saying. When
you began we were in this room, crouched there by the window--that is,
Ethel and I were, for mamma refused to even pretend to listen--and at
first we thought it was one of the mob, and then Ethel recognized your
voice. That almost annoyed me, for it seemed as if _I_ should have
been---at least, equally quick to know it--that is, I mean, Ive heard
you speak so much more than she has. And then we both hurried up-stairs,
and lifted the window--and oh! And from the moment we knew it was you--that you were here--we felt
perfectly safe. It doesnt seem now that we were very much afraid, even
before that, although probably we were. There was a lot of hooting, and
that dreadful blowing on horns, and all that, and once somebody rang the
door-bell; but, beyond throwing snowballs, nothing else was done. So
I daresay they only wanted to scare us. Of course it was the fire that
made us really nervous. We got that brave girls warning about the mobs
coming here just a little while before the sky began to redden with the
blaze; and that sight, coming on the heels of her letter--

What girl? Here it is, answered Kate, drawing a crumpled sheet of paper from her
bosom, and reading aloud:

Dear Miss Minster:

I have just heard that a crowd of men are coming to your house to-night
to do violent things. I am starting out to try and bring you help. Meanwhile, I send you my father, who will do whatever you tell him to
do. Gratefully yours,

Jessica Lawton.

Reuben had risen abruptly to his feet before the signature was reached. I am ashamed of myself, he said; Ive left her out there all this
while. There was so much else that really she
escaped my memory altogether.

He had made his way out into the hall and taken up his hat and coat. You will come back, wont you? Kate asked. There are so many things
to talk over, with all of us. And--and bring her too, if--if she will
come.

With a sign of acquiescence and comprehension. Reuben darted down the
steps and into the darkness. In a very few minutes he returned,
disappointment written all over his face. Gedney, the man I left with the sleigh, says she went off
as soon as I had got out of sight. I had offered to have him drive her
home, but she refused. Shes a curiously independent girl.

I am very sorry, said Kate. But I will go over the first thing in the
morning and thank her.

You dont as yet know the half of what you have to thank her for,
 put in the lawyer. I dont mean that it was so great a thing--my
coming--but she drove all the way out to my mothers farm to bring me
here to-night, and fainted when she got there. If
her father is still here, I think hed better go at once to her place,
and see about her.

The suggestion seemed a good one, and was instantly acted upon. Ben
Lawton had been in the kitchen, immensely proud of his position as
the responsible garrison of a beleaguered house, and came out into the
hallway now with a full stomach and a satisfied expression on his lank
face. He assented with readiness to Reubens idea, when it was explained to
him. So she druv out to your mothers place for you, did she? he commented,
admiringly. That girls a genuwine chip of the old block. I mean, he
added, with an apologetic smile, of the old, old block. I aint got so
much git-up-and-git about me, that I know of, but her grandfather was a
regular snorter!

We shall not forget how much we are obliged to you, Mr. Lawton, said
Kate, pleasantly, offering him her hand. Be sure that you tell your
daughter, too, how grateful we all are.

Ben took the delicate hand thus amazingly extended to him, and shook it
with formal awkwardness. I didnt seem to do much, he said, deprecatingly, and perhaps I
wouldnt have amounted to much, neether, if it had a-come to fightin
and gougin and wraslin round generally. But you can bet your boots,
maam, that Id a-done what I could!

With this chivalrous assurance Ben withdrew, and marched down the steps
with a carriage more nearly erect than Thessaly had ever seen him assume
before. The heavy front door swung to, and Reuben realized, with a new rush of
charmed emotion, that heaven had opened for him once more. A servant came and whispered something to Miss Kate. The latter nodded,
and then turned to Reuben with a smile full of light and softness. If you will give me your arm, she said, in a delicious murmur, we
will go into the dining-room. My mother and sister are waiting for us
there. We are not supper-people as a rule, but it seemed right to have
one to-night.




CHAPTER XXXV.--THE SHINING REWARD. The scene which opened upon Reubens eyes was like a vista of
fairyland. The dark panelled room, with its dim suggestions of gold
frames and heavy curtains, and its background of palms and oleanders,
contributed with the reticence of richness to the glowing splendor of
the table in its centre. Here all light was concentrated--light which
fell from beneath ruby shades at the summits of tall candles, and
softened the dazzling whiteness of the linen, mellowed the burnished
gleam of the silver plate, reflected itself in tender, prismatic hues
from the facets of the cut-glass decanters. There were flowers here
which gave forth still the blended fragrance of their hot-house home,
and fragile, painted china, and all the nameless things of luxury which
can make the breaking of bread a poem. Reuben had seen something dimly resembling this in New York once or
twice at semi-public dinners. The thought that this higher marvel was
in his honor intoxicated his reason. The other thought--that conceivably
his future might lie all in this flower-strewn, daintily lighted
path--was too heady, too full of threatened delirium, to be even
entertained. With an anxious hold upon himself, he felt his way forward
to self-possession. It came sooner than he had imagined it would, and
thereafter everything belonged to a dream of delight. The ladies were all dressed more elaborately than he had observed them
to be on any previous occasion, and, at the outset, there was something
disconcerting in this. Speedily enough, though, there came the
reflection that his clothes were those in which he had raced
breathlessly from the farm, in which he had faced and won the crowd
outside, and then, all at once, he was at perfect ease. He told them--addressing his talk chiefly to Mrs. Minster, who sat at
the head of the table, to his left--the story of Jessicas ride, of her
fainting on her arrival, and of the furious homeward drive. From this
he drifted to the final proofs which had been procured at Cadmus--he
had sent Gedney home with the horses, and was to see him early in the
morning--and then to the steps toward a criminal prosecution which he
would summarily take. So far as I can see, Mrs. Minster, he concluded, when the servant
had again left the room, no real loss will result from this whole
imbroglio. It may even show a net gain, when everything is cleared
up; for your big loan must really give you control of the Thessaly
Manufacturing Company, in law. These fellows staked their majority
interest in that concern to win your whole property in the game. They have lost, and the proceeds must go to you. Of course, it is not
entirely clear how the matter will shape itself; but my notion is that
you will come out winner.

Mrs. My daughters thought that I knew
nothing about business! she said, with an air of easy triumph. The daughters displayed great eagerness to leave this branch of the
matter undiscussed. And will it really be necessary to prosecute these men? asked Ethel,
from Reubens right. The lawyer realized, even before he spoke, that not a little of his
bitterness had evaporated. Men ought to be punished for such a crime as
they committed, he said. If only as a duty to the public, they should
be prosecuted.

He was looking at Kate as he spoke, and in her glance, as their eyes
met, he read something which prompted him hastily to add:

Of course, I am in your hands in the matter. I have committed myself
with the crowd outside to the statement that they should be punished. I
was full, then, of angry feelings; and I still think that they ought to
be punished. But it is really your question, not mine. And I may even
tell you that there would probably be a considerable financial advantage
in settling the thing with them, instead of taking it before the grand
jury.

That is a consideration which we wont discuss, said Kate. If my mind
were clear as to the necessity of a prosecution, I would not alter the
decision for any amount of money. But my sister and I have been talking
a great deal about this matter, and we feel--You know that Mr. Boyce
was, for a time, on quite a friendly footing in this house.

Yes; I know. Reuben bowed his head gravely. Well, you yourself said that if one was prosecuted, they all must be.

No doubt. Wendover and Tenney were smart enough to put the credulous
youngster in the very forefront of everything. Until these affidavits
came to hand to-day, it would have been far easier to convict him than
them.

Precisely, urged Kate. Credulous is just the word. He was weak,
foolish, vain--whatever you like. But I
dont believe that at the outset, or, indeed, till very recently, he had
any idea of being a party to a plan to plunder us. There are reasons,
 the girl blushed a little, and hesitated, to be frank, there are
reasons for my thinking so.

Reuben, noting the faint flush of embarrassment, catching the doubtful
inflection of the words, felt that he comprehended everything, and
mirrored that feeling in his glance. I quite follow you, he said. It is my notion that he was deceived, at
the beginning.

Others deceived him, and still more he deceived himself, responded
Kate. And that is why, put in Ethel, we feel like asking you not to take
the matter into the courts--I mean so as to put him in prison. It would
be too dreadful to think of--to take a man who had dined at your house,
and been boating with you, and had driven with you all over the Orange
Mountains, picking wild-flowers for you and all that, and put him into
prison, where he would have his hair shaved off, and tramp up and down
on a treadmill. No; we mustnt do that, Mr. Tracy.

Kate added musingly: He has lost so much, we can afford to be generous,
can we not?

Then Reuben felt that there could be no answer possible except yes.
 His heart pleaded with his brain for a lovers interpretation of this
speech; and his tongue, to evade the issue, framed some halting words
about allowing him to go over the whole case to-morrow, and postponing a
final decision until that had been done. The consent of silence was accorded to this, and everybody at the
table knew that there would be no prosecutions. Upon the instant the
atmosphere grew lighter. And now for the real thing, said Kate, gayly. I am commissioned on
behalf of the entire family to formally thank you for coming to our
rescue tonight. Mamma did not hear your speech--she resolutely sat in
the library, pretending to read, during the whole rumpus, and we were
in such a hurry to get up-stairs that we didnt tell her when you
began--but she couldnt help hearing the horns, and she is as much
obliged to you as we are; and that is very, very, very much indeed!

Yes, indeed, assented Mrs. I dont know where the police
were, at all.

The police could have done next to nothing, if they had been
here, said Reuben. The visit of the crowd was annoying enough, and
discreditable in its way, but I dont really imagine there was ever any
actual danger. The men felt disagreeable about the closing of the works
and the importation of the French Canadians, and I dont blame them;
but as a body they never had any idea of molesting you. My own notion is
that the mob was organized by outsiders--by men who had an end to serve
in frightening you--and that after the crowd got here it didnt know
what to do with itself. The truth is, that the mob isnt an American
institution. Its component parts are too civilized, too open to appeals
to reason. As soon as I told these people the facts in the case, they
were quite ready to go, and they even cheered for you before they went.

Ethel tells me that you promised them the furnaces should be opened
promptly, said the mother, with her calm, inquiring glance, which might
mean sarcasm, anger, approval, or nothing at all. Reuben answered resolutely: Yes, Mrs. And so they must
be opened, on Monday. It is my dearest
wish that I should be able to act for you all in this whole business. But I have gone too far now, the interests involved are too great, to
make a pause here possible. The very essence of the situation is that we
should defy the trust, and throw upon it the _onus_ of stopping us if it
can. We have such a grip upon the men who led you into that trust, and
who can influence the decisions of its directors, that they will not
dare to show fight. The force of circumstances has made me the custodian
of your interests quite as much as of your daughters. I am very proud
and happy that it is so. It is true that I have not your warrant for
acting in your behalf; but if you will permit me to say so, that cannot
now be allowed to make the slightest difference in my action.

Yes, mamma, you are to be rescued in spite of yourself, said Ethel,
merrily. The young people were all smiling at one another, and to their
considerable relief Mrs. Nobody attempted to analyze the mental processes by which she had been
brought around. It was enough that she had come to accept the situation. The black shadow of discord, which had overhung the household so long,
was gone, and mother and daughters joined in a sigh of grateful relief. It must have been nearly midnight when Reuben rose finally to go. There
had been so much to talk about, and time had flown so softly, buoyantly
along, that the evening seemed to him only to have begun, and he felt
that he fain would have had it go on forever. These delicious hours that
were past had been one sweet sustained conspiracy to do him honor, to
minister to his pleasure. No word or smile or deferential glance of
attention had been wanting to make complete the homage with which the
family had chosen to envelop him. The sense of tender domestic intimacy
had surcharged the very air he breathed. It had not even been necessary
to keep the ball of talk in motion: so well and truly did they know one
another, that silences had come as natural rests--silences more eloquent
than spoken words could be of mutual liking and trust. The outside world
had shrunk to nothingness. Here within this charmed circle of softened
light was home. All that the whole universe contained for him of beauty,
of romance, of reverential desire, of happiness, here within touch it
was centred. The farewells that found their way into phrases left scarcely a mark
upon his memory. There had been cordial, softly significant words of
smiling leave-taking with Ethel and her mother, and then, divinely
prompted by the spirit which ruled this blessed hour, they had gone
away, and he stood alone in the hallway with the woman he worshipped. He
held her hand in his, and there was no need for speech. Slowly, devoutly, he bowed his head over this white hand, and pressed
his lips upon it. There were tears in his eyes when he stood erect
again, and through them he saw with dim rapture the marvel of an angels
face, pale, yet glowing in the half light, lovely beyond all mortal
dreams; and on this face there shone a smile, tender, languorous,
trembling with the supreme ecstasy of a soul. Reuben could hardly have told as he walked away down
the path to the street. bless you! was what the song-birds
carolled in his brain; but whether the music was an echo of what he had
said, did not make itself clear. He was scarcely conscious of the physical element of walking in his
progress. Rather it seemed to him that his whole being was afloat in the
ether, wafted forward by the halcyon winds of a beneficent destiny. Was
there ever such unthinkable bliss before in all the vast span of the
universe? The snowfall had long since ceased, and the clouds were gone. The air
was colder, and the broad sky was brilliant with the clear starlight of
winter. To the lovers eyes, the great planets were nearer, strangely
nearer, than they had ever been before, and the undying fire with which
they burned was the same that glowed in his own heart. His senses linked
themselves to the grand procession of the skies. The triumphant onward
glide of the earth itself within this colossal scheme of movement was
apparent to him, and seemed but a part of his own resistless, glorified
onward sweep. Oh, this--_this_ was life! *****

At the same hour a heavy and lumpish man made his way homeward by a
neighboring street, tramping with difficulty through the hardening snow
which lay thick upon the walks. There was nothing buoyant in his stride,
and he never once lifted his eyes to observe the luminous panorama
spread overhead. With his hands plunged deep into his pockets, and his
cane under his arm, he trudged moodily along, his shoulders rounded and
his brows bent in a frown. An acquaintance going in the other direction called out cheerily as he
passed, Hello, General! Pretty tough walking, isnt it? and had only
an inarticulate grunt for an answer. There were evil hints abroad in the village below, this night--stories
of impending revelations of fraud, hints of coming prosecutions--and
General Boyce had heard enough of these to grow sick at heart. That
Horace had been deeply mixed up in something scoundrelly, seemed only
too evident. Since this foolish, ungrateful boy had left the paternal
roof, his father had surrendered himself more than ever to drink; but
indulgence now, instead of the old brightening merriment of song and
quip and pleasantly reminiscent camp-fire sparkle, seemed to swing him
like a pendulum between the extremes of sullen wrath and almost tearful
weakness. Something of both these moods weighted his mind to-night, and
to their burden was added a crushingly gloomy apprehension that naked
disgrace was coming as well. Precisely what it was, he knew not; but
winks and nods and unnatural efforts to shift the conversation when
he came in had been in the air about him all the evening. The very
vagueness of the fear lent it fresh terror. His own gate was reached at last, and he turned wearily into the path
which encircled the small yard to reach the front door. He cursorily
noted the existence of some partially obliterated footprints in the
snow, and took it for granted that one of the servants had been out
late. He had begun fumbling in his pocket for the key, and had his foot on the
lower step, before he discovered in the dim light something which
gave even his martial nerves a start. The dark-clad figure of a woman,
obviously well dressed, apparently young, lay before him, the head and
arms bent under against his very door. The General was a man of swift decision and ready resource. In an
instant he had lifted the figure up out of the snow which half enveloped
it, and sustained it in one arm, while with the other he sent the
reverberating clamor of the door-bell pealing through the house. Then,
unlocking the door, he bore his burden lightly into the hall, turned up
the gas, and disposed the inanimate form on a chair. He did not know the woman, but it was evident that she was very
ill--perhaps dying. When the servant came down, he bade her run with all possible haste for
Dr. Lester, who lived only a block or so away. CHAPTER XXXVI.--I TELL YOU I HAVE LIVED IT DOWN!

 Instead of snow and cold and the black terror of being overwhelmed
by stormy night, here were light and warmth and a curiously sleepy yet
volatile sense of comfort. Jessicas eyes for a long time rested tranquilly upon what seemed a
gigantic rose hanging directly over her head. Her brain received no
impression whatever as to why it was there, and there was not the
slightest impulse to wonder or to think about it at all. Even when it
finally began to descend nearer, and to expand and unfold pale pink
leaves, still it was satisfying not to have to make any effort toward
understanding it. The transformation went on with infinite slowness
before her vacantly contented vision. Upon all sides the outer leaves
gradually, little by little, stretched themselves downward, still
downward, until they enveloped her as in the bell of some huge inverted
lily. Indefinite spaces of time intervened, and then it became vaguely
apparent that faint designs of other, smaller flowers were scattered
over these large environing leaves, and that a soft, ruddy light came
through them. With measured deliberation, as if all eternity were at
its disposal, this vast floral cone revealed itself at last to her
dim consciousness as being made of some thin, figured cloth. It seemed
weeks--months--before she further comprehended that the rose above her
was the embroidered centre of a canopy, and that the leaves depending
from it in long, graceful curves about her were bed-curtains. After a time she found herself lifting her hand upright and looking at
it. It was wan and white like wax, as if it did not belong to her at
all. From the wrist there was turned back the delicately quilted cuff of
a mans silk night-shirt. She raised the arm in its novel silken sleeve,
and thrust it forward with some unformed notion that it would prove not
to be hers. The action pushed aside the curtains, and a glare of light
flashed in, under which she shut her eyes and gasped. When she looked again, an elderly, broad-figured man with a florid face
was standing close beside the bed, gazing with anxiety upon her. She
knew that it was General Boyce, and for a long time was not surprised
that he should be there. The capacity for wondering, for thinking about
things, seemed not to exist in her brain. She looked at him calmly and
did not dream of speaking. Are you better? she heard him eagerly whisper. Are you in pain?

The complex difficulty of two questions which required separate answers
troubled her remotely. She made some faint nodding motion of her head
and eyes, and then lay perfectly still again. She could hear the sound
of her own breathing--a hoarse, sighing sound, as if of blowing through
a comb--and, now that it was suggested to her, there was a deadened
heavy ache in her breast. Still placidly surveying the General, she began to be conscious of
remembering things. The pictures came slowly, taking form with a
fantastic absence of consecutive meaning, but they gradually produced
the effect of a recollection upon her mind. The starting point--and
everything else that went before that terrible sinking, despairing
struggle through the wet snow--was missing. She recalled most vividly
of all being seized with a sudden crisis of swimming giddiness
and choking--her throat and chest all afire with the tortures of
suffocation. It was under a lamp-post, she remembered; and when the
vehement coughing was over, her mouth was full of blood, and there were
terrifying crimson spatters on the snow. She had stood aghast at this,
and then fallen to weeping piteously to herself with fright. How strange
it was--in the anguish of that moment she had moaned out, O mother,
mother! and yet she had never seen that parent, and had scarcely
thought of her memory even for many, many years. Then she had blindly staggered on, sinking more than once from sheer
exhaustion, but still forcing herself forward, her wet feet weighing
like leaden balls, and fierce agonies clutching her very heart. She had
fallen in the snow at the very end of her journey; had dragged herself
laboriously, painfully, up on to the steps, and had beaten feebly on the
panels of the door with her numbed hands, making an inarticulate moan
which not all her desperate last effort could lift into a cry; and then
there had come, with a great downward swoop of skies and storm, utter
blackness and collapse. She closed her eyes now in the weariness which this effort at
recollection had caused. Her senses wandered off, unbidden, unguided,
to a dream of the buzzing of a bee upon a window-pane, which was somehow
like the stertorous sound of her own breathing. The bee--a big, loud, foolish fellow, with yellow fur upon his broad
back and thighs--had flown into the schoolroom, and had not wit enough
to go out again. Some of the children were giggling over this, but
she would not join them because Mr. Tracy, the schoolmaster upon the
platform, did not wish it. Already
she delighted in the hope that he liked her better than he did some of
the other girls--scornful girls who came from wealthy homes, and wore
better dresses than any of the despised Lawton brood could ever hope to
have. Silk dresses, opened boldly at the throat, and with long trains
tricked out with imitation garlands. They were worn now by older
girls--hard-faced, jealous, cruel creatures--and these sat in a room
with lace curtains and luxurious furniture. And some laughed with a ring
like brass in their voices, and some wept furtively in comers, and some
cursed their God and all living things; and there was the odor of wine
and the uproar of the piano, and over all a great, ceaseless shame and
terror. Escape from this should be made at all hazards; and the long, incredibly
fearful flight, with pursuit always pressing hot upon her, the evil
fangs of the wolf-pack snapping in the air all about her frightened
ears, led to a peaceful, soft-carpeted forest, where the low setting
sun spread a red light among the big tree-trunks. Against this deep,
far-distant sky there was the figure of a man coming. For him she waited
with a song in her heart. It was Reuben Tracy, and
he was too gentle and good not to see her when he passed. She would call
out to him--and lo! Horace was with her, and held her hand; and they both gazed with
terrified longing after Tracy, and could not cry out to him for the
awful dumbness that was on them. And when he, refusing to see them,
spread out his arms in anger, the whole great forest began to sway and
circle dizzily, and huge trees toppled, rocks crashed downward, gaunt
giant reptiles rose from yawning caves with hideous slimy eyes in a
lurid ring about her. And she would save Horace with her life, and
fought like mad, bleeding and maimed and frenzied, until the weight
of mountains piled upon her breast held her down in helpless, choking
horror. Then only came the power to scream, and--

Out of the roar of confusion and darkness came suddenly a hush and the
return of light. She was lying in the curtained bed, and a tender hand
was pressing soft cool linen to her lips. Opening her eyes in tranquil weakness, she saw two men standing at her
bedside. He who held the cloth in his hand was Dr. Lester, whom she
remembered very well. The other--he whose head was bowed, and whose eyes
were fastened upon hers with a pained and affrighted gaze--was Horace
Boyce. In her soul she smiled at him, but no answering softness came to his
harrowed face. I told your father everything, she heard the doctor say in a low tone. I happened to have attended her, by
the merest chance, when her child was born.

Her child? the other asked, in the same low, far-away voice. He is in Thessaly now, a boy nearly six years
old.

Good God! I never knew--

You seem to have taken precious good care not to know, said the
doctor, with grave dislike. This is the time and place to speak plainly
to you, Boyce. This poor girl has come to her death through the effort
to save you from disgrace. She supposed you lived here, and dragged
herself here to help you. Jessica heard the sentence of doom without
even a passing thought. Every energy left in her feebly fluttering
brain was concentrated upon the question, _Is_ he saved? Vaguely the
circumstances of the papers, of the threats against Horace, of her
desires and actions, seemed to come back to her memory. She waited in
dazed suspense to hear what Horace would say; but he only hung his head
the lower, and left the doctor to go on. She raved for hours last night, he said, after the women had got her
to bed, and we had raised her out of the comatose state, about saving
you from State prison. First she would plead with Tracy, then she would
appeal to you to fly, and so backwards and forwards, until she wore
herself out. The papers she had got hold of--they must have slipped out
of Gedneys pocket into the sleigh. I suppose you know that I took them
back to Tracy this morning?

Still Horace made no answer, but bent that crushed and vacant gaze
upon her face. She marvelled that he could not see she was awake and
conscious, and still more that the strength and will to speak were
withheld from her. The dreadful pressure upon her breast was making
itself felt again, and the painful sound of the labored breathing took
on the sombre rhythm of a distant death-chant. No: still the doctor went on:

Tracy will be here in a few minutes. Hes terribly upset by the thing,
and has gone first to tell the news at the Minsters. Do you want to see
him when he comes?

I dont know what I want, said Horace, gloomily. If I were you, I would go straight to him and say frankly, I have been
a damned fool, and a still damneder hypocrite, and I throw myself on
your mercy. Hes the tenderest-hearted man alive, and this sight here
will move him. Upon my word, I can hardly keep the tears out of my eyes
myself.

Jessica saw as through a mist that these two mens faces, turned upon
her, were softened with a deep compassion. Then suddenly the power to
speak came to her. It was a puny and unnatural voice which fell upon her
ears--low and hoarsely grating, and the product of much pain. Go away--doctor, she murmured. Leave him here.

Horace sat softly upon the edge of the bed, and gathered her two hands
tenderly in his. He did not attempt to keep back the tears which welled
to his eyes, nor did he try to talk. Thus they were together for what
seemed a long time, surrounded by a silence which was full of voices
to them both. A wan smile settled upon her face as she held him in her
intent gaze. Take the boy, she whispered at last; he is Horace, too. Dont let him
lie--ever--to any girl.

The young man groaned in spite of himself, and for answer gently pressed
her hands. I promise you that, Jess, he said, after a time, in a
broken voice. He bent over and kissed her on the forehead. The damp
roughness of the skin chilled and terrified him, but the radiance on her
face deepened. It hurts--to breathe, she said, after a time with a glance of
affectionate apology in her smile. Subdued noises were faintly heard now in the hallway outside, and
presently the door was opened cautiously, and a tall new figure entered
the room. After a moments hesitation Reuben Tracy tiptoed his way to
the bedside, and stood gravely behind and above his former partner. Is she conscious? he asked of Boyce, in a tremulous whisper; and
Horace, bending his head still lower, murmured between choking sobs: It
is Mr. Tracy, Jess, come to say--to see you.

Her eyes brightened with intelligence. Good--good, she said, slowly,
as if musing to herself. The gaze which she fastened upon Reubens face
was strangely full of intense meaning, and he felt it piercing his
very heart. Minutes went by under the strain of this deep, half-wild,
appealing look. At last she spoke, with a greater effort at distinctness
than before, and in a momentarily clearer tone. You were always kind, she said. Dont hurt--my boy. Shake hands with
him--for my sake.

The two young men obeyed mechanically, after an instants pause, and
without looking at each other. Neither had eyes save for the white face
on the pillows in front of them, and for the gladdened, restful light
which spread softly over it as their hands touched in amity before her
vision. In the languor of peace which had come to possess her, even the sense of
pain in breathing was gone. There were shadowy figures on the retina of
her brain, but they conveyed no idea save of general beatitude to her
mind. The space in which her senses floated was radiant and warm and
full of formless beauty. Various individuals--types of her loosening
ties to life--came and went almost unheeded in this daze. Lucinda, vehemently weeping, and holding the little fair-haired,
wondering boy over the bed for her final kiss, passed away like a
dissolving mist. Her fathers face, too, dawned upon this dream,
tear-stained and woful, and faded again into nothingness. Other flitting
apparitions there were, even more vague and brief, melting noiselessly
into the darkened hush. The unclouded calm of this lethargy grew troubled presently when there
fell upon her dulled ear the low tones of a remembered womans voice. Enough of consciousness flickered up to tell her whose it was. She
strained her eyes in the gathering shadows to see Kate Minster, and
began restlessly to roll her head upon the pillow. Where--where--_her?_ she moaned, striving to stretch forth her hand. It was lifted and held softly in a tender grasp, and she felt as well
a compassionate stroking touch laid upon her forehead. The gentle
magnetism of these helped the dying girl to bring into momentary being
the image of a countenance close above hers--a dark, beautiful face, all
melting now with affection and grief. She smiled faintly into this face,
and lay still again for a long time. The breathing grew terribly shorter
and more labored, the light faded. After having written down his
name on the register he was admitted to see the Prince. He made a long and
very attentive examination of the unfortunate child, asked him many
questions without being able to obtain an answer, and contented himself
with prescribing a decoction of hops, to be taken by spoonfuls every
half-hour, from six o'clock in the morning till eight in the evening. On
the first day the Prince steadily refused to take it. In vain Gomin
several times drank off a glass of the potion in his presence; his example
proved as ineffectual as his words. Next day Lasne renewed his
solicitations. "Monsieur knows very well that I desire nothing but the
good of his health, and he distresses me deeply by thus refusing to take
what might contribute to it. I entreat him as a favour not to give me
this cause of grief." And as Lasne, while speaking, began to taste the
potion in a glass, the child took what he offered him out of his hands. "You have, then, taken an oath that I should drink it," said he, firmly;
"well, give it me, I will drink it." From that moment he conformed with
docility to whatever was required of him, but the policy of the Commune
had attained its object; help had been withheld till it was almost a
mockery to supply it. The Prince's weakness was excessive; his keepers could scarcely drag him
to the, top of the Tower; walking hurt his tender feet, and at every step
he stopped to press the arm of Lasne with both hands upon his breast. At
last he suffered so much that it was no longer possible for him to walk,
and his keeper carried him about, sometimes on the platform, and sometimes
in the little tower, where the royal family had lived at first. But the
slight improvement to his health occasioned by the change of air scarcely
compensated for the pain which his fatigue gave him. On the battlement of
the platform nearest the left turret, the rain had, by perseverance
through ages, hollowed out a kind of basin. The water that fell remained
there for several days; and as, during the spring of 1795, storms were of
frequent occurrence, this little sheet of water was kept constantly
supplied. Whenever the child was brought out upon the platform, he saw a
little troop of sparrows, which used to come to drink and bathe in this
reservoir. At first they flew away at his approach, but from being
accustomed to see him walking quietly there every day, they at last grew
more familiar, and did not spread their wings for flight till he came up
close to them. They were always the same, he knew them by sight, and
perhaps like himself they were inhabitants of that ancient pile. He
called them his birds; and his first action, when the door into the
terrace was opened, was to look towards that side,--and the sparrows were
always there. He delighted in their chirping, and he must have envied
them their wings. Though so little could be done to alleviate his sufferings, a moral
improvement was taking place in him. He was touched by the lively
interest displayed by his physician, who never failed to visit him at nine
o'clock every morning. He seemed pleased with the attention paid him, and
ended by placing entire confidence in M. Desault. Gratitude loosened his
tongue; brutality and insult had failed to extort a murmur, but kind
treatment restored his speech he had no words for anger, but he found them
to express his thanks. M. Desault prolonged his visits as long as the
officers of the municipality would permit. When they announced the close
of the visit, the child, unwilling to beg them to allow a longer time,
held back M. Desault by the skirt of his coat. Suddenly M. Desault's
visits ceased. Several days passed and nothing was heard of him. The
keepers wondered at his absence, and the poor little invalid was much
distressed at it. The commissary on duty (M. Benoist) suggested that it
would be proper to send to the physician's house to make inquiries as to
the cause of so long an absence. Gomin and Larne had not yet ventured to
follow this advice, when next day M. Benoist was relieved by M. Bidault,
who, hearing M. Desault's name mentioned as he came in, immediately said,
"You must not expect to see him any more; he died yesterday." M. Pelletan, head surgeon of the Grand Hospice de l'Humanite, was next
directed to attend the prisoner, and in June he found him in so alarming a
state that he at once asked for a coadjutor, fearing to undertake the
responsibility alone. The physician--sent for form's sake to attend the
dying child, as an advocate is given by law to a criminal condemned
beforehand--blamed the officers of the municipality for not having removed
the blind, which obstructed the light, and the numerous bolts, the noise
of which never failed to remind the victim of his captivity. That sound,
which always caused him an involuntary shudder, disturbed him in the last
mournful scene of his unparalleled tortures. M. Pelletan said
authoritatively to the municipal on duty, "If you will not take these
bolts and casings away at once, at least you can make no objection to our
carrying the child into another room, for I suppose we are sent here to
take charge of him." The Prince, being disturbed by these words, spoken
as they were with great animation, made a sign to the physician to come
nearer. "Speak lower, I beg of you," said he; "I am afraid they will hear
you up-stairs, and I should be very sorry for them to know that I am ill,
as it would give them much uneasiness." At first the change to a cheerful and airy room revived the Prince and
gave him evident pleasure, but the improvement did not last. Next day M.
Pelletan learned that the Government had acceded to his request for a
colleague. M. Dumangin, head physician of the Hospice de l'Unite, made
his appearance at his house on the morning of Sunday, 7th June, with the
official despatch sent him by the committee of public safety. They
repaired together immediately to the Tower. On their arrival they heard
that the child, whose weakness was excessive, had had a fainting fit,
which had occasioned fears to be entertained that his end was approaching. He had revived a little, however, when the physicians went up at about
nine o'clock. Unable to contend with increasing exhaustion, they
perceived there was no longer any hope of prolonging an existence worn out
by so much suffering, and that all their art could effect would be to
soften the last stage of this lamentable disease. While standing by the
Prince's bed, Gomin noticed that he was quietly crying, and asked him. "My dear
mother remains in the other tower." Night came,--his last night,--which
the regulations of the prison condemned him to pass once more in solitude,
with suffering, his old companion, only at his side. This time, however,
death, too, stood at his pillow. When Gomin went up to the child's room
on the morning of 8th June, he said, seeing him calm, motionless, and
mute:

"I hope you are not in pain just now?" "Oh, yes, I am still in pain, but not nearly so much,--the music is so
beautiful!" Now there was no music to be heard, either in the Tower or anywhere near. Gomin, astonished, said to him, "From what direction do you hear this
music?" And the
child, with a nervous motion, raised his faltering hand, as he opened his
large eyes illuminated by delight. His poor keeper, unwilling to destroy
this last sweet illusion, appeared to listen also. After a few minutes of attention the child again started, and cried out,
in intense rapture, "Amongst all the voices I have distinguished that of
my mother!" At a quarter past two he died, Lasne
only being in the room at the time. Lasne acquainted Gomin and Damont,
the commissary on duty, with the event, and they repaired to the chamber
of death. The poor little royal corpse was carried from the room into
that where he had suffered so long,--where for two years he had never
ceased to suffer. From this apartment the father had gone to the
scaffold, and thence the son must pass to the burial-ground. The remains
were laid out on the bed, and the doors of the apartment were set
open,--doors which had remained closed ever since the Revolution had
seized on a child, then full of vigour and grace and life and health! At eight o'clock next morning (9th June) four members of the committee of
general safety came to the Tower to make sure that the Prince was really
dead. When they were admitted to the death-chamber by Lasne and Damont
they affected the greatest indifference. "The event is not of the least
importance," they repeated, several times over; "the police commissary of
the section will come and receive the declaration of the decease; he will
acknowledge it, and proceed to the interment without any ceremony; and the
committee will give the necessary directions." As they withdrew, some
officers of the Temple guard asked to see the remains of little Capet. Damont having observed that the guard would not permit the bier to pass
without its being opened, the deputies decided that the officers and
non-commissioned officers of the guard going off duty, together with those
coming on, should be all invited to assure themselves of the child's
death. All having assembled in the room where the body lay, he asked them
if they recognised it as that of the ex-Dauphin, son of the last King of
France. Those who had seen the young Prince at the Tuileries, or at the
Temple (and most of them had), bore witness to its being the body of Louis
XVII. When they were come down into the council-room, Darlot drew up the
minutes of this attestation, which was signed by a score of persons. These minutes were inserted in the journal of the Temple tower, which was
afterwards deposited in the office of the Minister of the Interior. During this visit the surgeons entrusted with the autopsy arrived at the
outer gate of the Temple. These were Dumangin, head physician of the
Hospice de l'Unite; Pelletan, head surgeon of the Grand Hospice de
l'Humanite; Jeanroy, professor in the medical schools of Paris; and
Laasus, professor of legal medicine at the Ecole de Sante of Paris. The
last two were selected by Dumangin and Pelletan because of the former
connection of M. Lassus with Mesdames de France, and of M. Jeanroy with
the House of Lorraine, which gave a peculiar weight to their signatures. Gomin received them in the council-room, and detained them until the
National Guard, descending from the second floor, entered to sign the
minutes prepared by Darlot. This done, Lasne, Darlot, and Bouquet went up
again with the surgeons, and introduced them into the apartment of Louis
XVII., whom they at first examined as he lay on his death-bed; but M.
Jeanroy observing that the dim light of this room was but little
favourable to the accomplishment of their mission, the commissaries
prepared a table in the first room, near the window, on which the corpse
was laid, and the surgeons began their melancholy operation. At seven o'clock the police commissary ordered the body to be taken up,
and that they should proceed to the cemetery. It was the season of the
longest days, and therefore the interment did not take place in secrecy
and at night, as some misinformed narrators have said or written; it took
place in broad daylight, and attracted a great concourse of people before
the gates of the Temple palace. One of the municipals wished to have the
coffin carried out secretly by the door opening into the chapel enclosure;
but M. Duaser, police commiasary, who was specially entrusted with the
arrangement of the ceremony, opposed this indecorous measure, and the
procession passed out through the great gate. The crowd that was pressing
round was kept back, and compelled to keep a line, by a tricoloured
ribbon, held at short distances by gendarmes. Compassion and sorrow were
impressed on every countenance. A small detachment of the troops of the line from the garrison of Paris,
sent by the authorities, was waiting to serve as an escort. The bier,
still covered with the pall, was carried on a litter on the shoulders of
four men, who relieved each other two at a time; it was preceded by six or
eight men, headed by a sergeant. The procession was accompanied a long
way by the crowd, and a great number of persona followed it even to the
cemetery. The name of "Little Capet," and the more popular title of
Dauphin, spread from lip to lip, with exclamations of pity and compassion. Marguerite, not by the church, as
some accounts assert, but by the old gate of the cemetery. The interment
was made in the corner, on the left, at a distance of eight or nine feet
from the enclosure wall, and at an equal distance from a small house,
which subsequently served as a school. The grave was filled up,--no mound
marked its place, and not even a trace remained of the interment! Not
till then did the commissaries of police and the municipality withdraw,
and enter the house opposite the church to draw up the declaration of
interment. It was nearly nine o'clock, and still daylight. Release of Madame Royale.--Her Marriage to the Duc d'Angouleme. The last person to hear of the sad events in the Temple was the one for
whom they had the deepest and most painful interest. After her brother's
death the captivity of Madame Royale was much lightened. She was allowed
to walk in the Temple gardens, and to receive visits from some ladies of
the old Court, and from Madame de Chantereine, who at last, after several
times evading her questions, ventured cautiously to tell her of the deaths
of her mother, aunt, and brother. Madame Royale wept bitterly, but had
much difficulty in expressing her feelings. "She spoke so confusedly,"
says Madame de la Ramiere in a letter to Madame de Verneuil, "that it was
difficult to understand her. It took her more than a month's reading
aloud, with careful study of pronunciation, to make herself
intelligible,--so much had she lost the power of expression." She was
dressed with plainness amounting to poverty, and her hands were disfigured
by exposure to cold and by the menial work she had been so long accustomed
to do for herself, and which it was difficult to persuade her to leave
off. When urged to accept the services of an attendant, she replied, with
a sad prevision of the vicissitudes of her future life, that she did not
like to form a habit which she might have again to abandon. She suffered
herself, however, to be persuaded gradually to modify her recluse and
ascetic habits. It was well she did so, as a preparation for the great
changes about to follow. Nine days after the death of her brother, the city of Orleans interceded
for the daughter of Louis XVI., and sent deputies to the Convention to
pray for her deliverance and restoration to her family. Names followed
this example; and Charette, on the part of the Vendeans, demanded, as a
condition of the pacification of La Vendee, that the Princess should be
allowed to join her relations. At length the Convention decreed that
Madame Royale should be exchanged with Austria for the representatives and
ministers whom Dumouriez had given up to the Prince of Cobourg,--Drouet,
Semonville, Maret, and other prisoners of importance. At midnight on 19th
December, 1795, which was her birthday, the Princess was released from
prison, the Minister of the Interior, M. Benezech, to avoid attracting
public attention and possible disturbance, conducting her on foot from the
Temple to a neighbouring street, where his carriage awaited her. She made
it her particular request that Gomin, who had been so devoted to her
brother, should be the commissary appointed to accompany her to the
frontier; Madame de Soucy, formerly under-governess to the children of
France, was also in attendance; and the Princess took with her a dog named
Coco, which had belonged to Louis XVI. [The mention of the little dog taken from the Temple by Madame Royale
reminds me how fond all the family were of these creatures. Mesdames had beautiful spaniels; little grayhounds
were preferred by Madame Elisabeth. was the only one of all his
family who had no dogs in his room. I remember one day waiting in the
great gallery for the King's retiring, when he entered with all his family
and the whole pack, who were escorting him. All at once all the dogs
began to bark, one louder than another, and ran away, passing like ghosts
along those great dark rooms, which rang with their hoarse cries. The
Princesses shouting, calling them, running everywhere after them,
completed a ridiculous spectacle, which made those august persons very
merry.--D'HEZECQUES, p. She was frequently recognised on her way through France, and always with
marks of pleasure and respect. It might have been supposed that the Princess would rejoice to leave
behind her the country which had been the scene of so many horrors and
such bitter suffering. But it was her birthplace, and it held the graves
of all she loved; and as she crossed the frontier she said to those around
her, "I leave France with regret, for I shall never cease to consider it
my country." She arrived in Vienna on 9th January, 1796, and her first
care was to attend a memorial service for her murdered relatives. After
many weeks of close retirement she occasionally began to appear in public,
and people looked with interest at the pale, grave, slender girl of
seventeen, dressed in the deepest mourning, over whose young head such
terrible storms had swept. The Emperor wished her to marry the Archduke
Charles of Austria, but her father and mother had, even in the cradle,
destined her hand for her cousin, the Duc d'Angouleme, son of the Comte
d'Artois, and the memory of their lightest wish was law to her. Her quiet determination entailed anger and opposition amounting to
persecution. Every effort was made to alienate her from her French
relations. She was urged to claim Provence, which had become her own if
Louis XVIII. A pressure of opinion
was brought to bear upon her which might well have overawed so young a
girl. "I was sent for to the Emperor's cabinet," she writes, "where I
found the imperial family assembled. The ministers and chief imperial
counsellors were also present. When the Emperor invited me to
express my opinion, I answered that to be able to treat fittingly of such
interests I thought, I ought to be surrounded not only by my mother's
relatives, but also by those of my father. Besides, I said, I
was above all things French, and in entire subjection to the laws of
France, which had rendered me alternately the subject of the King my
father, the King my brother, and the King my uncle, and that I would yield
obedience to the latter, whatever might be his commands. This declaration
appeared very much to dissatisfy all who were present, and when they
observed that I was not to be shaken, they declared that my right being
independent of my will, my resistance would not be the slightest obstacle
to the measures they might deem it necessary to adopt for the preservation
of my interests." In their anxiety to make a German princess of Marie Therese, her imperial
relations suppressed her French title as much as possible. When, with
some difficulty, the Duc de Grammont succeeded in obtaining an audience of
her, and used the familiar form of address, she smiled faintly, and bade
him beware. "Call me Madame de Bretagne, or de Bourgogne, or de
Lorraine," she said, "for here I am so identified with these
provinces--[which the Emperor wished her to claim from her uncle Louis
XVIII.] --that I shall end in believing in my own transformation." After
these discussions she was so closely watched, and so many restraints were
imposed upon her, that she was scarcely less a prisoner than in the old
days of the Temple, though her cage was this time gilded. Rescue,
however, was at hand. accepted a refuge offered to him at Mittau by the
Czar Paul, who had promised that he would grant his guest's first request,
whatever it might be. Louis begged the Czar to use his influence with the
Court of Vienna to allow his niece to join him. "Monsieur, my brother,"
was Paul's answer, "Madame Royale shall be restored to you, or I shall
cease to be Paul I." Next morning the Czar despatched a courier to Vienna
with a demand for the Princess, so energetically worded that refusal must
have been followed by war. Accordingly, in May, 1799, Madame Royale was
allowed to leave the capital which she had found so uncongenial an asylum. In the old ducal castle of Mittau, the capital of Courland, Louis XVIII. and his wife, with their nephews, the Ducs d'Angouleme

[The Duc d'Angonleme was quiet and reserved. He loved hunting as means of
killing time; was given to early hours and innocent pleasures. He was a
gentleman, and brave as became one. He had not the "gentlemanly vices" of
his brother, and was all the better for it. He was ill educated, but had
natural good sense, and would have passed for having more than that had he
cared to put forth pretensions. Of all his family he was the one most ill
spoken of, and least deserving of it.--DOCTOR DORAN.] and de Berri, were awaiting her, attended by the Abbe Edgeworth, as chief
ecclesiastic, and a little Court of refugee nobles and officers. With
them were two men of humbler position, who must have been even more
welcome to Madame Royale,--De Malden, who had acted as courier to Louis
XVI. during the flight to Varennes, and Turgi, who had waited on the
Princesses in the Temple. It was a sad meeting, though so long anxiously
desired, and it was followed on 10th June, 1799, by an equally sad
wedding,--exiles, pensioners on the bounty of the Russian monarch,
fulfilling an engagement founded, not on personal preference, but on
family policy and reverence for the wishes of the dead, the bride and
bridegroom had small cause for rejoicing. During the eighteen months of
tranquil seclusion which followed her marriage, the favourite occupation
of the Duchess was visiting and relieving the poor. In January, 1801, the
Czar Paul, in compliance with the demand of Napoleon, who was just then
the object of his capricious enthusiasm, ordered the French royal family
to leave Mittau. Their wanderings commenced on the 21st, a day of bitter
memories; and the young Duchess led the King to his carriage through a
crowd of men, women, and children, whose tears and blessings attended them
on their way. The Duc d'Angouleme took another route
to join a body of French gentlemen in arms for the Legitimist cause.] The exiles asked permission from the King of Prussia to settle in his
dominions, and while awaiting his answer at Munich they were painfully
surprised by the entrance of five old soldiers of noble birth, part of the
body-guard they had left behind at Mittau, relying on the protection of
Paul. The "mad Czar" had decreed their immediate expulsion, and,
penniless and almost starving, they made their way to Louis XVIII. All
the money the royal family possessed was bestowed on these faithful
servants, who came to them in detachments for relief, and then the Duchess
offered her diamonds to the Danish consul for an advance of two thousand
ducats, saying she pledged her property "that in our common distress it
may be rendered of real use to my uncle, his faithful servants, and
myself." The Duchess's consistent and unselfish kindness procured her
from the King, and those about him who knew her best, the name of "our
angel." Warsaw was for a brief time the resting-place of the wanderers, but there
they were disturbed in 1803 by Napoleon's attempt to threaten and bribe
Louis XVIII. It was suggested that refusal might bring
upon them expulsion from Prussia. "We are accustomed to suffering," was
the King's answer, "and we do not dread poverty. I would, trusting in
God, seek another asylum." In 1808, after many changes of scene, this
asylum was sought in England, Gosfield Hall, Essex, being placed at their
disposal by the Marquis of Buckingham. From Gosfield, the King moved to
Hartwell Hall, a fine old Elizabethan mansion rented from Sir George Lee
for L 500 a year. A yearly grant of L 24,000 was made to the exiled
family by the British Government, out of which a hundred and forty persons
were supported, the royal dinner-party generally numbering two dozen. At Hartwell, as in her other homes, the Duchess was most popular amongst
the poor. In general society she was cold and reserved, and she disliked
the notice of strangers. In March, 1814, the royalist successes at
Bordeaux paved the way for the restoration of royalty in France, and
amidst general sympathy and congratulation, with the Prince Regent himself
to wish them good fortune, the King, the Duchess, and their suite left
Hartwell in April, 1814. The return to France was as triumphant as a
somewhat half-hearted and doubtful enthusiasm could make it, and most of
such cordiality as there was fell to the share of the Duchess. As she
passed to Notre-Dame in May, 1814, on entering Paris, she was vociferously
greeted. The feeling of loyalty, however, was not much longer-lived than
the applause by which it was expressed; the Duchess had scarcely effected
one of the strongest wishes of her heart,--the identification of what
remained of her parents' bodies, and the magnificent ceremony with which
they were removed from the cemetery of the Madeleine to the Abbey of St. Denis,--when the escape of Napoleon from Elba in February,1815, scattered
the royal family and their followers like chaff before the wind. The Duc
d'Angouleme, compelled to capitulate at Toulouse, sailed from Cette in a
Swedish vessel. The Comte d'Artois, the Duc de Berri, and the Prince de
Conde withdrew beyond the frontier. The
Duchesse d'Angouleme, then at Bordeaux celebrating the anniversary of the
Proclamation of Louis XVIII., alone of all her family made any stand
against the general panic. Day after day she mounted her horse and
reviewed the National Guard. She made personal and even passionate
appeals to the officers and men, standing firm, and prevailing on a
handful of soldiers to remain by her, even when the imperialist troops
were on the other side of the river and their cannon were directed against
the square where the Duchess was reviewing her scanty followers. ["It was the Duchesse d'Angouleme who saved you," said the gallant General
Clauzel, after these events, to a royalist volunteer; "I could not bring
myself to order such a woman to be fired upon, at the moment when she was
providing material for the noblest page in her history." --"Fillia
Dolorosa," vol. With pain and difficulty she was convinced that resistance was vain;
Napoleon's banner soon floated over Bordeaux; the Duchess issued a
farewell proclamation to her "brave Bordelais," and on the 1st April,
1815, she started for Pouillac, whence she embarked for Spain. During a
brief visit to England she heard that the reign of a hundred days was
over, and the 27th of July, 1815, saw her second triumphal return to the
Tuileries. She did not take up her abode there with any wish for State
ceremonies or Court gaieties. Her life was as secluded as her position
would allow. Her favourite retreat was the Pavilion, which had been
inhabited by her mother, and in her little oratory she collected relics of
her family, over which on the anniversaries of their deaths she wept and
prayed. In her daily drives through Paris she scrupulously avoided the
spot on which they had suffered; and the memory of the past seemed to rule
all her sad and self-denying life, both in what she did and what she
refrained from doing. [She was so methodical and economical, though liberal in her charities,
that one of her regular evening occupations was to tear off the seals from
the letters she had received during the day, in order that the wax might
be melted down and sold; the produce made one poor family "passing rich
with forty pounds a year." --See "Filia Dolorosa," vol. Her somewhat austere goodness was not of a nature to make her popular. The
few who really understood her loved her, but the majority of her
pleasure-seeking subjects regarded her either with ridicule or dread. She
is said to have taken no part in politics, and to have exerted no
influence in public affairs, but her sympathies were well known, and "the
very word liberty made her shudder;" like Madame Roland, she had seen "so
many crimes perpetrated under that name." The claims of three pretended Dauphins--Hervagault, the son of the tailor
of St. Lo; Bruneau, son of the shoemaker of Vergin; and Naundorf or
Norndorff, the watchmaker somewhat troubled her peace, but never for a
moment obtained her sanction. Of the many other pseudo-Dauphins (said to
number a dozen and a half) not even the names remain. In February,1820, a
fresh tragedy befell the royal family in the assassination of the Duc de
Berri, brother-in-law of the Duchesse d'Angouleme, as he was seeing his
wife into her carriage at the door of the Opera-house. He was carried
into the theatre, and there the dying Prince and his wife were joined by
the Duchess, who remained till he breathed his last, and was present when
he, too, was laid in the Abbey of St. She was present also when
his son, the Duc de Bordeaux, was born, and hoped that she saw in him a
guarantee for the stability of royalty in France. In September, 1824, she
stood by the death-bed of Louis XVIII., and thenceforward her chief
occupation was directing the education of the little Duc de Bordeaux, who
generally resided with her at Villeneuve l'Etang, her country house near
St. Thence she went in July, 1830, to the Baths of Vichy,
stopping at Dijon on her way to Paris, and visiting the theatre on the
evening of the 27th. She was received with "a roar of execrations and
seditious cries," and knew only too well what they signified. She
instantly left the theatre and proceeded to Tonnere, where she received
news of the rising in Paris, and, quitting the town by night, was driven
to Joigny with three attendants. Soon after leaving that place it was
thought more prudent that the party should separate and proceed on foot,
and the Duchess and M. de Foucigny, disguised as peasants, entered
Versailles arm-in-arm, to obtain tidings of the King. The Duchess found
him at Rambouillet with her husband, the Dauphin, and the King met her
with a request for "pardon," being fully conscious, too late, that his
unwise decrees and his headlong flight had destroyed the last hopes of his
family. The act of abdication followed, by which the prospect of royalty
passed from the Dauphin and his wife, as well as from Charles X.--Henri V.
being proclaimed King, and the Duc d'Orleans (who refused to take the boy
monarch under his personal protection) lieutenant-general of the kingdom. Then began the Duchess's third expatriation. At Cherbourg the royal
family, accompanied by the little King without a kingdom, embarked in the
'Great Britain', which stood out to sea. The Duchess, remaining on deck
for a last look at the coast of France, noticed a brig which kept, she
thought, suspiciously near them. "To fire into and sink the vessels in which we sail, should any attempt be
made to return to France." Such was the farewell of their subjects to the House of Bourbon. The
fugitives landed at Weymouth; the Duchesse d'Angouleme under the title of
Comtesse de Marne, the Duchesse de Berri as Comtesse de Rosny, and her
son, Henri de Bordeaux, as Comte de Chambord, the title he retained till
his death, originally taken from the estate presented to him in infancy by
his enthusiastic people. Holyrood, with its royal and gloomy
associations, was their appointed dwelling. The Duc and Duchesse
d'Angouleme, and the daughter of the Duc de Berri, travelled thither by
land, the King and the young Comte de Chambord by sea. "I prefer my route
to that of my sister," observed the latter, "because I shall see the coast
of France again, and she will not." The French Government soon complained that at Holyrood the exiles were
still too near their native land, and accordingly, in 1832, Charles X.,
with his son and grandson, left Scotland for Hamburg, while the Duchesse
d'Angouleme and her niece repaired to Vienna. The family were reunited at
Prague in 1833, where the birthday of the Comte de Chambord was celebrated
with some pomp and rejoicing, many Legitimists flocking thither to
congratulate him on attaining the age of thirteen, which the old law of
monarchical France had fixed as the majority of her princes. Three years
later the wanderings of the unfortunate family recommenced; the Emperor
Francis II. was dead, and his successor, Ferdinand, must visit Prague to
be crowned, and Charles X. feared that the presence of a discrowned
monarch might be embarrassing on such an occasion. Illness and sorrow
attended the exiles on their new journey, and a few months after they were
established in the Chateau of Graffenburg at Goritz, Charles X. died of
cholera, in his eightieth year. At Goritz, also, on the 31st May, 1844,
the Duchesse d'Angouleme, who had sat beside so many death-beds, watched
over that of her husband. Theirs had not been a marriage of affection in
youth, but they respected each other's virtues, and to a great extent
shared each other's tastes; banishment and suffering had united them very
closely, and of late years they had been almost inseparable,--walking,
riding, and reading together. When the Duchesse d'Angouleme had seen her
husband laid by his father's side in the vault of the Franciscan convent,
she, accompanied by her nephew and niece, removed to Frohsdorf, where they
spent seven tranquil years. Here she was addressed as "Queen" by her
household for the first time in her life, but she herself always
recognised Henri, Comte de Chambord, as her sovereign. The Duchess lived
to see the overthrow of Louis Philippe, the usurper of the inheritance of
her family. Her last attempt to exert herself was a characteristic one. She tried to rise from a sick-bed in order to attend the memorial service
held for her mother, Marie Antoinette, on the 16th October, the
anniversary of her execution. But her strength was not equal to the task;
on the 19th she expired, with her hand in that of the Comte de Chambord,
and on 28th October, 1851, Marie Therese Charlotte, Duchesse d'Angouleme,
was buried in the Franciscan convent. "In the spring of 1814 a ceremony took place in Paris at which I was
present because there was nothing in it that could be mortifying to a
French heart. had long been admitted to be one of
the most serious misfortunes of the Revolution. The Emperor Napoleon
never spoke of that sovereign but in terms of the highest respect, and
always prefixed the epithet unfortunate to his name. The ceremony to
which I allude was proposed by the Emperor of Russia and the King of
Prussia. It consisted of a kind of expiation and purification of the spot
on which Louis XVI. I went to see the
ceremony, and I had a place at a window in the Hotel of Madame de Remusat,
next to the Hotel de Crillon, and what was termed the Hotel de Courlande. "The expiation took place on the 10th of April. The weather was extremely
fine and warm for the season. The Emperor of Russia and King of Prussia,
accompanied by Prince Schwartzenberg, took their station at the entrance
of the Rue Royale; the King of Prussia being on the right of the Emperor
Alexander, and Prince Schwartzenberg on his left. There was a long
parade, during which the Russian, Prussian and Austrian military bands
vied with each other in playing the air, 'Vive Henri IV.!' The cavalry
defiled past, and then withdrew into the Champs Elysees; but the infantry
ranged themselves round an altar which was raised in the middle of the
Place, and which was elevated on a platform having twelve or fifteen
steps. The Emperor of Russia alighted from his horse, and, followed by
the King of Prussia, the Grand Duke Constantine, Lord Cathcart, and Prince
Schwartzenberg, advanced to the altar. When the Emperor had nearly
reached the altar the "Te Deum" commenced. At the moment of the
benediction, the sovereigns and persons who accompanied them, as well as
the twenty-five thousand troops who covered the Place, all knelt down. The Greek priest presented the cross to the Emperor Alexander, who kissed
it; his example was followed by the individuals who accompanied him,
though they were not of the Greek faith. On rising, the Grand Duke
Constantine took off his hat, and immediately salvoes of artillery were
heard." The following titles have the signification given below during the period
covered by this work:

MONSEIGNEUR........... The Dauphin. MONSIEUR.............. The eldest brother of the King, Comte de Provence,
afterwards Louis XVIII. MONSIEUR LE PRINCE.... The Prince de Conde, head of the House of Conde. MONSIEUR LE DUC....... The Duc de Bourbon, the eldest son of the Prince de
Condo (and the father of the Duc d'Enghien shot by Napoleon). MONSIEUR LE GRAND..... The Grand Equerry under the ancien regime. MONSIEUR LE PREMIER... The First Equerry under the ancien regime. ENFANS DE FRANCE...... The royal children. MADAME & MESDAMES..... Sisters or daughters of the King, or Princesses
near the Throne (sometimes used also for the wife of Monsieur, the eldest
brother of the King, the Princesses Adelaide, Victoire, Sophie, Louise,
daughters of Louis XV., and aunts of Louis XVI.) MADAME ELISABETH...... The Princesse Elisabeth, sister of Louis XVI. MADAME ROYALE......... The Princesse Marie Therese, daughter of Louis
XVI., afterwards Duchesse d'Angouleme. MADEMOISELLE.......... The daughter of Monsieur, the brother of the King. Jane
Blaisdell's impecunious relatives) had very visible difficulty in
making Miss Flora understand that gifts bestowed as she bestowed them
were more welcome unmade. Every day, from one quarter or another, came stories like these to the
ears of Miss Maggie and Mr. Then one day, about a month later, she appeared as before at the Duff
cottage, breathless and agitated; only this time, plainly, she had been
crying. "Why, Flora, what in the world is the matter?" cried Miss Maggie, as
she hurried her visitor into a comfortable chair and began to unfasten
her wraps. Oh, he ain't here, is he?" she lamented, with a
disappointed glance toward the vacant chair by the table in the corner. "I thought maybe he could help me, some way. I won't go to Frank, or
Jim. They've--they've said so many things. I'll call him,"
comforted Miss Maggie, taking off Miss Flora's veil and hat and
smoothing back her hair. "But you don't want him to find you crying
like this, Flora. "Yes, yes, I know, but I'm not crying--I mean, I won't any more. And
I'll tell you just as soon as you get Mr. It's only that I've
been--so silly, I suppose. Miss Maggie, still with the disturbed frown between her eyebrows,
summoned Mr. Then together they sat down to hear Miss Flora's
story. "It all started, of course, from--from that day I brought the letter
here--from that man in Boston with seven children, you know." "Yes, I remember," encouraged Miss Maggie. "Well, I--I did quite a lot of things after that. I was so glad and
happy to discover I could do things for folks. It seemed to--to take
away the wickedness of my having so much, you know; and so I gave food
and money, oh, lots of places here in town--everywhere,'most, that I
could find that anybody needed it." We heard of the many kind things you did, dear." Miss
Maggie had the air of one trying to soothe a grieved child. John travelled to the hallway. "But they didn't turn out to be kind--all of 'em," quavered Miss Flora. I TRIED to do 'em all right!" "I know; but 'tain't those I came to talk about. I got 'em--lots of 'em--after the first one--the one you saw. First I got one, then another and another, till lately I've been
getting 'em every day,'most, and some days two or three at a time." "And they all wanted--money, I suppose," observed Mr. Smith, "for their
sick wives and children, I suppose." "Oh, not for children always--though it was them a good deal. But it
was for different things--and such a lot of them! I never knew there
could be so many kinds of such things. And I was real pleased, at
first,--that I could help, you know, in so many places." "Then you always sent it--the money?" Why, I just had to, the way they wrote; I wanted to, too. They wrote lovely letters, and real interesting ones, too. One man
wanted a warm coat for his little girl, and he told me all about what
hard times they'd had. Another wanted a brace for his poor little
crippled boy, and HE told me things. Why, I never s'posed folks could
have such awful things, and live! One woman just wanted to borrow
twenty dollars while she was so sick. She didn't ask me to give it to
her. Don't you suppose I'd send her that money? And there was a poor blind man--he wanted money to buy
a Bible in raised letters; and of COURSE I wouldn't refuse that! Some
didn't beg; they just wanted to sell things. I bought a diamond ring to
help put a boy through school, and a ruby pin of a man who needed the
money for bread for his children. And there was--oh, there was lots of
'em--too many to tell." "And all from Boston, I presume," murmured Mr. "Oh, no,--why, yes, they were, too, most of 'em, when you come to think
of it. "No, I haven't finished," moaned Miss Flora, almost crying again. "And
now comes the worst of it. As I said, at first I liked it--all these
letters--and I was so glad to help. But they're coming so fast now I
don't know what to do with 'em. And I never saw such a lot of things as
they want--pensions and mortgages, and pianos, and educations, and
wedding dresses, and clothes to be buried in, and--and there were so
many, and--and so queer, some of 'em, that I began to be afraid maybe
they weren't quite honest, all of 'em, and of course I CAN'T send to
such a lot as there are now, anyway, and I was getting so worried. Besides, I got another one of those awful proposals from those dreadful
men that want to marry me. As if I didn't know THAT was for my money! Then to-day, this morning, I--I got the worst of all." From her bag she
took an envelope and drew out a small picture of several children, cut
apparently from a newspaper. "Why, no,--yes, it's the one you brought us a month ago, isn't it?" The one I showed you before is in my bureau drawer
at home. But I got it out this morning, when this one came, and
compared them; and they're just exactly alike--EXACTLY!" "Oh, he wrote again, then,--wants more money, I suppose," frowned Miss
Maggie. This man's name is Haley, and
that one was Fay. Haley says this is a picture of his children,
and he says that the little girl in the corner is Katy, and she's deaf
and dumb; but Mr. Fay said her name was Rosie, and that she was LAME. And all the others--their names ain't the same, either, and there ain't
any of 'em blind. And, of course, I know now that--that one of those
men is lying to me. Why, they cut them out of the same newspaper;
they've got the same reading on the back! And I--I don't know what to
believe now. And there are all those letters at home that I haven't
answered yet; and they keep coming--why, I just dread to see the
postman turn down our street. I didn't
like his first letter and didn't answer it; and now he says if I don't
send him the money he'll tell everybody everywhere what a stingy
t-tight-wad I am. And another man said he'd come and TAKE it if I
didn't send it; and you KNOW how afraid of burglars I am! Oh what shall
I do, what shall I do?" "First, don't you worry another bit,
Miss Flora. Second, just hand those letters over to me--every one of
them. Most rich people have to have secretaries,
you know." "But how'll you know how to answer MY letters?" "N-no, not exactly a secretary. But--I've had some experience with
similar letters," observed Mr. I hoped maybe you
could help me some way, but I never thought of that--your answering
'em, I mean. I supposed everybody had to answer their own letters. How'll you know what I want to say?" "I shan't be answering what YOU want to say--but what _I_ want to say. In this case, Miss Flora, I exceed the prerogatives of the ordinary
secretary just a bit, you see. But you can count on one thing--I shan't
be spending any money for you." "You won't send them anything, then?" Smith, I want to send some of 'em something! "Of course you do, dear," spoke up Miss Maggie. "But you aren't being
either kind or charitable to foster rascally fakes like that," pointing
to the picture in Miss Flora's lap. "I'd stake my life on most of 'em," declared Mr. "They have all
the earmarks of fakes, all right." "But I was having a beautiful time giving until these horrid letters
began to come." "Flora, do you give because YOU like the sensation of giving, and of
receiving thanks, or because you really want to help somebody?" asked
Miss Maggie, a bit wearily. "Why, Maggie Duff, I want to help people, of course," almost wept Miss
Flora. "Well, then, suppose you try and give so it will help them, then," said
Miss Maggie. "One of the most risky things in the world, to my way of
thinking, is a present of--cash. Y-yes, of course," stammered Mr. Smith, growing
suddenly, for some unapparent reason, very much confused. Smith finished speaking, he threw an oddly nervous glance
into Miss Maggie's face. But Miss Maggie had turned back to Miss Flora. "There, dear," she admonished her, "now, you do just as Mr. Just hand over your letters to him for a while, and forget all about
them. He'll tell you how he answers them, of course. But you won't have
to worry about them any more. Besides they'll soon stop coming,--won't
they, Mr. They'll dwindle to a few scattering ones,
anyway,--after I've handled them for a while." "Well, I should like that," sighed Miss Flora. "But--can't I give
anything anywhere?" "But I would investigate a
little, first, dear. Smith threw a swiftly questioning
glance into Miss Maggie's face. "Yes, oh, yes; I believe in--investigation," he said then. "And now,
Miss Flora," he added briskly, as Miss Flora reached for her wraps,
"with your kind permission I'll walk home with you and have a look
at--my new job of secretarying." CHAPTER XIX

STILL OTHER FLIES


It was when his duties of secretaryship to Miss Flora had dwindled to
almost infinitesimal proportions that Mr. Smith wished suddenly that he
were serving Miss Maggie in that capacity, so concerned was he over a
letter that had come to Miss Maggie in that morning's mail. He himself had taken it from the letter-carrier's hand and had placed
it on Miss Maggie's little desk. Casually, as he did so, he had noticed
that it bore a name he recognized as that of a Boston law firm; but he
had given it no further thought until later, when, as he sat at his
work in the living-room, he had heard Miss Maggie give a low cry and
had looked up to find her staring at the letter in her hand, her face
going from red to white and back to red again. "Why, Miss Maggie, what is it?" As she turned toward him he saw that her eyes were full of tears. "Why, it--it's a letter telling me---" She stopped abruptly, her eyes
on his face. "Yes, yes, tell me," he begged. "Why, you are--CRYING, dear!" Smith, plainly quite unaware of the caressing word he had used, came
nearer, his face aglow with sympathy, his eyes very tender. The red surged once more over Miss Maggie's face. She drew back a
little, though manifestly with embarrassment, not displeasure. "It's--nothing, really it's nothing," she stammered. "It's just a
letter that--that surprised me." "Oh, well, I--I cry easily sometimes." With hands that shook visibly,
she folded the letter and tucked it into its envelope. Then with a
carelessness that was a little too elaborate, she tossed it into her
open desk. Very plainly, whatever she had meant to do in the first
place, she did not now intend to disclose to Mr. "Miss Maggie, please tell me--was it bad news?" Smith thought he detected a break very like a sob in the laugh. "But maybe I could--help you," he pleaded. "You couldn't--indeed, you couldn't!" "Miss Maggie, was it--money matters?" He had his answer in the telltale color that flamed instantly into her
face--but her lips said:--

"It was--nothing--I mean, it was nothing that need concern you." She
hurried away then to the kitchen, and Mr. Smith was left alone to fume
up and down the room and frown savagely at the offending envelope
tiptilted against the ink bottle in Miss Maggie's desk, just as Miss
Maggie's carefully careless hand had thrown it. Miss Maggie had several more letters from the Boston law firm, and Mr. Smith knew it--though he never heard Miss Maggie cry out at any of the
other ones. That they affected her deeply, however, he was certain. Her
very evident efforts to lead him to think that they were of no
consequence would convince him of their real importance to her if
nothing else had done so. He watched her, therefore, covertly,
fearfully, longing to help her, but not daring to offer his services. That the affair had something to do with money matters he was sure. That she would not deny this naturally strengthened him in this belief. He came in time, therefore, to formulate his own opinion: she had lost
money--perhaps a good deal (for her), and she was too proud to let him
or any one else know it. He watched then all the more carefully to see if he could detect any
NEW economies or new deprivations in her daily living. Then, because he
could not discover any such, he worried all the more: if she HAD lost
that money, she ought to economize, certainly. Could she be so foolish
as to carry her desire for secrecy to so absurd a length as to live
just exactly as before when she really could not afford it? Smith requested to have hot water
brought to his room morning and night, for which service he insisted,
in spite of Miss Maggie's remonstrances, on paying three dollars a week
extra. There came a strange man to call one day. He was a member of the Boston
law firm. Smith found out that much, but no more. Miss Maggie was
almost hysterical after his visit. She talked very fast and laughed a
good deal at supper that night; yet her eyes were full of tears nearly
all the time, as Mr. "And I suppose she thinks she's hiding it from me--that her heart is
breaking!" Smith savagely to himself, as he watched Miss
Maggie's nervous efforts to avoid meeting his eyes. "I vow I'll have it
out of her. I'll have it out--to-morrow!" Smith did not "have it out" with Miss Maggie the following day,
however. Something entirely outside of himself sent his thoughts into a
new channel. He was alone in the Duff living-room, and was idling over his work, at
his table in the corner, when Mrs. Hattie Blaisdell opened the door and
hurried in, wringing her hands. Smith sprang to his feet and hastened toward her. "Oh, I don't know--I don't know," moaned the woman, flinging herself
into a chair. "There can't anybody do anything, I s'pose; but I've GOT
to have somebody. I can't stay there in that house--I can't--I can't--I
CAN'T!" And you shan't," soothed the man. "And she'll
be here soon, I'm sure--Miss Maggie will. But just let me help you off
with your things," he urged, somewhat awkwardly trying to unfasten her
heavy wraps. Impatiently she jerked off the rich fur coat and
tossed it into his arms; then she dropped into the chair again and fell
to wringing her hands. "Oh, what shall I do, what shall I do?" Can't I send for--for your husband?" Blaisdell fell to weeping afresh. He's gone--to Fred, you know." "Yes, yes, that's what's the matter. Blaisdell, I'm so sorry! The woman dropped her hands from her face and looked up wildly, half
defiantly. He isn't bad and
wicked, is he? And they can't shut him up if--if we pay it back--all of
it that he took? They won't take my boy--to PRISON?" Smith's face, she began to wring her hands
again. I'll have to tell you--I'll have to," she
moaned. "But, my dear woman,--not unless you want to." "I do want to--I do want to! With a visible effort she calmed herself a little and forced
herself to talk more coherently. He wanted seven hundred
dollars and forty-two cents. He said he'd got to have it--if he didn't,
he'd go and KILL himself. He said he'd spent all of his allowance,
every cent, and that's what made him take it--this other money, in the
first place." "You mean--money that didn't belong to him?" "Yes; but you mustn't blame him, you mustn't blame him, Mr. "Yes; and--Oh, Maggie, Maggie, what shall I do? she
broke off wildly, leaping to her feet as Miss Maggie pushed open the
door and hurried in. Miss Maggie,
white-faced, but with a cheery smile, was throwing off her heavy coat
and her hat. A moment later she came over and took Mrs. Hattie's
trembling hands in both her own. "Now, first, tell me all about it,
dear." "Only a little," answered Miss Maggie, gently pushing the other back
into her chair. Jim telephoned him something, just before
he left. She began to wring her hands again, but
Miss Maggie caught and held them firmly. "You see, Fred, he was
treasurer of some club, or society, or something; and--and he--he
needed some money to--to pay a man, and he took that--the money that
belonged to the club, you know, and he thought he could pay it back,
little by little. But something happened--I don't know what--a new
treasurer, or something: anyhow, it was going to be found out--that
he'd taken it. It was going to be found out to-morrow, and so he wrote
the letter to his father. But he looked so--oh, I never
saw him look so white and terrible. And I'm so afraid--of what he'll
do--to Fred. "Is Jim going to give him the money?" And he's going to give it to him. Oh, they can't shut him
up--they CAN'T send him to prison NOW, can they?" No, they won't send him to prison. If Jim has gone with
the money, Fred will pay it back and nobody will know it. But, Hattie,
Fred DID it, just the same." "And, Hattie, don't you see? Don't you
see where all this is leading? But he isn't going to, any more. He said if his father would help him out of this
scrape, he'd never get into another one, and he'd SHOW him how much he
appreciated it." I'm glad to hear that," cried Miss Maggie. "He'll come out all
right, yet." Smith, over at the window, blew his nose
vigorously. Smith had not sat down since Miss Maggie's entrance. He
had crossed to the window, and had stood looking out--at nothing--all
through Mrs. Mary journeyed to the bathroom. "You do think he will, don't you?" Hattie, turning from one
to the other piteously. "He said he was ashamed of himself; that this
thing had been an awful lesson to him, and he promised--oh, he promised
lots of things, if Jim would only go up and help him out of this. He'd
never, never have to again. But he will, I know he will, if that
Gaylord fellow stays there. The whole thing was his fault--I know it
was. "Why, Hattie, I thought you liked them!" They're mean, stuck-up things, and they snub me awfully. Don't you suppose I know when I'm being snubbed? And that Gaylord
girl--she's just as bad, and she's making my Bessie just like her. I
got Bess into the same school with her, you know, and I was so proud
and happy. Why, my Bess, my own daughter,
actually looks down on us. She's ashamed of her own father and
mother--and she shows it. And it's that Gaylord girl that's done it,
too, I believe. I thought I--I was training my daughter to be a lady--a
real lady; but I never meant to train her to look down on--on her own
mother!" "I'm afraid Bessie--needs something of a lesson," commented Miss Maggie
tersely. "But Bessie will be older, one of these days, Hattie, and then
she'll--know more." "But that's what I've been trying to teach her--'more,' something more
all the time, Maggie," sighed Mrs. "And I've
tried to remember and call her Elizabeth, too.--but I can't. But,
somehow, to-day, nothing seems of any use, any way. And even if she
learns more and more, I don't see as it's going to do any good. I'm not fine enough yet, it seems, for
Mrs. They don't want me among them, and
they show it. And all my old friends are so envious and jealous since
the money came that THEY don't want me, and THEY show it; so I don't
feel comfortable anywhere." "Never mind, dear, just stop trying to live as you think other folks
want you to live, and live as YOU want to, for a while." Hattie smiled faintly, wiped her eyes again, and got to her feet. "Well, just try it," smiled Miss Maggie, helping her visitor into the
luxurious fur coat. "You've no idea how much more comfort you'll take." Hattie's eyes were wistful, but almost instantly they
showed an alert gleam of anger. "Well, anyhow, I'm not going to try to do what those Gaylords do any
longer. And--and you're SURE Fred won't have to go to prison?" "I'm very sure," nodded Miss Maggie. You always make
me feel better, Maggie, and you, too, Mr. "Now, go home and go to bed, and don't
worry any more or you'll have one of your headaches." As the door closed behind her visitor, Miss Maggie turned and sank into
a chair. She looked worn and white, and utterly weary. "I hope she won't meet Frank or Jane anywhere." Do you think they'd blame her--about this
unfortunate affair of Fred's?" I just
came from Frank's, and--"

"Yes?" Something in her face sent a questioning frown to Mr. "Do you remember hearing Flora say that Jane had bought a lot of the
Benson gold-mine stock?" "Well, Benson has failed; and they've just found out that that
gold-mine stock is worth--about two cents on a dollar." And how much--"

"About forty thousand dollars," said Miss Maggie wearily. "Well, I'll be--"

He did not finish his sentence. CHAPTER XX

FRANKENSTEIN: BEING A LETTER FROM JOHN SMITH TO EDWARD D. NORTON,
ATTORNEY AT LAW


DEAR NED:--Wasn't there a story written once about a fellow who created
some sort of a machine man without any soul that raised the very
dickens and all for him? Frank--Frankenstein?--I guess that was it. Well, I've created a Frankenstein creature--and I'm dead up against it
to know what to do with him. Ned, what in Heaven's name am I going to do with Mr. John Smith, let me tell you, is a very healthy, persistent, insistent,
important person, with many kind friends, a definite position in the
world, and no small degree of influence. Worse yet (now prepare for a
stunning blow, Ned! Smith has been so inconsiderate as to fall in
love. And he has fallen in love as absolutely and as
idiotically as if he were twenty-one instead of fifty-two. Now, will
you kindly tell me how Mr. John Smith is going to fade away into
nothingness? And, even if he finds the way to do that, shall he, before
fading, pop the question for Mr. Stanley G. Fulton, or shall he trust
to Mr. Stanley G. Fulton's being able to win for himself the love Mr. Seriously, joking aside, I'm afraid I've made a mess of things, not
only for myself, but for everybody else. I'll spare you rhapsodies, Ned. They say, anyway,
that there's no fool like an old fool. But I will admit that that
future looks very dark to me if I am not to have the companionship of
the little woman, Maggie Duff. Oh, yes, it's "Poor Maggie." As for Miss Maggie herself, perhaps it's
conceited, but I believe she's not entirely indifferent to Mr. Stanley G. Fulton I have my doubts; but,
alas! I have no doubts whatever as to what her opinion will be of Mr. Stanley G. Fulton's masquerading as Mr. Stanley G. Fulton the job he's got on his hands to put himself
right with her, either. But there's one thing he can be sure of, at
least; if she does care for Mr. Stanley G.
Fulton's money that was the bait. you see already I have adopted the Hillerton
vernacular.) But I fear Miss Maggie is indeed "poor" now. She has had
several letters that I don't like the looks of, and a call from a
villainous-looking man from Boston--one of your craft, I believe
(begging your pardon). I think she's lost some money, and I don't
believe she had any extra to lose. She's as proud as Lucifer, however,
and she's determined no one shall find out she's lost any money, so her
laugh is gayer than ever. I can hear
something in her voice that isn't laughter. Ned, what a mess I HAVE made of it! I feel more than ever now
like the boy with his ear to the keyhole. These people are my
friends--or, rather, they are Mr. As for being
mine--who am I, Smith, or Fulton? Will they be Fulton's friends, after
they find he is John Smith? Will they be Smith's friends, even, after
they find he is Fulton? Oh, yes, I can hear you say that it serves me right, and that you
warned me, and that I was deaf to all remonstrances. Now, we'll waste no more time on that. I've acknowledged my error, and my transgression is ever
before me. I built the box, I walked into it, and I deliberately shut
the cover down. I've got to get out--some
way. I can't spend the rest of my natural existence as John Smith,
hunting Blaisdell data--though sometimes I think I'd be willing to, if
it's the only way to stay with Miss Maggie. I tell you, that little
woman can make a home out of--

But I couldn't stay with Miss Maggie. John Smith wouldn't have money
enough to pay his board, to say nothing of inviting Miss Maggie to
board with him, would he? Stanley G. Fulton's last
will and testament on the first day of next November will effectually
cut off Mr. There is no provision in the
will for Mr. I don't think
he'd like that. By the way, I wonder: do you suppose John Smith could
earn--his salt, if he was hard put to it? Very plainly, then, something
has got to be done about getting John Smith to fade away, and Stanley
G. Fulton to appear before next November. And I had thought it would be so easy! Early this summer John Smith was
to pack up his Blaisdell data, bid a pleasant adieu to Hillerton, and
betake himself to South America. In due course, after a short trip to
some obscure Inca city, or down some little-known river, Mr. Stanley G.
Fulton would arrive at some South American hotel from the interior, and
would take immediate passage for the States, reaching Chicago long
before November first. There would be a slight flurry, of course, and a few annoying
interviews and write-ups; but Mr. Stanley G. Fulton always was known to
keep his affairs to himself pretty well, and the matter would soon be
put down as merely another of the multi-millionaire's eccentricities. The whole thing would then be all over, and well over. But--nowhere had
there been taken into consideration the possibilities of--a Maggie
Duff. And now, to me, that same Maggie Duff is the only thing worth
considering--anywhere. And even after all this, I haven't accomplished what I set out to
do--that is, find the future possessor of the Fulton millions (unless
Miss Maggie--bless her!--says "yes." And even then, some one will have
to have them after us). As
conditions are now, I should not want either Frank, or James, or Flora
to have them--not unless the millions could bring them more happiness
than these hundred thousand apiece have brought. Honest, Ned, that miserable money has made more--But, never mind. It's
too long a story to write. I'll tell you when I see you--if I ever do
see you. There's still the possibility, you know, that Mr. Stanley G.
Fulton is lost in darkest South America, and of course John Smith CAN
go to work! I believe I won't sign any name--I haven't got any name--that I feel
really belongs to me now. Still I might--yes, I will sign it

                                        "FRANKENSTEIN." CHAPTER XXI

SYMPATHIES MISPLACED


The first time Mr. Smith saw Frank Blaisdell, after Miss Maggie's news
of the forty-thousand-dollar loss, he tried, somewhat awkwardly, to
express his interest and sympathy. But Frank Blaisdell cut him short. "That's all right, and I thank you," he cried heartily. "And I know
most folks would think losing forty thousand dollars was about as bad
as it could be. Jane, now, is all worked up over it; can't sleep
nights, and has gone back to turning down the gas and eating sour cream
so's to save and help make it up. But me--I call it the best thing that
ever happened." Smith; "I'm sure that's a very delightful
way to look at it--if you can." "Well, I can; and I'll tell you why. It's put me back where I
belong--behind the counter of a grocery store. Oh, I had enough left for that, and more! Gorry, but I was glad to feel the old floor under my feet again!" "But I thought you--you were tired of work, and--wanted to enjoy
yourself," stammered Mr. "Tired of work--wanted to enjoy myself, indeed! Yes, I know I did say
something like that. But, let me tell you this, Mr. Talk about
work!--I never worked so hard in my life as I have the last ten months
trying to enjoy myself. How these folks can stand gadding 'round the
country week in and week out, feeding their stomachs on a French
dictionary instead of good United States meat and potatoes and squash,
and spending their days traipsing off to see things they ain't a mite
interested in, and their nights trying to get rested so they can go and
see some more the next day, I don't understand." "I'm afraid these touring agencies wouldn't like to have you write
their ads for them, Mr. "Well, they hadn't better ask me to," smiled the other grimly. Since I come back I've been working even harder trying
to enjoy myself here at home--knockin' silly little balls over a
ten-acre lot in a game a healthy ten-year-old boy would scorn to play." "Oh, yes, I enjoyed the riding well enough; but I didn't enjoy hunting
for punctures, putting on new tires, or burrowing into the inside of
the critter to find out why she didn't go! And that's what I was doing
most of the time. He paused a moment, then went on a little wistfully:--

"I suspect, Mr. Smith, there ain't anything in my line but groceries. If--if I had my life to
live over again, I'd do different, maybe. I'd see if I couldn't find
out what there was in a picture to make folks stand and stare at it an
hour at a time when you could see the whole thing in a minute--and it
wa'n't worth lookin' at, anyway, even for a minute. Now, I like a good tune what is a tune; but them caterwaulings and
dirges that that chap Gray plays on that fiddle of his--gorry, Mr. Smith, I'd rather hear the old barn door at home squeak any day. But if
I was younger I'd try to learn to like 'em. She can set by the hour in front of that phonygraph of hers, and
not know it!" "And there's books, too," resumed the other, still wistfully. "I'd read
books--if I could stay awake long enough to do it--and I'd find out
what there was in 'em to make a good sensible man like Jim Blaisdell
daft over 'em--and Maggie Duff, too. Why, that little woman used to go
hungry sometimes, when she was a girl, so she could buy a book she
wanted. Why, I'd 'a' given anything this last year if I
could 'a' got interested--really interested, readin'. I could 'a'
killed an awful lot of time that way. I bought a
lot of 'em, too, an' tried it; but I expect I didn't begin young
enough. Smith, I've about come to the conclusion that
there ain't a thing in the world so hard to kill as time. I've tried
it, and I know. Why, I got so I couldn't even kill it EATIN'--though I
'most killed myself TRYIN' to! A full
stomach ain't in it with bein' hungry an' knowing a good dinner's
coming. Why, there was whole weeks at a time back there that I didn't
know the meaning of the word 'hungry.' You'd oughter seen the jolt I
give one o' them waiter-chaps one day when he comes up with his paper
and his pencil and asks me what I wanted. 'There ain't
but one thing on this earth I want, and you can't give it to me. I'm tired of bein' so blamed satisfied all the
time!'" "And what did--Alphonso say to that?" Oh, the waiter-fellow, you mean? Oh, he just stared a
minute, then mumbled his usual 'Yes, sir, very good, sir,' and shoved
that confounded printed card of his a little nearer to my nose. I guess you've heard enough of this, Mr. It's only that I
was trying to tell you why I'm actually glad we lost that money. It's
give me back my man's job again." I won't waste any more sympathy on you,"
laughed Mr. I hope it'll give me
back a little of my old faith in my fellow-man." I won't suspect every man, woman, and child that says a
civil word to me now of having designs on my pocketbook. Smith, you wouldn't believe it, if I told you, the things that's been
done and said to get a little money out of me. Of course, the open
gold-brick schemes I knew enough to dodge,'most of 'em (unless you
count in that darn Benson mining stock), and I spotted the blackmailers
all right, most generally. But I WAS flabbergasted when a WOMAN tackled
the job and began to make love to me--actually make love to me!--one
day when Jane's back was turned. DO I look such a fool as that,
Mr. Well, anyhow, there won't be any more of that kind, nor
anybody after my money now, I guess," he finished with a sage wag of
his head as he turned away. Smith said, after recounting the
earlier portion of the conversation: "So you see you were right, after
all. Frank Blaisdell had plenty to
retire upon, but nothing to retire to. But I'm glad--if he's happy now." "And he isn't the only one that that forty-thousand-dollar loss has
done a good turn to," nodded Miss Maggie. "Mellicent has just been
here. It's the Easter vacation,
anyway, but she isn't going back. Miss Maggie spoke with studied casualness, but there was an added color
in her cheeks--Miss Maggie always flushed a little when she mentioned
Mellicent's name to Mr. Smith, in spite of her indignant efforts not to
do so. Well, the Pennocks had a dance last night, and Mellicent went. She said she had to laugh to see Mrs. Pennock's efforts to keep Carl
away from her--the loss of the money is known everywhere now, and has
been greatly exaggerated, I've heard. She said that even Hibbard
Gaylord had the air of one trying to let her down easy. He doesn't move in the Pennock crowd much. But
Mellicent sees him, and--and everything's all right there, now. That's
why Mellicent is so happy." "You mean--Has her mother given in?" You see, Jane was at the dance, too, and she saw Carl, and she
saw Hibbard Gaylord. She told Mellicent this
morning that she had her opinion of fellows who would show so plainly
as Carl Pennock and Hibbard Gaylord did that it was the money they were
after." Jane has changed her shoes again," murmured Mr. Miss Maggie's puzzled frown gave way to a laugh. "Well, yes, perhaps the shoe is on the other foot again. But, anyway,
she doesn't love Carl or Hibbard any more, and she does love Donald
Gray. He HASN'T let the loss of the money make any difference to him,
you see. He's been even more devoted, if anything. She told Mellicent
this morning that he was a very estimable young man, and she liked him
very much. Perhaps you see now why Mellicent is--happy." I'm glad to know it," cried Mr. "I'm glad--" His
face changed suddenly. "I'm glad the LOSS of the
money brought them some happiness--if the possession of it didn't," he
finished moodily, turning to go to his own room. At the hall door he
paused and looked back at Miss Maggie, standing by the table, gazing
after him with troubled eyes. "Did Mellicent say--whether Fred was
there?" He didn't come home for this vacation
at all. I suspect Mellicent doesn't know
anything about that wretched affair of his." So the young gentleman didn't show up at all?" Hattie didn't
go to the Pennocks' either. Hattie has--has been very different since
this affair of Fred's. I think it frightened her terribly--it was so
near a tragedy; the boy threatened to kill himself, you know, if his
father didn't help him out." "Yes, I know he did; and I'm afraid he found things in a pretty bad
mess--when he got there," sighed Miss Maggie. "It was a bad mess all
around." "It is, indeed, a bad mess all around," he growled as he
disappeared through the door. Behind him, Miss Maggie still stood motionless, looking after him with
troubled eyes. As the spring days grew warmer, Miss Maggie had occasion many times to
look after Mr. One day he would be the old delightful companion, genial,
cheery, generously donating a box of chocolates to the center-table
bonbon dish or a dozen hothouse roses to the mantel vase. The next, he
would be nervous, abstracted, almost irritable. Yet she could see no
possible reason for the change. Sometimes she wondered fearfully if Mellicent could have anything to do
with it. Was it possible that he had cared for Mellicent, and to see
her now so happy with Donald Gray was more than he could bear? There was his own statement that he had devoted
himself to her solely and only to help keep the undesirable lovers away
and give Donald Gray a chance. Besides, had he not said that he was not a marrying man, anyway? To be
sure, that seemed a pity--a man so kind and thoughtful and so
delightfully companionable! But then, it was nothing to her, of
course--only she did hope he was not feeling unhappy over Mellicent! Smith would not bring flowers and
candy so often. She felt as if he were spending too
much money--and she had got the impression in some way that he did not
have any too much money to spend. And there were the expensive motor
trips, too--she feared Mr. Yet she could not
tell him so, of course. He never seemed to realize the value of a
dollar, anyway, and he very obviously did not know how to get the most
out of it. Look at his foolish generosity in regard to the board he
paid her! Miss Maggie wondered sometimes if it might not be worry over money
matters that was making him so nervous and irritable on occasions now. Plainly he was very near the end of his work there in Hillerton. He was
not getting so many letters on Blaisdell matters from away, either. For
a month now he had done nothing but a useless repetition of old work;
and of late, a good deal of the time, he was not even making that
pretense of being busy. For days at a time he would not touch his
records. That could mean but one thing, of course; his work was done. Yet he seemed to be making no move toward departure. Not that she
wanted him to go. She should miss him very much when he went, of
course. But she did not like to feel that he was staying simply because
he had nowhere to go and nothing to do. Miss Maggie did not believe in
able-bodied men who had nowhere to go and nothing to do--and she wanted
very much to believe in Mr. She had been under the impression that he was getting the Blaisdell
material together for a book, and that he was intending to publish it
himself. His book must be ready, but he was making no move to
publish it. To Miss Maggie this could mean but one thing: some
financial reverses had made it impossible for him to carry out his
plans, and had left him stranded with no definite aim for the future. She was so sorry!--but there seemed to be nothing that she could do. She HAD tried to help by insisting that he pay less for his board; but
he had not only scouted that idea, but had brought her more chocolates
and flowers than ever--for all the world as if he had divined her
suspicions and wished to disprove them. Smith was trying to keep something from her, Miss Maggie was
sure. She was the more sure, perhaps, because she herself had something
that she was trying to keep from Mr. Smith--and she thought she
recognized the symptoms. Meanwhile April budded into May, and May blossomed into June; and June
brought all the Blaisdells together again in Hillerton. CHAPTER XXII

WITH EVERY JIM A JAMES


Two days after Fred Blaisdell had returned from college, his mother
came to see Miss Maggie. Smith was rearranging the books on Miss
Maggie's shelves and trying to make room for the new ones he had
brought her through the winter. Hattie came in, red-eyed and
flushed-faced, he ceased his work at once and would have left the room,
but she stopped him with a gesture. You know all about it, anyway,--and I'd just as soon you
knew the rest. I just came down to talk
things over with Maggie. I--I'm sure I don't know w-what I'm going to
do--when I can't." "But you always can, dear," soothed Miss Maggie cheerily, handing her
visitor a fan and taking a chair near her. Smith, after a moment's hesitation, turned quietly back to his
bookshelves. "Why, Hattie Blaisdell, where are you going?" I
guess we can still see each other. Now, tell me, what does all this
mean?" "Well, of course, it began with Fred--his trouble, you know." "But I thought Jim fixed that all up, dear." He paid the money, and nobody there at college knew a
thing about it. Fred told us some of them
night before last. He says he's ashamed of himself, but that he
believes there's enough left in him to make a man of him yet. But he
says he can't do it--there." "You mean--he doesn't want to go back to college?" Miss Maggie's voice
showed her disappointment. "Oh, he wants to go to college--but not there." "He says he's had too much money to spend--and that 't wouldn't be easy
not to spend it--if he was back there, in the old crowd. "Well, that's all right, isn't it?" He's awfully happy over it, and--and I
guess I am." But now, what is this about Plainville?" "Oh, that
grew out of it--all this. Hammond is going to open a new office in
Plainville and he's offered Jim--James--no, JIM--I'm not going to call
him 'James' any more!--the chance to manage it." "Well, that's fine, I'm sure." "Yes, of course that part is fine--splendid. He'll get a bigger salary,
and all that, and--and I guess I'm glad to go, anyway--I don't like
Hillerton any more. I haven't got any friends here, Maggie. Of course,
I wouldn't have anything to do with the Gaylords now, after what's
happened,--that boy getting my boy to drink and gamble, and--and
everything. And yet--YOU know how I've strained every nerve for years,
and worked and worked to get where my children could--COULD be with
them!" "It didn't pay, did it, Hattie?" They're perfectly horrid--every one of them, and I
hate them!" Look at what they've done to Fred, and Bessie, too! I
shan't let HER be with them any more, either. There aren't any folks
here we can be with now. That's why I don't mind going away. All our
friends that we used to know don't like us any more, they're so jealous
on account of the money. Oh, yes, I know you think I'm to blame for
that," she went on aggrievedly. "I can see you do, by your face. But it was just so I could get ahead. Miss Maggie looked as if she would like to say
something more--but she did not say it. Smith was abstractedly opening and shutting
the book in his hand. He had not
touched the books on the shelves for some time. "And look at how I've tried and see what it has come to--Bessie so
high-headed and airy she makes fun of us, and Fred a gambler and a
drunkard, and'most a thief. And it's all that horrid hundred thousand
dollars!" Smith's hand slipped to the floor with a bang; but no
one was noticing Mr. "Oh, Hattie, don't blame the hundred thousand dollars," cried Miss
Maggie. "Jim says it was, and Fred does, too. Fred said it
was all just the same kind of a way that I'd tried to make folks call
Jim 'James.' He said I'd been trying to make every single 'Jim' we had
into a 'James,' until I'd taken away all the fun of living. And I
suppose maybe he's right, too." "Well,
anyhow, I'm not going to do it any more. There isn't any fun in it,
anyway. It doesn't make any difference how hard I tried to get ahead, I
always found somebody else a little 'aheader' as Benny calls it. "There isn't any use--in that kind of trying, Hattie." Jim said I was like the little boy that
they asked what would make him the happiest of anything in the world,
and he answered, 'Everything that I haven't got.' And I suppose I have
been something like that. But I don't see as I'm any worse than other
folks. Everybody goes for money; but I'm sure I don't see why--if it
doesn't make them any happier than it has me! "We shall begin to pack the first of the
month. It looks like a mountain to me, but Jim and Fred say they'll
help, and--"

Mr. Smith did not hear any more, for Miss Maggie and her guest had
reached the hall and had closed the door behind them. But when Miss
Maggie returned, Mr. Smith was pacing up and down the room nervously. "Well," he demanded with visible irritation, as soon as she appeared,
"will you kindly tell me if there is anything--desirable--that that
confounded money has done?" "You mean--Jim Blaisdell's money?" "I mean all the money--I mean the three hundred thousand dollars that
those three people received. Has it ever brought any good or
happiness--anywhere?" "Oh, yes, I know," smiled Miss Maggie, a little sadly. "But--" Her
countenance changed abruptly. A passionate earnestness came to her
eyes. "Don't blame the money--blame the SPENDING of it! The dollar that will buy tickets to the movies will just as
quickly buy a good book; and if you're hungry, it's up to you whether
you put your money into chocolate eclairs or roast beef. Is the MONEY
to blame that goes for a whiskey bill or a gambling debt instead of for
shoes and stockings for the family?" Smith had apparently lost his own irritation in his
amazement at hers. "Why, Miss Maggie, you--you seem worked up over this
matter." It's been money,
money, money, ever since I could remember! We're all after it, and we
all want it, and we strain every nerve to get it. We think it's going
to bring us happiness. But it won't--unless we do our part. And there
are some things that even money can't buy. Besides, it isn't the money
that does the things, anyway,--it's the man behind the money. What do
you think money is good for, Mr. Smith, now thoroughly dazed, actually blinked his eyes at the
question, and at the vehemence with which it was hurled into his face. "Why, Miss Maggie, it--it--I--I--"

"It isn't good for anything unless we can exchange it for something we
want, is it?" "Why, I--I suppose we can GIVE it--"

"But even then we're exchanging it for something we want, aren't we? We
want to make the other fellow happy, don't we?" "But it doesn't
always work that way. Now, very likely
this--er--Mr. Fulton thought those three hundred thousand dollars were
going to make these people happy. Personification of happiness--that
woman was, a few minutes ago, wasn't she?" Smith had regained his
air of aggrieved irritation. She
didn't know how to spend it. And that's just what I mean when I say
we've got to do our part--money won't buy happiness, unless we exchange
it for the things that will bring happiness. If we don't know how to
get any happiness out of five dollars, we won't know how to get it out
of five hundred, or five thousand, or five hundred thousand, Mr. I don't mean that we'll get the same amount out of five dollars, of
course,--though I've seen even that happen sometimes!--but I mean that
we've got to know how to spend five dollars--and to make the most of
it." "I reckon--you're right, Miss Maggie." "I know I'm right, and 't isn't the money's fault when things go wrong. Oh, yes, I know--we're taught that the
love of money is the root of all evil. But I don't think it should be
so--necessarily. I think money's one of the most wonderful things in
the world. It's more than a trust and a gift--it's an opportunity, and
a test. It brings out what's strongest in us, every time. And it does
that whether it's five dollars or five hundred thousand dollars. If--if
we love chocolate eclairs and the movies better than roast beef and
good books, we're going to buy them, whether they're chocolate eclairs
and movies on five dollars, or or--champagne suppers and Paris gowns on
five hundred thousand dollars!" Miss Maggie gave a shamefaced laugh and sank back in her chair. "You don't know what to think of me, of course; and no wonder," she
sighed. "But I've felt so bad over this--this money business right here
under my eyes. I love them all, every one of them. And YOU know how
it's been, Mr. Hasn't it worked out to prove just what I say? She said that Fred declared she'd been
trying to make every one of her 'Jims' a 'James,' ever since the money
came. But he forgot that she did that very same thing before it came. All her life she's been trying to make five dollars look like ten; so
when she got the hundred thousand, it wasn't six months before she was
trying to make that look like two hundred thousand." Jane used to buy ingrain carpets and cheap
chairs and cover them with mats and tidies to save them." "They got on your nerves, too, didn't they? Such layers upon layers of
covers for everything! It brought me to such a pass that I went to the
other extreme. I wouldn't protect ANYTHING--which was very
reprehensible, of course. Well, now she has pretty dishes and solid
silver--but she hides them in bags and boxes, and never uses them
except for company. She doesn't take any more comfort with them than
she did with the ingrain carpets and cheap chairs. Of course, that's a
little thing. When you can't spend five
cents out of a hundred dollars for pleasure without wincing, you
needn't expect you're going to spend five dollars out of a hundred
thousand without feeling the pinch," laughed Miss Maggie. "Poor Flora--and when she tried so hard to quiet her conscience because
she had so much money! She told me yesterday that she
hardly ever gets a begging letter now." "No; and those she does get she investigates," asserted Mr. "So
the fakes don't bother her much these days. And she's doing a lot of
good, too, in a small way." "She is, and she's happy now," declared Miss Maggie, "except that she
still worries a little because she is so happy. She's dismissed the
maid and does her own work--I'm afraid Miss Flora never was cut out for
a fine-lady life of leisure, and she loves to putter in the kitchen. She says it's such a relief, too, not to keep dressed up in company
manners all the time, and not to have that horrid girl spying 'round
all day to see if she behaves proper. and I reckon it worked the best with her of any of them." "Er--that is, I mean, perhaps she's made the best use of the hundred
thousand," stammered Mr. "She's been--er--the happiest." "Why, y-yes, perhaps she has, when you come to look at it that way." "But you wouldn't--er--advise this Mr. Fulton to leave her--his twenty
millions?" "She'd faint dead
away at the mere thought of it." Smith turned on his heel and resumed
his restless pacing up and down the room. From time to time he glanced
furtively at Miss Maggie. Miss Maggie, her hands idly resting in her
lap, palms upward, was gazing fixedly at nothing. he demanded at last, coming to a
pause at her side. Stanley G. Fulton," she answered, not looking
up. The odd something had increased, but Miss Maggie's eyes
were still dreamily fixed on space. I was wondering what he had done with them." "Yes, in the letter, I mean." There was a letter--a second letter to be opened
in two years' time. They said that that was to dispose of the remainder
of the property--his last will and testament." "Oh, yes, I remember," assented Mr. Smith was very carefully not
meeting Miss Maggie's eyes. Miss Maggie turned back to her meditative
gazing at nothing. "The two years are nearly up, you know,--I was
talking with Jane the other day--just next November." The words were very near a groan, but at once Mr. Smith
hurriedly repeated, "I know--I know!" very lightly, indeed, with an
apprehensive glance at Miss Maggie. "So it seems to me if he were alive that he'd be back by this time. And
so I was wondering--about those millions," she went on musingly. "What
do YOU suppose he has done with them?" she asked, with sudden
animation, turning full upon him. "Why, I--I--How should I know?" Smith, a swift crimson
dyeing his face. "You wouldn't, of course--but that needn't make you look as if I'd
intimated that YOU had them! I was only asking for your opinion, Mr. Smith," she twinkled, with mischievous eyes. Smith laughed now, a little precipitately. "But,
indeed, Miss Maggie, you turned so suddenly and the question was so
unexpected that I felt like the small boy who, being always blamed for
everything at home that went wrong, answered tremblingly, when the
teacher sharply demanded, 'Who made the world?' 'Please, ma'am, I did;
but I'll never do it again!'" Smith, when Miss Maggie had done laughing at his
little story, "suppose I turn the tables on you? Miss Maggie shifted her position, her
face growing intently interested again. "I've been trying to remember
what I know of the man." "Yes, from the newspaper and magazine accounts of him. Of course, there
was quite a lot about him at the time the money came; and Flora let me
read some things she'd saved, in years gone. Flora was always
interested in him, you know." "Why, not much, really, about the man. Besides, very likely what I did
find wasn't true. But
I was trying to find out how he'd spent his money himself. I thought
that might give me a clue--about the will, I mean." "Yes; but I didn't find much. In spite of his reported eccentricities,
he seems to me to have done nothing very extraordinary." "He doesn't seem to have been very bad." "Nor very good either, for that matter." "Sort of a--nonentity, perhaps." "Perhaps--though I suppose he couldn't really be that--not very
well--with twenty millions, could he? But I mean, he wasn't very bad,
nor very good. He didn't seem to be dissipated, or mixed up in any
scandal, or to be recklessly extravagant, like so many rich men. On the
other hand, I couldn't find that he'd done any particular good in the
world. Some charities were mentioned, but they were perfunctory,
apparently, and I don't believe, from the accounts, that he ever really
INTERESTED himself in any one--that he ever really cared for--any one." If Miss Maggie had looked up, she would have met a
most disconcerting expression in the eyes bent upon her. But Miss
Maggie did not look up. "Why, he didn't even have a wife and
children to stir him from his selfishness. He had a secretary, of
course, and he probably never saw half his begging letters. I can
imagine his tossing them aside with a languid 'Fix them up,
James,--give the creatures what they want, only don't bother me.'" Smith; then, hastily: "I'm sure he never
did. "But when I think of what he might
do--Twenty millions! But he didn't
do--anything--worth while with them, so far as I can see, when he was
living, so that's why I can't imagine what his will may be. Probably
the same old perfunctory charities, however, with the Chicago law firm
instead of 'James' as disburser--unless, of course, Hattie's
expectations are fulfilled, and he divides them among the Blaisdells
here." "You think--there's something worth while he MIGHT have done with those
millions, then?" Smith, a sudden peculiar wistfulness in
his eyes. "Something he MIGHT have done with them!" "Why,
it seems to me there's no end to what he might have done--with twenty
millions." Smith came nearer, his face working with emotion. "Miss
Maggie, if a man with twenty millions--that is, could you love a man
with twenty millions, if--if Mr. Fulton should ask you--if _I_ were Mr. Fulton--if--" His countenance changed suddenly. He drew himself up with
a cry of dismay. "Oh, no--no--I've spoiled it all now. That isn't what
I meant to say first. I was going to find out--I mean, I was going to
tell--Oh, good Heavens, what a--That confounded money--again!" Smith, w-what--" Only the crisp shutting of the door answered
her. With a beseeching look and a despairing gesture Mr. Then, turning to sit down, she came face to face with her own
image in the mirror. "Well, now you've done it, Maggie Duff," she whispered wrathfully to
the reflection in the glass. He was--was
going to say something--I know he was. You've talked money,
money, MONEY to him for an hour. You said you LOVED money; and you told
what you'd do--if you had twenty millions of dollars. And you know--you
KNOW he's as poor as Job's turkey, and that just now he's more than
ever plagued over--money! As
if that counted against--"

With a little sobbing cry Miss Maggie covered her face with her hands
and sat down, helplessly, angrily. CHAPTER XXIII

REFLECTIONS--MIRRORED AND OTHERWISE


Miss Maggie was still sitting in the big chair with her face in her
hands when the door opened and Mr. Miss Maggie, dropping her hands and starting up at his entrance, caught
a glimpse of his face in the mirror in front of her. With a furtive,
angry dab of her fingers at her wet eyes, she fell to rearranging the
vases and photographs on the mantel. "Miss Maggie, I've got to face this thing out, of course. Even if I
had--made a botch of things at the very start, it didn't help any
to--to run away, as I did. It was only
because I--I--But never mind that. I'm coming now straight to the
point. Miss Maggie, will you--marry me?" The photograph in Miss Maggie's hand fell face down on the shelf. Miss
Maggie's fingers caught the edge of the mantel in a convulsive grip. A
swift glance in the mirror before her disclosed Mr. Smith's face just
over her shoulder, earnest, pleading, and still very white. She dropped
her gaze, and turned half away. She tried to speak, but only a half-choking little
breath came. "Miss Maggie, please don't say no--yet. Let me--explain--about how I
came here, and all that. But first, before I do that, let me tell you
how--how I love you--how I have loved you all these long months. I
THINK I loved you from the first time I saw you. Whatever comes, I want
you to know that. And if you could care for me a little--just a little,
I'm sure I could make it more--in time, so you would marry me. Don't you believe I'd try to make you happy--dear?" "Yes, oh, yes," murmured Miss Maggie, still with her head turned away. Then all you've got to say is that you'll let me try. Why, until I came here to this little house, I
didn't know what living, real living, was. And I HAVE been, just as
you said, a selfish old thing." Miss Maggie, with a start of surprise, faced the image in the mirror;
but Mr. Smith was looking at her, not at her reflection, so she did not
meet his ayes. "Why, I never--" she stammered. "Yes, you did, a minute ago. Oh, of course you
didn't realize--everything, and perhaps you wouldn't have said it if
you'd known. But you said it--and you meant it, and I'm glad you said
it. And, dear little woman, don't you see? That's only another reason
why you should say yes. You can show me how not to be selfish." Smith, I--I-" stammered Miss Maggie, still with puzzled eyes. You can show me how to make life really worth while, for
me, and for--for lots of others And NOW I have some one to care for. And, oh, little woman, I--I care so much, it can't be that you--you
don't care--any!" Miss Maggie caught her breath and turned away again. The red crept up Miss Maggie's neck to her forehead but still she was
silent. "If I could only see your eyes," pleaded the man. Then, suddenly, he
saw Miss Maggie's face in the mirror. The next moment Miss Maggie
herself turned a little, and in the mirror their eyes met--and in the
mirror Mr. "You DO care--a LITTLE!" he
breathed, as he took her in his arms. Miss Maggie shook her head vigorously against his
coat-collar. "I care--a GREAT DEAL," whispered Miss Maggie to the coat-collar, with
shameless emphasis. triumphed the man, bestowing a rapturous kiss on the
tip of a small pink ear--the nearest point to Miss Maggie's lips that
was available, until, with tender determination, he turned her face to
his. A moment later, blushing rosily, Miss Maggie drew herself away. "There, we've been quite silly enough--old folks like us." Love is never silly--not real love like ours. Besides,
we're only as old as we feel. I've
lost--YEARS since this morning. And you know I'm just beginning to
live--really live, anyway! "I'm afraid you act it," said Miss Maggie, with mock severity. "YOU would--if you'd been through what _I_ have," retorted Mr. "And when I think what a botch I made of it, to
begin with--You see, I didn't mean to start off with that, first thing;
and I was so afraid that--that even if you did care for John Smith, you
wouldn't for me--just at first. At arms' length he
held her off, his hands on her shoulders. His happy eyes searching her
face saw the dawn of the dazed, question. "Wouldn't care for YOU if I did for John Smith! she demanded, her eyes slowly sweeping him
from head to foot and back again. Instinctively his tongue went back to the old manner of
address, but his hands still held her shoulders. "You don't mean--you
can't mean that--that you didn't understand--that you DON'T understand
that I am--Oh, good Heavens! Well, I have made a mess of it this time,"
he groaned. Releasing his hold on her shoulders, he turned and began to
tramp up and down the room. "Nice little John-Alden-Miles-Standish
affair this is now, upon my word! Miss Maggie, have I got to--to
propose to you all over again for--for another man, now?" I--I don't think I understand you." "Then you don't know--you didn't understand a few minutes ago, when
I--I spoke first, when I asked you about--about those twenty millions--"

She lifted her hand quickly, pleadingly. Smith, please, don't let's bring money into it at all. I don't
care--I don't care a bit if you haven't got any money." "If I HAVEN'T got any money!" Oh, yes, I know, I said I loved money." The rich red came back to
her face in a flood. "But I didn't mean--And it's just as much of a
test and an opportunity when you DON'T have money--more so, if
anything. I never thought of--of how you
might take it--as if I WANTED it. Oh, can't
you--understand?" "And I
thought I'd given myself away! He came to her and stood
close, but he did not offer to touch her. "I thought, after I'd said
what I did about--about those twenty millions that you understood--that
you knew I was--Stanley Fulton himself." Miss Maggie stood motionless, her eyes looking
straight into his, amazed incredulous. Maggie, don't look at me
like that. She was backing away now, slowly, step by step. Anger, almost loathing,
had taken the place of the amazement and incredulity in her eyes. But--" "And you've been here all these months--yes,
years--under a false name, pretending to be what you weren't--talking
to us, eating at our tables, winning our confidence, letting us talk to
you about yourself, even pretending that--Oh, how could you?" "Maggie, dearest," he begged, springing toward her, "if you'll only let
me--"

But she stopped him peremptorily, drawing herself to her full height. "I am NOT your dearest," she flamed angrily. "I did not give my
love--to YOU." I gave it to John Smith--gentleman, I supposed. A man--poor, yes,
I believed him poor; but a man who at least had a right to his NAME! Stanley G. Fulton, spy, trickster, who makes life
itself a masquerade for SPORT! Stanley G. Fulton,
and--I do not wish to." The words ended in a sound very like a sob; but
Miss Maggie, with her head still high, turned her back and walked to
the window. The man, apparently stunned for a moment, stood watching her, his eyes
grieved, dismayed, hopeless. Then, white-faced, he turned and walked
toward the door. With his hand almost on the knob he slowly wheeled
about and faced the woman again. He hesitated visibly, then in a dull,
lifeless voice he began to speak. "Miss Maggie, before John Smith steps entirely out of your life, he
would like to say just this, please, not on justification, but on
explanation of----of Stanley G. Fulton. Fulton did not intend to be a
spy, or a trickster, or to make life a masquerade for--sport. He was a
lonely old man--he felt old. True, he had no
one to care for, but--he had no one to care for HIM, either. He did have a great deal of money--more than he knew what
to do with. Oh, he tried--various ways of spending it. They resulted, chiefly,
in showing him that he wasn't--as wise as he might be in that line,
perhaps." At the window Miss Maggie still stood,
with her back turned as before. "The time came, finally," resumed the man, "when Fulton began to wonder
what would become of his millions when he was done with them. He had a
feeling that he would like to will a good share of them to some of his
own kin; but he had no nearer relatives than some cousins back East,
in--Hillerton." Miss Maggie at the window drew in her breath, and held it suspended,
letting it out slowly. "He didn't know anything about these cousins," went on the man dully,
wearily, "and he got to wondering what they would do with the money. I
think he felt, as you said to-day that you feel, that one must know how
to spend five dollars if one would get the best out of five thousand. So Fulton felt that, before he gave a man fifteen or twenty millions,
he would like to know--what he would probably do with them. He had seen
so many cases where sudden great wealth had brought--great sorrow. "And so then he fixed up a little scheme; he would give each one of
these three cousins of his a hundred thousand dollars apiece, and then,
unknown to them, he would get acquainted with them, and see which of
them would be likely to make the best use of those twenty millions. It
was a silly scheme, of course,--a silly, absurd foolishness from
beginning to end. It--"

He did not finish his sentence. There was a rush of swift feet, a swish
of skirts, then full upon him there fell a whirlwind of sobs, clinging
arms, and incoherent ejaculations. "It wasn't silly--it wasn't silly. Oh, I think it was--WONDERFUL! And
I--I'm so ASHAMED!" Later--very much later, when something like lucid coherence had become
an attribute of their conversation, as they sat together upon the old
sofa, the man drew a long breath and said:--

"Then I'm quite forgiven?" "And you consider yourself engaged to BOTH John Smith and Stanley G. "It sounds pretty bad, but--yes," blushed Miss Maggie. "And you must love Stanley G. Fulton just exactly as well--no, a little
better, than you did John Smith." "I'll--try to--if he's as lovable." Miss Maggie's head was at a saucy
tilt. "He'll try to be; but--it won't be all play, you know, for you. You've
got to tell him what to do with those twenty millions. By the way, what
WILL you do with them?" Fulton, you HAVE got--And
I forgot all about--those twenty millions. "They belong to
Fulton, if you please. Furthermore, CAN'T you call me anything but that
abominable 'Mr. You might--er--abbreviate
it to--er--' Stan,' now." "Perhaps so--but I shan't," laughed Miss Maggie,--"not yet. You may be
thankful I have wits enough left to call you anything--after becoming
engaged to two men all at once." "And with having the responsibility of spending twenty millions, too." "Oh, we can do so much with that money! Why, only think what is
needed right HERE--better milk for the babies, and a community house,
and the streets cleaner, and a new carpet for the church, and a new
hospital with--"

"But, see here, aren't you going to spend some of that money on
yourself?" I'm going to Egypt, and China, and
Japan--with you, of course; and books--oh, you never saw such a lot of
books as I shall buy. And--oh, I'll spend heaps on just my selfish
self--you see if I don't! But, first,--oh, there are so many things
that I've so wanted to do, and it's just come over me this minute that
NOW I can do them! And you KNOW how Hillerton needs a new hospital." "And I want to build a store
and run it so the girls can LIVE, and a factory, too, and decent homes
for the workmen, and a big market, where they can get their food at
cost; and there's the playground for the children, and--"

But Mr. Smith was laughing, and lifting both hands in mock despair. "Look here," he challenged, "I THOUGHT you were marrying ME, but--ARE
you marrying me or that confounded money?" "Yes, I know; but you see--" She stopped short. Suddenly she laughed again, and threw into his eyes a look so merry, so
whimsical, so altogether challenging, that he demanded:--

"Well, what is it now?" "Oh, it's so good, I have--half a mind to tell you." Miss Maggie had left the sofa, and was standing, as if half-poised for
flight, midway to the door. "I think--yes, I will tell you," she nodded, her cheeks very pink; "but
I wanted to be--over here to tell it." Do you remember those letters I got awhile ago,
and the call from the Boston; lawyer, that I--I wouldn't tell you
about?" "Well; you know you--you thought they--they had something to do
with--my money; that I--I'd lost some." "Well, they--they did have something to do--with money." "Oh, why wouldn't you tell me
then--and let me help you some way?" She shook her head nervously and backed nearer the door. If you don't--I won't tell you." "Well, as I said, it did have something to do--with my money; but just
now, when you asked me if I--I was marrying you or your money--"

"But I was in fun--you know I was in fun!" "Oh, yes, I knew that," nodded Miss Maggie. "But it--it made me laugh
and remember--the letters. You see, they weren't as you thought. They
didn't tell me of--of money lost. That father's Cousin George in Alaska had died and left me--fifty
thousand dollars." "But, my dear woman, why in Heaven's name wouldn't you tell me that?" "You see, I thought
you were poor--very poor, and I--I wouldn't even own up to it myself,
but I knew, in my heart, that I was afraid, if you heard I had this
money, you wouldn't--you wouldn't--ask me to--to--"

She was blushing so adorably now that the man understood and leaped to
his feet. "Maggie, you--darling!" But the door had shut--Miss Maggie had fled. CHAPTER XXIV

THAT MISERABLE MONEY


In the evening, after the Martin girls had gone to their rooms, Miss
Maggie and Mr. "Of course," he began with a sigh, "I'm really not out of the woods at
all. Blissfully happy as I am, I'm really deeper in the woods than
ever, for now I've got you there with me, to look out for. However
successfully John Smith might dematerialize into nothingness--Maggie
Duff can't." "No, I know she can't," admitted Miss Maggie soberly. "Yet if she marries John Smith she'll have to--and if she doesn't marry
him, how's Stanley G. Fulton going to do his courting? Smith, you'll HAVE to tell them--who you are. You'll have to tell them
right away." The man made a playfully wry face. "I shall be glad," he observed, "when I shan't have to be held off at
the end of a 'Mr.'! However, we'll let that pass--until we settle the
other matter. Have you given any thought as to HOW I'm going to tell
Cousin Frank and Cousin James and Cousin Flora that I am Stanley G. "No--except that you must do it," she answered decidedly. "I don't
think you ought to deceive them another minute--not another minute." "And had you thought--as to
what would happen when I did tell them?" "Why, n-no, not particularly, except that--that they naturally wouldn't
like it, at first, and that you'd have to explain--just as you did to
me--why you did it." "And do you think they'll like it any better--when I do explain? Miss Maggie meditated; then, a little tremulously she drew in her
breath. "Why, you'd have to tell them that--that you did it for a test,
wouldn't you?" "And they'd know--they couldn't help knowing--that they had failed to
meet it adequately." And would that help matters any--make things any happier, all
around?" "No--oh, no," she frowned despairingly. "Would it do anybody any REAL good, now? "N-no," she admitted reluctantly, "except that--that you'd be doing
right." And another thing--aside from the
mortification, dismay, and anger of my good cousins, have you thought
what I'd be bringing on you?" In less than half a dozen hours after the Blaisdells knew that
Mr. John Smith was Stanley G. Fulton, Hillerton would know it. And in
less than half a dozen more hours, Boston, New York, Chicago,--to say
nothing of a dozen lesser cities,--would know it--if there didn't
happen to be anything bigger on foot. Headlines an inch high would
proclaim the discovery of the missing Stanley G. Fulton, and the fine
print below would tell everything that happened, and a great deal that
didn't happen, in the carrying-out of the eccentric multi-millionaire's
extraordinary scheme of testing his relatives with a hundred thousand
dollars apiece to find a suitable heir. Your picture would adorn the
front page of the yellowest of yellow journals, and--"

"MY picture! "Oh, yes, yes," smiled the man imperturbably. Aren't you the affianced bride of Mr. I can see them
now: 'In Search of an Heir and Finds a Wife.' --'Charming Miss Maggie
Duff Falls in Love with Plain John Smith,' and--"

"Oh, no, no," moaned Miss Maggie, shrinking back as if already the
lurid headlines were staring her in the face. "Oh, well, it might not be so bad as that, of course. Undoubtedly there are elements for a pretty good story in the
case, and some man, with nothing more important to write up, is bound
to make the most of it somewhere. There's
sure to be unpleasant publicity, my dear, if the truth once leaks out." "But what--what HAD you planned to do?" "Well, I HAD planned something like this: pretty quick, now, Mr. Smith
was to announce the completion of his Blaisdell data, and, with
properly grateful farewells, take his departure from Hillerton. There he would go inland on some sort of a
simple expedition with a few native guides and carriers, but no other
companion. Somewhere in the wilderness he would shed his beard and his
name, and would emerge in his proper person of Stanley G. Fulton and
promptly take passage for the States. Of course, upon the arrival in
Chicago of Mr. Stanley G. Fulton, there would be a slight flurry at his
appearance, and a few references to the hundred-thousand-dollar gifts
to the Eastern relatives, and sundry speculations as to the why and how
of the exploring trip. There would be various rumors and alleged
interviews; but Mr. Stanley G. Fulton never was noted for his
communicativeness, and, after a very short time, the whole thing would
be dismissed as probably another of the gentleman's well-known
eccentricities. "Oh, I see," murmured Miss Maggie, in very evident relief. "That would
be better--in some ways; only it does seem terrible not to--to tell
them who you are." "But we have just proved that to do that wouldn't bring happiness
anywhere, and would bring misery everywhere, haven't we?" "Then why do it?--particularly as by not doing it I am not defrauding
anybody in the least. No; that part isn't worrying me a bit now--but
there is one point that does worry me very much." My scheme gets Stanley G. Fulton back to life and Chicago
very nicely; but it doesn't get Maggie Duff there worth a cent! John Smith in Hillerton and arrive in Chicago as
the wife of Stanley G. Fulton, can she?" "N-no, but he--he can come back and get her--if he wants her." (Miss Maggie blushed all the more at the
method and the fervor of Mr. Smith, smiling at Miss
Maggie's hurried efforts to smooth her ruffled hair. He'd look altogether too much like--like Mr. "But your beard will be gone--I wonder how I shall like you without a
beard." Smith laughed and threw up his hands with a doleful shrug. "That's what comes of courting as one man and marrying as another," he
groaned. Then, sternly: "I'll warn you right now, Maggie Duff, that
Stanley G. Fulton is going to be awfully jealous of John Smith if you
don't look out." "He should have thought of that before," retorted Miss Maggie, her eyes
mischievous. "But, tell me, wouldn't you EVER dare to come--in your
proper person?" "Never!--or, at least, not for some time. The beard would be gone, to
be sure; but there'd be all the rest to tattle--eyes, voice, size,
manner, walk--everything; and smoked glasses couldn't cover all that,
you know. They'd only result
in making me look more like John Smith than ever. John Smith, you
remember, wore smoked glasses for some time to hide Mr. Stanley G.
Fulton from the ubiquitous reporter. Stanley G. Fulton can't
come to Hillerton. So, as Mahomet can't go to the mountain, the
mountain must come to Mahomet." Miss Maggie's eyes were growing dangerously mutinous. "That you will have to come to Chicago--yes." "I love you with your head tilted that way." (Miss Maggie promptly
tilted it the other.) "Or that, either, for that matter," continued Mr. "However, speaking of courting--Mr. Fulton will do
that, all right, and endeavor to leave nothing lacking, either as to
quantity or quality. Haven't you got some friend that you can visit?" Miss Maggie's answer was prompt and emphatic--too prompt and too
emphatic for unquestioning acceptance. "Oh, yes, you have," asserted the man cheerfully. "I don't know her
name--but she's there. She's Waving a red flag from your face this
minute! Well, turn your head away, if you like--if you can
listen better that way," he went on tranquilly paying no attention to
her little gasp. "Well, all you have to do is to write the lady you're
coming, and go. Stanley G. Fulton will find
a way to meet her. Then he'll call and meet
you--and be so pleased to see you! There'll be a
regular whirlwind courtship then--calls, dinners, theaters, candy,
books, flowers! You'll be immensely surprised, of course, but you'll accept. Then we'll
get married," he finished with a deep sigh of satisfaction. "Say, CAN'T you call me anything--" he began wrathfully, but
interrupted himself. "However, it's better that you don't, after all. But you wait
till you meet Mr. Now, what's her name,
and where does she live?" Miss Maggie laughed in spite of herself, as she said severely: "Her
name, indeed! Stanley G. Fulton is so in the habit of
having his own way that he forgets he is still Mr. However,
there IS an old schoolmate," she acknowledged demurely. Now, write her at once, and tell her you're
coming." "But she--she may not be there." I think you'd
better plan to go pretty soon after I go to South America. Stanley G. Fulton arrives in Chicago and can write
the news back here to Hillerton. Oh, they'll get it in the papers, in
time, of course; but I think it had better come from you first. You
see--the reappearance on this earth of Mr. Stanley G. Fulton is going
to be of--of some moment to them, you know. Hattie, for
instance, who is counting on the rest of the money next November." "Yes, I know, it will mean a good deal to them, of course. Still, I
don't believe Hattie is really expecting the money. At any rate, she
hasn't said anything about it very lately--perhaps because she's been
too busy bemoaning the pass the present money has brought them to." "No, no--I didn't mean to bring that up," apologized Miss Maggie
quickly, with an apprehensive glance into his face. "And it wasn't
miserable money a bit! Besides, Hattie has--has learned her lesson, I'm
sure, and she'll do altogether differently in the new home. Smith, am I never to--to come back here? "Indeed we can--some time, by and by, when all this has blown over, and
they've forgotten how Mr. Meanwhile, you can come alone--a VERY little. I shan't let you leave me
very much. But I understand; you'll have to come to see your friends. Besides, there are all those playgrounds for the babies and cleaner
milk for the streets, and--"

"Cleaner milk for the streets, indeed!" Oh, yes, it WAS the milk for the babies, wasn't it?" "Well, however that may be you'll have to come back to
superintend all those things you've been wanting to do so long. But"--his face grew a little wistful--"you don't want to spend too much
time here. You know--Chicago has a few babies that need cleaner milk." Her face grew softly luminous as it had grown
earlier in the afternoon. "So you can bestow some of your charity there; and--"

"It isn't charity," she interrupted with suddenly flashing eyes. "Oh,
how I hate that word--the way it's used, I mean. Of course, the real
charity means love. I suppose it was LOVE that made John
Daly give one hundred dollars to the Pension Fund Fair--after he'd
jewed it out of those poor girls behind his counters! Morse
went around everywhere telling how kind dear Mr. Daly was to give so
much to charity! Nobody wants charity--except a few lazy
rascals like those beggars of Flora's! And
if half the world gave the other half its rights there wouldn't BE any
charity, I believe." Smith
held up both hands in mock terror. "I shall be petitioning her for my
bread and butter, yet!" Smith, when I think of all that
money"--her eyes began to shine again--"and of what we can do with it,
I--I just can't believe it's so!" "But you aren't expecting that twenty millions are going to right all
the wrongs in the world, are you?" "No, oh, no; but we can help SOME that we know about. But it isn't that
I just want to GIVE, you know. We must get behind things--to the
causes. We must--"

"We must make the Mr. Dalys pay more to their girls before they pay
anything to pension funds, eh?" Smith, as Miss Maggie came
to a breathless pause. "Oh, can't you SEE what we can
do--with that twenty million dollars?" Smith, his gaze on Miss Maggie's flushed cheeks and shining eyes,
smiled tenderly. "I see--that I'm being married for my money--after all!" sniffed Miss Maggie, so altogether bewitchingly that Mr. Smith
gave her a rapturous kiss. CHAPTER XXV

EXIT MR. JOHN SMITH


Early in July Mr. He made a
farewell call upon each of the Blaisdell families, and thanked them
heartily for all their kindness in assisting him with his Blaisdell
book. The Blaisdells, one and all, said they were very sorry to have him go. Miss Flora frankly wiped her eyes, and told Mr. Smith she could never,
never thank him enough for what he had done for her. Mellicent, too,
with shy eyes averted, told him she should never forget what he had
done for her--and for Donald. James and Flora and Frank--and even Jane!--said that they would like to
have one of the Blaisdell books, when they were published, to hand down
in the family. Flora took out her purse and said that she would pay for
hers now; but Mr. Smith hastily, and with some evident embarrassment,
refused the money, saying that he could not tell yet what the price of
the book would be. All the Blaisdells, except Frank, Fred, and Bessie, went to the station
to see Mr. They told him he was
just like one of the family, anyway, and they declared they hoped he
would come back soon. Frank telephoned him that he would have gone,
too, if he had not had so much to do at the store. Smith seemed pleased at all this attention--he seemed, indeed,
quite touched; but he seemed also embarrassed--in fact, he seemed often
embarrassed during those last few days at Hillerton. Miss Maggie Duff did not go to the station to see Mr. Miss
Flora, on her way home, stopped at the Duff cottage and reproached Miss
Maggie for the delinquency. "All the rest of us did,
'most." You're Blaisdells--but I'm not, you know." "You're just as good as one, Maggie Duff! Besides, hasn't that man
boarded here for over a year, and paid you good money, too?" "Why, y-yes, of course." "Well, then, I don't think it would have hurt you any to show him this
last little attention. He'll think you don't like him, or--or are mad
about something, when all the rest of us went." "Well, then, if--Why, Maggie Duff, you're BLUSHING!" she broke off,
peering into Miss Maggie's face in a way that did not tend to lessen
the unmistakable color that was creeping to her forehead. I declare, if you were twenty years younger, and I didn't
know better, I should say that--" She stopped abruptly, then plunged
on, her countenance suddenly alight with a new idea. "NOW I know why
you didn't go to the station, Maggie Duff! That man proposed to you,
and you refused him!" Hattie always said it would be a match--from
the very first, when he came here to your house." gasped Miss Maggie again, looking about her very much as if
she were meditating flight. "Well, she did--but I didn't believe it. You refused
him--now, didn't you?" Miss Maggie caught her breath a little convulsively. "Well, I suppose you didn't,
then, if you say so. And I don't need to ask if you accepted him. You
didn't, of course, or you'd have been there to see him off. And he
wouldn't have gone then, anyway, probably. So he didn't ask you, I
suppose. Well, I never did believe, like Hattie did, that--"

"Flora," interrupted Miss Maggie desperately, "WILL you stop talking in
that absurd way? Listen, I did not care to go to the station to-day. I'm going to see my old classmate, Nellie
Maynard--Mrs. It's lovely, of course, only--only I--I'm so
surprised! "All the more reason why I should, then. It's time I did," smiled Miss
Maggie. And I do hope you can DO it, and
that it won't peter out at the last minute, same's most of your good
times do. And you've had such a hard life--and your
boarder leaving, too! That'll make a lot of difference in your
pocketbook, won't it? But, Maggie, you'll have to have some new
clothes." I've got to have--oh,
lots of things." And, Maggie,"--Miss Flora's face grew
eager,--"please, PLEASE, won't you let me help you a little--about
those clothes? And get some nice ones--some real nice ones, for once. Please, Maggie, there's a good girl!" "Thank you, no, dear," refused Miss Maggie, shaking her head with a
smile. "But I appreciate your kindness just the same--indeed, I do!" "If you wouldn't be so horrid proud," pouted Miss Flora. I was going to tell
you soon, anyway, and I'll tell it now. I HAVE money, dear,--lots of it
now." Father's Cousin George died two months ago." "Yes; and to father's daughter he left--fifty thousand dollars." But he loved father, you know, years ago,
and father loved him." "But had you ever heard from him--late years?" Father was very angry because he went to Alaska in the first
place, you know, and they haven't ever written very often." They sent me a thousand--just for pin money, they
said. The lawyer's written several times, and he's been here once. I
believe it's all to come next month." "Oh, I'm so glad, Maggie," breathed Flora. I don't know
of anybody I'd rather see take a little comfort in life than you!" At the door, fifteen minutes later, Miss Flora said again how glad she
was; but she added wistfully:--

"I'm sure I don't know, though, what I'm going to do all summer without
you. Just think how lonesome we'll be--you gone to Chicago, Hattie and
Jim and all their family moved to Plainville, and even Mr. And I think we're going to miss Mr. "Indeed, I do think he was a very nice man!" "Now, Flora, I shall want you to go shopping with me lots. And Miss Flora, eagerly entering into Miss Maggie's discussion of
frills and flounces, failed to notice that Miss Maggie had dropped the
subject of Mr. Hillerton had much to talk about during those summer days. Smith's
going had created a mild discussion--the "ancestor feller" was well
known and well liked in the town. But even his departure did not arouse
the interest that was bestowed upon the removal of the James Blaisdells
to Plainville; and this, in turn, did not cause so great an excitement
as did the news that Miss Maggie Duff had inherited fifty thousand
dollars and had gone to Chicago to spend it. And the fact that nearly
all who heard this promptly declared that they hoped she WOULD spend a
good share of it--in Chicago, or elsewhere--on herself, showed pretty
well just where Miss Maggie Duff stood in the hearts of Hillerton. It was early in September that Miss Flora had the letter from Miss
Maggie. Not but that she had received letters from Miss Maggie before,
but that the contents of this one made it at once, to all the
Blaisdells, "the letter." Miss Flora began to read it, gave a little cry, and sprang to her feet. Standing, her breath suspended, she finished it. Five minutes later,
gloves half on and hat askew, she was hurrying across the common to her
brother Frank's home. "Jane, Jane," she panted, as soon as she found her sister-in-law. "I've
had a letter from Maggie. She's just been living on having that money. And us, with all we've
lost, too! But, then, maybe we wouldn't have got it, anyway. And I never thought to bring it," ejaculated Miss Flora
vexedly. She said it would be in all the Eastern papers right away,
of course, but she wanted to tell us first, so we wouldn't be so
surprised. Walked into his lawyer's office without a
telegram, or anything. Tyndall
brought home the news that night in an 'Extra'; but that's all it
told--just that Mr. Stanley G. Fulton, the multi-millionaire who
disappeared nearly two years ago on an exploring trip to South America,
had come back alive and well. Then it told all about the two letters he
left, and the money he left to us, and all that, Maggie said; and it
talked a lot about how lucky it was that he got back just in time
before the other letter had to be opened next November. But it didn't
say any more about his trip, or anything. The morning papers will have
more, Maggie said, probably." "Yes, of course, of course," nodded Jane, rolling the corner of her
upper apron nervously. (Since the forty-thousand-dollar loss Jane had
gone back to her old habit of wearing two aprons.) "Where DO you
suppose he's been all this time? "Maggie said it wasn't known--that the paper didn't say. It was an
'Extra' anyway, and it just got in the bare news of his return. Besides, Maggie'll
write again about it, I'm sure. I'm so glad she's having
such a good time!" "Yes, of course, of course," nodded Jane again nervously. "Say, Flora,
I wonder--do you suppose WE'LL ever hear from him? He left us all that
money--he knows that, of course. He can't ask for it back--the lawyer
said he couldn't do that! But, I wonder--do you
suppose we ought to write him and--and thank him?" I'd be
scared to death to do such a thing as that. Oh, you don't think we've
got to do THAT?" We'd want to do what was right and proper, of course. But I don't see--" She paused helplessly. Miss Flora gave a sudden hysterical little laugh. "Well, I don't see how we're going to find out what's proper, in this
case," she giggled. "We can't write to a magazine, same as I did when I
wanted to know how to answer invitations and fix my knives and forks on
the table. We CAN'T write to them, 'cause nothing like this ever
happened before, and they wouldn't know what to say. How'd we look
writing, 'Please, dear Editor, when a man wills you a hundred thousand
dollars and then comes to life again, is it proper or not proper to
write and thank him?' They'd think we was crazy, and they'd have reason
to! For my part, I--"

The telephone bell rang sharply, and Jane rose to answer it. When she came back she was even more excited. she questioned, as Miss
Flora got hastily to her feet. I left everything just as it was and ran, when I got the
letter. I'll get a paper myself on the way home. I'm going to call up
Hattie, too, on the long distance. My, it's'most as exciting as it was
when it first came,--the money, I mean,--isn't it?" panted Miss Flora
as she hurried away. The Blaisdells bought many papers during the next few days. But even by
the time that the Stanley G. Fulton sensation had dwindled to a short
paragraph in an obscure corner of a middle page, they (and the public
in general) were really little the wiser, except for these bare facts:--

Stanley G. Fulton had arrived at a South American hotel, from the
interior, had registered as S. Fulton, frankly to avoid publicity, and
had taken immediate passage to New York. Arriving at New York, still to
avoid publicity, he had not telegraphed his attorneys, but had taken
the sleeper for Chicago, and had fortunately not met any one who
recognized him until his arrival in that city. He had brought home
several fine specimens of Incan textiles and potteries: and he declared
that he had had a very enjoyable and profitable trip. He did not care to talk of his experiences, he said. For a time, of course, his return was made much of. Fake interviews and
rumors of threatened death and disaster in impenetrable jungles made
frequent appearance; but in an incredibly short time the flame of
interest died from want of fuel to feed upon; and, as Mr. Stanley G.
Fulton himself had once predicted, the matter was soon dismissed as
merely another of the multi-millionaire's well-known eccentricities. All of this the Blaisdells heard from Miss Maggie in addition to seeing
it in the newspapers. But very soon, from Miss Maggie, they began to
learn more. Before a fortnight had passed, Miss Flora received another
letter from Chicago that sent her flying as before to her sister-in-law. "Jane, Jane, Maggie's MET HIM!" she cried, breathlessly bursting into
the kitchen where Jane was paring the apples that she would not trust
to the maid's more wasteful knife. With a hasty twirl of a now reckless knife, Jane finished the
last apple, set the pan on the table before the maid, and hurried her
visitor into the living-room. "Now, tell me quick--what did she say? "Yes--yes--everything," nodded Miss Flora, sinking into a chair. "She
liked him real well, she said and he knows all about that she belongs
to us. Oh, I hope she didn't
tell him about--Fred!" "And that awful gold-mine stock," moaned Jane. "But she wouldn't--I
know she wouldn't!" "Of course she wouldn't," cried Miss Flora. "'Tisn't like Maggie one
bit! She'd only tell the nice things, I'm sure. And, of course, she'd
tell him how pleased we were with the money!" And to think she's met him--really met
him!" She turned an excited face to her
daughter, who had just entered the room. Aunt
Flora's just had a letter from Aunt Maggie, and she's met Mr. Yes, he's real nice, your Aunt
Maggie says, and she likes him very much." Tyndall brought him home
one night and introduced him to his wife and Maggie; and since then
he's been very nice to them. He's taken them out in his automobile, and
taken them to the theater twice." "That's because she belongs to us, of course," nodded Jane wisely. "Yes, I suppose so," agreed Flora. "And I think it's very kind of him." "_I_ think he does it because he
WANTS to. I'll warrant she's
nicer and sweeter and--and, yes, PRETTIER than lots of those old
Chicago women. Aunt Maggie looked positively HANDSOME that day she left
here last July. Probably he LIKES
to take her to places. Anyhow, I'm glad she's having one good time
before she dies." "Yes, so am I, my dear. "I only wish he'd marry her and--and give her a good time all her
life," avowed Mellicent, lifting her chin. She's good enough for him," bridled Mellicent. "Aunt
Maggie's good enough for anybody!" "Maggie's a saint--if
ever there was one." "Yes, but I shouldn't call her a MARRYING saint," smiled Jane. "Well, I don't know about that," frowned Miss Flora thoughtfully. "Hattie always declared there'd be a match between her and Mr. "Well, then, I
shall stick to my original statement that Maggie Duff is a saint, all
right, but not a marrying one--unless some one marries her now for her
money, of course." "As if Aunt Maggie'd stand for that!" "Besides, she
wouldn't have to! Aunt Maggie's good enough to be married for herself." "There, there, child, just because you are a love-sick little piece of
romance just now, you needn't think everybody else is," her mother
reproved her a little sharply. But Mellicent only laughed merrily as she disappeared into her own room. Smith, I wonder where he is, and if he'll ever come
back here," mused Miss Flora, aloud. He was a very
nice man, and I liked him." "Goodness, Flora, YOU aren't, getting romantic, too, are you?" ejaculated Miss Flora sharply, buttoning up her coat. "I'm no more romantic than--than poor Maggie herself is!" Two weeks later, to a day, came Miss Maggie's letter announcing her
engagement to Mr. Stanley G. Fulton, and saying that she was to be
married in Chicago before Christmas. CHAPTER XXVI

REENTER MR. STANLEY G. FULTON


In the library of Mrs. Stanley G.
Fulton was impatiently awaiting the appearance of Miss Maggie Duff. In
a minute she came in, looking charmingly youthful in her new,
well-fitting frock. The man, quickly on his feet at her entrance, gave her a lover's ardent
kiss; but almost instantly he held her off at arms' length. "Why, dearest, what's the matter?" "You look as if--if something had happened--not exactly a bad
something, but--What is it?" "That's one of the very nicest things about you, Mr. Stanley-G.-Fulton-John-Smith," she sighed, nestling comfortably into
the curve of his arm, as they sat down on the divan;--"that you NOTICE
things so. And it seems so good to me to have somebody--NOTICE." And to think of all these years I've wasted!" "Oh, but I shan't be lonely any more now. And, listen--I'll tell you
what made me look so funny. You know I
wrote them--about my coming marriage." "I believe--I'll let you read the letter for yourself, Stanley. It
tells some things, toward the end that I think you'll like to know,"
she said, a little hesitatingly, as she held out the letter she had
brought into the room with her. I'd like to read it," cried Fulton, whisking the closely written
sheets from the envelope. MY DEAR MAGGIE (Flora had written): Well, mercy me, you have given us a
surprise this time, and no mistake! Yet we're all real glad, Maggie,
and we hope you'll be awfully happy. You've had such an awfully hard time all your life! Well, when your letter came, we were just going out to Jim's for an
old-fashioned Thanksgiving dinner, so I took it along with me and read
it to them all. I kept it till we were all together, too, though I most
bursted with the news all the way out. Well, you ought to have heard their tongues wag! They were all struck
dumb first, for a minute, all except Mellicent. She spoke up the very
first thing, and clapped her hands. I knew Aunt Maggie was good
enough for anybody!" To explain that I'll have to go back a little. We were talking one day
about you--Jane and Mellicent and me--and we said you were a saint,
only not a marrying saint. But Mellicent thought you were, and it seems
she was right. Oh, of course, we'd all thought once Mr. Smith might
take a fancy to you, but we never dreamed of such a thing as this--Mr. Sakes alive--I can hardly sense it yet! Jane, for a minute, forgot how rich he was, and spoke right up real
quick--"It's for her money, of course. I KNEW some one would marry her
for that fifty thousand dollars!" But she laughed then, right off, with
the rest of us, at the idea of a man worth twenty millions marrying
ANYBODY for fifty thousand dollars. Benny says there ain't any man alive good enough for his Aunt Maggie,
so if Mr. Fulton gets to being too highheaded sometimes, you can tell
him what Benny says. But we're all real pleased, honestly, Maggie, and of course we're
terribly excited. We're so sorry you're going to be married out there
in Chicago. Why can't you make him come to Hillerton? Jane says she'd
be glad to make a real nice wedding for you--and when Jane says a thing
like that, you can know how much she's really saying, for Jane's
feeling awfully poor these days, since they lost all that money, you
know. Fulton, too--"Cousin Stanley," as Hattie
always calls him. Please give him our congratulations--but there, that
sounds funny, doesn't it? (But the etiquette editors in the magazines
say we must always give best wishes to the bride and congratulations to
the groom.) Only it seems funny here, to congratulate that rich Mr. I didn't mean it that way, Maggie. I
declare, if that sentence wasn't 'way in the middle of this third page,
and so awfully hard for me to write, anyway, I'd tear up this sheet and
begin another. But, after all, you'll understand, I'm sure. You KNOW we
all think the world of you, Maggie, and that I didn't mean anything
against YOU. Fulton is--is such a big man, and
all--But you know what I meant. Well, anyway, if you can't come here to be married, we hope you'll
bring him here soon so we can see him, and see you, too. We miss you
awfully, Maggie,--truly we do, especially since Jim's folks went, and
with Mr. Smith gone, too, Jane and I are real lonesome. Jim and Hattie like real well where they are. They've got a real pretty
home, and they're the biggest folks in town, so Hattie doesn't have to
worry for fear she won't live quite so fine as her neighbors--though
really I think Hattie's got over that now a good deal. That awful thing
of Fred's sobered her a lot, and taught her who her real friends were,
and that money ain't everything. Fred is doing splendidly now, just as steady as a clock. It does my
soul good to see him and his father together. And Bessie--she isn't near so disagreeable and airy as she was. Hattie
took her out of that school and put her into another where she's
getting some real learning and less society and frills and dancing. Jim
is doing well, and I think Hattie's real happy. Oh, of course, when we
first heard that Mr. Fulton had got back, I think she was kind of
disappointed. You know she always did insist we were going to have the
rest of that money if he didn't show up. But she told me just
Thanksgiving Day that she didn't know but 't was just as well, after
all, that they didn't have the money, for maybe Fred'd go wrong again,
or it would strike Benny this time. Anyhow, however much money she had,
she said, she'd never let her children spend so much again, and she'd
found out money didn't bring happiness, always, anyway. Mellicent and Donald are going to be married next summer. Donald don't
get a very big salary yet, but Mellicent says she won't mind a bit
going back to economizing again, now that for once she's had all the
chocolates and pink dresses she wanted. What a funny girl she is--but
she's a dear girl, just the same, and she's settled down real sensible
now. She and Donald are as happy as can be, and even Jane likes Donald
real well now. Jane's gone back to her tidies and aprons and skimping on everything. She says she's got to, to make up that forty thousand dollars. But she
enjoys it, I believe. Honestly, she acts'most as happy trying to save
five cents as Frank does earning it in his old place behind the
counter. And that's saying a whole lot, as you know. Jane knows very
well she doesn't have to pinch that way. They've got lots of the money
left, and Frank's business is better than ever. You complain because I don't tell you anything about myself in my
letters, but there isn't anything to tell. I am well and happy, and
I've just thought up the nicest thing to do. Mary Hicks came home from
Boston sick last September, and she's been here at my house ever since. Her own home ain't no place for a sick person, you know, with all those
children, and they're awfully poor, too. She works in a department store and was all
played out, but she's picked up wonderfully here and is going back next
week. Well, she was telling me about a girl that works with her at the same
counter, and saying how she wished she had a place like this to go to
for a rest and change, so I'm going to do it--give them one, I mean,
she and the other girls. Mary says there are a dozen girls that she
knows right there that are half-sick, but would get well in a minute if
they only had a few weeks of rest and quiet and good food. So I'm going
to take them, two at a time, so they'll be company for each other. Mary
is going to fix it up for me down there, and pick out the girls, and
she says she knows the man who owns the store will be glad to let them
off, for they are all good help, and he's been afraid he'd lose them. He'd offered them a month off, besides their vacation, but they
couldn't take it, because they didn't have any place to go or money to
pay. Of course, that part will be all right now. And I'm so glad and
excited I don't know what to do. Oh, I do hope you'll tell Mr. Fulton
some time how happy he's made me, and how perfectly splendid that
money's been for me. Well, Maggie, this is a long letter, and I must close. Tell me all
about the new clothes you are getting, and I hope you will get a lot. Lovingly yours,

FLORA. Maggie Duff, for pity's sake, never, never tell that man
that I ever went into mourning for him and put flowers before his
picture. Fulton folded the letter and handed
it back to Miss Maggie. "I didn't feel that I was betraying confidences--under the
circumstances," murmured Miss Maggie. "And there was a good deal in the letter that I DID want you to see,"
added Miss Maggie. "Hm-m; the congratulations, for one thing, of course," twinkled the
man. "I wanted you to see how really, in the end, that money was not doing
so much harm, after all," asserted Miss Maggie, with some dignity,
shaking her head at him reprovingly. "I thought you'd be GLAD, sir!" I'm so glad that, when I come to make my will now, I
shouldn't wonder if I remembered them all again--a little--that is, if
I have anything left to will," he teased shamelessly. "Oh, by the way,
that makes me think. I've just been putting up a monument to John
Smith." "But, my dear Maggie, something was due the man," maintained Fulton,
reaching for a small flat parcel near him and placing it in Miss
Maggie's hands. "But--oh, Stanley, how could you?" she shivered, her eyes on the words
the millionaire had penciled on the brown paper covering of the parcel. With obvious reluctance Miss Maggie loosened the paper covers and
peered within. In her hands lay a handsome brown leather volume with gold letters,
reading:--

     The Blaisdell Family
           By
        John Smith

"And you--did that?" I shall send a copy each to Frank and Jim and Miss Flora, of
course. Poor
man, it's the least I can do for him--and the most--unless--" He
hesitated with an unmistakable look of embarrassment. "Well, unless--I let you take me to Hillerton one of these days and see
if--if Stanley G. Fulton, with your gracious help, can make peace for
John Smith with those--er--cousins of mine. You see, I still feel
confoundedly like that small boy at the keyhole, and I'd like--to open
that door! And, oh, Stanley, it's the one thing needed
to make me perfectly happy," she sighed blissfully. THE END









End of Project Gutenberg's Oh, Money! So a ticket was bought, and Jacko was allowed to proceed on his journey. The little fellow was as pleased as the captain when he arrived at the
end of his journey, and took possession of his pleasant quarters in the
shed adjoining Mr. He soon grew fond of his little
mistress, and played all manner of tricks, jumping up and down, swinging
with his tail, which had begun to heal, and chattering with all his
might in his efforts to please her. Lee, at the suggestion of his brother, the captain, had a nice
house or cage made for Minnie's new pet, into which he could be put if
he became troublesome, and where he always went to sleep. The rest of
the time he was allowed his liberty, as far as his chain would reach. Jacko came from a very warm climate, and therefore often suffered from
the cold in the northern latitude to which he had been brought. Lee could not endure to see a monkey dressed like a man, as they
sometimes are in shows. She said they looked disgustingly; but she
consented that the little fellow should have a tight red jacket, and
some drawers, to keep him comfortable. Minnie, too, begged from her some
old pieces of carpeting, to make him a bed, when Jacko seemed greatly
delighted. He did not now, as before, often stand in the morning
shaking, and blue with the cold, but laughed, and chattered, and showed
his gratitude in every possible way. Not many months after Jacko came, and when he had become well acquainted
with all the family, Fidelle had a family of kittens, which she often
carried in her mouth back and forth through the shed. The very sight of
these little animals seemed to excite Jacko exceedingly. He would
spring the entire length of his chain, trying to reach them. One day, when the kittens had begun to run alone, and were getting to be
very playful, the cook heard a great noise in the shed, and Fidelle
crying with all her might. She ran to see what was the matter, and, to
her surprise, found Jacko sitting up in the cage, grinning with delight,
while he held one of the kittens in his arms, hugging it as if it had
been a baby. Cook knew the sight would please Minnie, and she ran to call her. But
the child sympathized too deeply in Fidelle's distress to enjoy it. She
tried to get the kitten away from Jacko, but he had no idea of giving it
up, until at last, when Mrs. Lee, who had come to the rescue, gave him a
piece of cake, of which he was very fond, he relaxed his hold, and she
instantly released the poor, frightened little animal. Fidelle took warning by this occurrence, and never ventured through the
shed again with her babies, though Jacko might seem to be sound asleep
in his cage. Lee's more than a year before they knew him to
break his chain and run about by himself. The first visit he made was to
Leo, in the barn, and he liked it so well that, somehow or other, he
contrived to repeat the visit quite as often as it was agreeable to the
dog, who never could endure him. After this, he became very mischievous, so that every one of the
servants, though they often had a great laugh at his tricks, would have
been glad to have the little fellow carried back to his home in Africa. I don't think even Minnie loved her pet monkey as well as she did her
other pets. She could not take him in her arms as she did Fidelle and
Tiney, nor play with him as she did with Nannie and her lamb, and he
could not carry her on his back, as Star did. "Well," she said, one day, after discussing the merits of her animals
with her mamma, "Poll talks to me, and Jacko makes me laugh; but if I
should have to give up one of my pets, I had rather it would be the
monkey." One morning, cook went to her mistress with loud complaints of Jacko's
tricks. "All kinds of mischief, ma'am. If I didn't like you, and the master, and
Miss Minnie so well, I wouldn't be living in the same house with a
monkey, no ways." Here the woman, having relieved her mind, began to relate Jacko's new
offence, and soon was joining heartily in the laugh her story caused her
mistress. "Since the trickish fellow found the way to undo his chain, ma'am, he
watches every thing that is done in the kitchen. Yesterday I polished
the range, and the door to the oven. I suppose he saw me at work, and
thought it would be good fun; for when I was out of the kitchen hanging
some towels to dry on the line, in he walks to the closet where I keep
the blacking and brushes, and what should he do but black the table and
chairs? Such a sight, ma'am, as would make your eyes cry to see. It'll
take me half the forenoon to clean them." "I think you will have to take a little stick, Hepsy," said Mrs. Lee,
smiling, "and whip him when he does mischief." "Indeed, ma'am, and it's little strength I'd have left me to do the
cooking if I gave him half the whippings he deserves; besides, I'd be
sure to get the cratur's ill will; and they say that's unlucky for any
one." "What does she mean, mamma, by its being unlucky?" inquired Minnie, when
the cook had returned to her work in the kitchen. You know Hepsy has some strange ideas which she
brought with her from Ireland. It may be she has heard of the
superstitious reverence some nations have for the monkey." "O, mamma, will you please tell me about it?" "I have read that in many parts of India, monkeys are made objects of
worship; and splendid temples are dedicated to their honor. "At one time, when the Portuguese plundered the Island of Ceylon, they
found, in one of the temples dedicated to these animals, a small golden
casket containing the tooth of a monkey. This was held in such
estimation by the natives, that they offered nearly a million of dollars
to redeem it. But the viceroy, thinking it would be a salutary
punishment to them, ordered it to be burned. "Some years after, a Portuguese, having obtained a similar tooth,
pretended that he had recovered the old one, which so rejoiced the
priests that they purchased it from him for more than fifty thousand
dollars." "I should suppose," she said, "that if cook thinks so
much of monkeys, she would be pleased to live with them. Do you know
any more about monkeys, mamma?" "I confess, my dear, that monkeys have never been among my favorites. There are a great many kinds, but all are mischievous, troublesome, and
thievish. The dispositions of some of them are extremely bad, while
others are so mild and tractable as to be readily tamed and taught a
great variety of tricks. They live together in large groups, leaping
with surprising agility from tree to tree. Travellers say it is very
amusing to listen to the chattering of these animals, which they compare
to the shouting of a grand cavalcade, all speaking together, and yet
seeming perfectly to understand one another. "In the countries of the Eastern Peninsula, where they abound, the
matrons are often observed, in the cool of the evening, sitting in a
circle round their little ones, which amuse themselves with their
various gambols. The merriment of the young, as they jump over each
other's heads, and wrestle in sport, is most ludicrously contrasted with
the gravity of their seniors, who are secretly delighted with the fun,
but far too dignified to let it appear. "But when any foolish little one behaves ill, the mamma will be seen to
jump into the throng, seize the juvenile by the tail, take it over her
knee, and give it a good whipping." "O, how very funny, mamma! "If you will bring me that book from the library next the one about
cats, perhaps I can find some anecdotes to read to you." The little girl clapped her hands with delight, and running gayly to the
next room, soon returned with the book, when her mother read as
follows:--

"A family in England had a pet monkey. On one occasion, the footman
retired to his room to shave himself, without noticing that the animal
had followed him. The little fellow watched him closely during the
process, and noticed where the man put his razor and brush. "No sooner had the footman left the room, than the monkey slyly took the
razor, and, mounting on a chair opposite the small mirror, began to
scrape away at his throat, as he had seen the man do; but alas! not
understanding the nature of the instrument he was using, the poor
creature cut so deep a gash, that he bled profusely. He was found in
the situation described, with the razor still in his fingers, but
unfortunately was too far gone to be recovered, and soon died, leaving a
caution to his fellows against playing with edged tools." "I hope Jacko will never see any body shave," said Minnie, in a
faltering voice. "Here is a funny story, my dear, about a monkey in the West Indies. The
little fellow was kept tied to a stake in the open air, and was
frequently deprived of his food by the Johnny Crows. He tried to drive
them off, but without success, and at last made the following plan for
punishing the thieves. "Perceiving a flock of these birds coming toward him one day just after
his food had been brought, he lay down near his stake, and pretended to
be dead. For some time, he lay perfectly motionless, when the birds,
really deceived, approached by degrees, and got near enough to steal his
food, which he allowed them to do. This game he repeated several times,
till they became so bold as to come within reach of his claws, when he
suddenly sprang up and caught his victim in his firm grasp. He wished to make a man of him, according
to the ancient definition, 'a biped without feathers,' and therefore,
plucking the crow neatly, he let him go to show himself to his
companions. This proved so effectual a punishment, that he was
afterwards left to eat his food in peace." "I don't see," said Minnie, thoughtfully, "how a monkey could ever think
of such a way." "It certainly does show a great deal of sagacity," responded the lady,
"and a great deal of cunning in carrying out his plan." "I hope there are ever so many anecdotes, mamma." "Yes, my dear," she said, cheerfully,
"there are quite a number; some of them seem to be very amusing, but I
have only time to read you one more to-day." Guthrie gives an amusing account of a monkey named Jack. "Seeing his master and friends drinking whiskey with great apparent
relish, he took the opportunity, when he thought he was unseen, to empty
their half-filled glasses; and while they were roaring with laughter, he
began to hop, skip, and jump. "The next day, his master wanted to repeat the experiment, but found
Jack had not recovered from the effects of his dissipation. He commanded
him to come to the table; but the poor fellow put his hand to his head,
and not all their endeavors could induce him to taste another drop all
his life. "Jack became a thorough teetotaller." Minnie had a cousin Frank, the son of Mr. He was three years
older than Minnie, and was full of life and frolic. At one time he came to visit Minnie; and fine fun indeed they had with
the pets, the monkey being his especial favorite. Every day some new experiment was to be tried with Jacko, who, as Frank
declared, could be taught any thing that they wished. One time, he took
the little fellow by the chain for a walk, Minnie gayly running by his
side, and wondering what her cousin was going to do. On their way to the barn, they met Leo, who at once began to bark
furiously. "That will never do, my brave fellow," exclaimed the boy; "for we want
you to turn horse, and take Jacko to ride." "But I mean to make them good friends," responded the lad. "Here, you
take hold of the chain, and I will coax the dog to be quiet while I put
Jacko on his back." This was not so easy as he had supposed; for no amount of coaxing or
flattery would induce Leo to be impressed into this service. He hated
the monkey, and was greatly disgusted at his appearance as he hopped,
first on Frank's shoulder, and then to the ground, his head sticking out
of his little red jacket, and his face wearing a malicious grin. Finding they could not succeed in this, they went into the stable to
visit Star, when, with a quick motion, Jacko twitched the chain from
Minnie's hand, and running up the rack above the manger, began to laugh
and chatter in great glee. His tail, which had now fully healed, was of great use to him on this
occasion, when, to Minnie's great surprise, he clung with it to the bar
of the rack, and began to swing himself about. [Illustration: JACKO RUNNING AWAY. "I heard of a monkey once," exclaimed Frank, laughing merrily, "who made
great use of his tail. If a nut or apple were thrown to him which fell
beyond his reach, he would run to the full length of his chain, turn his
back, then stretch out his tail, and draw toward him the coveted
delicacy." "Let's see whether Jacko would do so," shouted Minnie, greatly excited
with the project. There he goes up the
hay mow, the chain dangling after him." "If we don't try to catch him, he'll come quicker," said Minnie,
gravely. "I know another story about a monkey--a real funny one," added the boy. "I don't know what his name was; but he used to sleep in the barn with
the cattle and horses. I suppose monkeys are always cold here; at any
rate, this one was; and when he saw the hostler give the horse a nice
feed of hay, he said to himself, 'What a comfortable bed that would make
for me!' "When the man went away, he jumped into the hay and hid, and every time
the horse came near enough to eat, he sprang forward and bit her ears
with his sharp teeth. "Of course, as the poor horse couldn't get her food, she grew very thin,
and at last was so frightened that the hostler could scarcely get her
into the stall. Several times he had to whip her before she would enter
it, and then she stood as far back as possible, trembling like a leaf. "It was a long time before they found out what the matter was; and then
the monkey had to take a whipping, I guess." "If his mother had been there, she would have whipped him," said Minnie,
laughing. The little girl then repeated what her mother had told her of the
discipline among monkeys, at which he was greatly amused. All this time, they were standing at the bottom of the hay mow, and
supposed that Jacko was safe at the top; but the little fellow was more
cunning than they thought. He found the window open near the roof, where
hay was sometimes pitched in, and ran down into the yard as quick as
lightning. The first they knew of it was when John called out from the barnyard,
"Jacko, Jacko! It was a wearisome chase they had for the next hour, and at the end they
could not catch the runaway; but at last, when they sat down calmly in
the house, he stole back to his cage, and lay there quiet as a lamb. Minnie's face was flushed with her unusual exercise, but in a few
minutes she grew very pale, until her mother became alarmed. After a few
drops of lavender, however, she said she felt better, and that if Frank
would tell her a story she should be quite well. "That I will," exclaimed the boy, eagerly. "I know a real funny one;
you like funny stories--don't you?" "Yes, when they're true," answered Minnie. A man was hunting, and he happened to kill a
monkey that had a little baby on her back. The little one clung so close
to her dead mother, that they could scarcely get it away. When they
reached the gentleman's house, the poor creature began to cry at
finding itself alone. All at once it ran across the room to a block,
where a wig belonging to the hunter's father was placed, and thinking
that was its mother, was so comforted that it lay down and went to
sleep. "They fed it with goat's milk, and it grew quite contented, for three
weeks clinging to the wig with great affection. "The gentleman had a large and valuable collection of insects, which
were dried upon pins, and placed in a room appropriated to such
purposes. "One day, when the monkey had become so familiar as to be a favorite
with all in the family, he found his way to this apartment, and made a
hearty breakfast on the insects. "The owner, entering when the meal was almost concluded, was greatly
enraged, and was about to chastise the animal, who had so quickly
destroyed the work of years, when he saw that the act had brought its
own punishment. In eating the insects, the animal had swallowed the
pins, which very soon caused him such agony that he died." "I don't call the last part funny at all," said Minnie, gravely. "But wasn't it queer for it to think the wig was its mother?" asked the
boy, with a merry laugh. "I don't think it could have had much sense to
do that." "But it was only a baby monkey then, Harry." Lee, "that Jacko got away from you?" "He watched his chance, aunty, and twitched the chain away from Minnie. Now he's done it once, he'll try the game again, I suppose, he is so
fond of playing us tricks." And true enough, the very next morning the lady was surprised at a visit
from the monkey in her chamber, where he made himself very much at home,
pulling open drawers, and turning over the contents, in the hope of
finding some confectionery, of which he was extremely fond. "Really," she exclaimed to her husband, "if Jacko goes on so, I shall
be of cook's mind, and not wish to live in the house with him." One day, Jacko observed nurse washing out some fine clothes for her
mistress, and seemed greatly interested in the suds which she made in
the progress of her work. Lee's room while the family were at
breakfast one morning, and finding some nice toilet soap on the marble
washstand, began to rub it on some fine lace lying on the bureau. After
a little exertion, he was delighted to find that he had a bowl full of
nice, perfumed suds, and was chattering to himself in great glee, when
Ann came in and spoiled his sport. "You good for nothing, mischievous creature," she cried out, in sudden
wrath, "I'll cure you of prowling about the house in this style." Giving him a cuff across his head with a shoe, "Go back to your cage,
where you belong." "Jacko is really getting to be very troublesome," remarked the lady to
her husband. "I can't tell how much longer my patience with him will
last." "Would Minnie mourn very much if she were to lose him?" "I suppose she would for a time; but then she has so many pets to take
up her attention." Just then the child ran in, her eyes filled with tears, exclaiming,--

"Father, does Jacko know any better? "Because," she went on, "I found him crouched down in his cage, looking
very sorry; and nurse says he ought to be ashamed of himself, cutting
up such ridiculous capers." "I dare say he feels rather guilty," remarked Mr. "He must be
taught better, or your mother will be tired of him." When her father had gone to the city, Minnie looked so grave that her
mother, to comfort her, took the book and read her some stories. A few
of them I will repeat to you. "A lady was returning from India, in a ship on board of which there was
a monkey. She was a very mild, gentle creature, and readily learned any
thing that was taught her. When she went to lie down at night, she made
up her bed in imitation of her mistress, then got in and wrapped herself
up neatly with the quilt. Sometimes she would wrap her head with a
handkerchief. "When she did wrong, she would kneel and clasp her hands, seeming
earnestly to ask to be forgiven." "That's a good story, mamma." "Yes, dear; and here is another." "A gentleman boarding with his wife at a hotel in Paris had a pet
monkey, who was very polite. One day his master met him going down
stairs; and when the gentleman said 'good morning,' the animal took off
his cap and made a very polite bow. Upon
this the monkey held out a square piece of paper. said the gentleman; 'your mistress' gown is dusty.' "Jack instantly took a small brush from his master's pocket, raised the
hem of the lady's dress, cleaned it, and then did the same to his
master's shoes, which were also dusty. "When they gave him any thing to eat, he did not cram his pouches with
it, but delicately and tidily devoured it; and when, as frequently
occurred, strangers gave him money, he always put it in his master's
hands." "Do you think, mamma, I could teach Jacko to do so?" "I can't say, my dear; and indeed I think it would be hardly worth the
pains to spend a great deal of time in teaching him. He seems to learn
quite fast enough by himself. Indeed, he is so full of tricks, and so
troublesome to cook in hiding her kitchen utensils, I am afraid we shall
have to put him in close confinement." "I had rather uncle Frank would carry him back to Africa," sighed the
child. "Well, dear, I wouldn't grieve about it now. We must manage somehow till
uncle Frank comes, and then perhaps he can tell us what to do. "A monkey living with a gentleman in the country became so troublesome
that the servants were constantly complaining." "That seems similar to our case," said the lady, smiling, as she
interrupted the reading. "One day, having his offers of assistance rudely repulsed, he went into
the next house by a window in the second story, which was unfortunately
open. Here he pulled out a small drawer, where the lady kept ribbons,
laces, and handkerchiefs, and putting them in a foot-tub, rubbed away
vigorously for an hour, with all the soap and water there were to be
found in the room. "When the lady returned to the chamber, he was busily engaged in
spreading the torn and disfigured remnants to dry. "He knew well enough he was doing wrong; for, without her speaking to
him, he made off quickly and ran home, where he hid himself in the case
of the large kitchen clock. "The servants at once knew he had been in mischief, as this was his
place of refuge when he was in disgrace. "One day he watched the cook while she was preparing some partridges for
dinner, and concluded that all birds ought to be so treated. He soon
managed to get into the yard, where his mistress kept a few pet bantam
fowls, and, after eating their eggs, he secured one of the hens, and
began plucking it. The noise of the poor bird called some of the
servants to the rescue, when they found the half-plucked creature in
such a pitiable condition that they killed it at once. Minnie looked very grave after hearing this story, and presently said,
"I wonder how old that monkey was." "The book does not mention his age, my dear. "I was thinking that perhaps, as Jacko grows older, he may learn better;
and then I said to myself, 'That one must have been young.'" "If a monkey is really inclined to be vicious, he is almost unbearable,"
remarked the lady. "His company does not begin to compensate for the
trouble he makes. Sometimes he is only cunning, but otherwise mild and
tractable." "And which, mamma, do you think Jacko is?" "I have always thought, until lately, that he was one of the better
kind; but I have now a good many doubts whether you enjoy her funny
tricks enough to compensate cook for all the mischief she does. If I
knew any one who wanted a pet monkey, and would treat him kindly, I
should be glad to have him go. screamed Minnie, with a look of horror; "O, mamma, I wouldn't
have one of my pets killed for any thing." Lee thought that would probably be at some time Nannie's fate, but
she wisely said nothing. I don't want to think about such awful
things." The lady cast her eyes over the page, and laughed heartily. Presently
she said, "Here is a very curious anecdote, which I will read you; but
first I must explain to you what a sounding-board is. "In old fashioned churches, there used to hang, directly over the
pulpit, a large, round board, like the top of a table, which, it was
thought, assisted the minister's voice to be heard by all the
congregation. I can remember, when I was a child, going to visit my
grandmother, and accompanying her to church, where there was a
sounding-board. I worried, through the whole service, for fear it would
fall on the minister's head and kill him. "There was once an eminent clergyman by the name of Casaubon, who kept
in his family a tame monkey, of which he was very fond. This animal,
which was allowed its liberty, liked to follow the minister, when he
went out, but on the Sabbath was usually shut up till his owner was out
of sight, on his way to church. "But one Sabbath morning, when the clergyman, taking his sermon under
his arm, went out, the monkey followed him unobserved, and watching the
opportunity while his master was speaking to a gentleman on the steps,
ran up at the back of the pulpit, and jumped upon the sounding-board. "Here he gravely seated himself, looking round in a knowing manner on
the congregation, who were greatly amused at so strange a spectacle. "The services proceeded as usual, while the monkey, who evidently much
enjoyed the sight of so many people, occasionally peeped over the
sounding-board, to observe the movements of his master, who was
unconscious of his presence. "When the sermon commenced, many little forms were convulsed with
laughter, which conduct so shocked the good pastor, that he thought it
his duty to administer a reproof, which he did with considerable action
of his hands and arms. "The monkey, who had now become familiar with the scene, imitated every
motion, until at last a scarcely suppressed smile appeared upon the
countenance of most of the audience. This occurred, too, in one of the
most solemn passages in the discourse; and so horrible did the levity
appear to the good minister, that he launched forth into violent rebuke,
every word being enforced by great energy of action. "All this time, the little fellow overhead mimicked every movement with
ardor and exactness. "The audience, witnessing this apparent competition between the good man
and his monkey, could no longer retain the least appearance of
composure, and burst into roars of laughter, in the midst of which one
of the congregation kindly relieved the horror of the pastor at the
irreverence and impiety of his flock, by pointing out the cause of the
merriment. "Casting his eyes upward, the minister could just discern the animal
standing on the end of the sounding-board, and gesturing with all his
might, when he found it difficult to control himself, though highly
exasperated at the occurrence. He gave directions to have the monkey
removed, and sat down to compose himself, and allow his congregation to
recover their equanimity while the order was being obeyed." CHAPTER V.

JACKO IN THE PANTRY. In his frequent visits to the stable, Jacko amused himself by catching
mice that crept out to pick up the corn. The servants, having noticed his skill, thought they would turn it to
good account, and having been troubled with mice in the pantry,
determined to take advantage of the absence of Mrs. Lee on a journey,
and shut the monkey up in it. So, one evening, they took him out of his
comfortable bed, and chained him up in the larder, having removed every
thing except some jam pots, which they thought out of his reach, and
well secured with bladder stretched over the top. Poor Jacko was evidently much astonished, and quite indignant, at this
treatment, but presently consoled himself by jumping into a soup
tureen, where he fell sound asleep, while the mice scampered all over
the place. As soon as it was dawn, the mice retired to their holes. Jacko awoke
shivering with cold, stretched himself, and then, pushing the soup
tureen from the shelf, broke it to pieces. After this achievement, he
began to look about for something to eat, when he spied the jam pots on
the upper shelf. "There is something good," he thought, smelling them. His sharp teeth soon worked an entrance, when the treasured jams, plums,
raspberry, strawberry, candied apricots, the pride and care of the cook,
disappeared in an unaccountably short time. At last, his appetite for sweets was satisfied, and coiling his tail in
a corner, he lay quietly awaiting the servant's coming to take him out. Presently he heard the door cautiously open, when the chamber girl gave
a scream of horror as she saw the elegant China dish broken into a
thousand bits, and lying scattered on the floor. She ran in haste to summon Hepsy and the nurse, her heart misgiving her
that this was not the end of the calamity. They easily removed Jacko,
who began already to experience the sad effects of overloading his
stomach, and then found, with alarm and grief, the damage he had done. For several days the monkey did not recover from the effects of his
excess. He was never shut up again in the pantry. Lee returned she blamed the servants for trying such an
experiment in her absence. Jacko was now well, and ready for some new
mischief; and Minnie, who heard a ludicrous account of the story,
laughed till she cried. She repeated it, in great glee, to her father, who looked very grave as
he said, "We think a sea voyage would do the troublesome fellow good;
but you shall have a Canary or a pair of Java sparrows instead." "Don't you know any stories of good monkeys, father?" "I don't recollect any at this moment, my dear; but I will see whether I
can find any for you." He opened the book, and then asked,--

"Did you know, Minnie, that almost all monkeys have bags or pouches in
their cheeks, the skin of which is loose, and when empty makes the
animal look wrinkled?" "No, sir; I never heard about it." He puts his food in them, and keeps it there
till he wishes to devour it. "There are some kinds, too, that have what is called prehensile tails;
that is, tails by which they can hang themselves to the limb of a tree,
and which they use with nearly as much ease as they can their hands. The
facility which this affords them for moving about quickly among the
branches of trees is astonishing. The firmness of the grasp which it
makes is very surprising; for if it winds a single coil around a branch,
it is quite sufficient, not only to support its weight, but to enable it
to swing in such a manner as to gain a fresh hold with its feet." "I'm sure, father," eagerly cried Minnie, "that Jacko has a prehensile
tail, for I have often seen him swing from the ladder which goes up the
hay mow." But here is an
account of an Indian monkey, of a light grayish yellow color, with black
hands and feet. The face is black, with a violet tinge. This is called
Hoonuman, and is much venerated by the Hindoos. They believe it to be
one of the animals into which the souls of their friends pass at death. If one of these monkeys is killed, the murderer is instantly put to
death; and, thus protected, they become a great nuisance, and destroy
great quantities of fruit. But in South America, monkeys are killed by
the natives as game, for the sake of the flesh. Absolute necessity alone
would compel us to eat them. A great naturalist named Humboldt tells us
that their manner of cooking them is especially disgusting. They are
raised a foot from the ground, and bent into a sitting position, in
which they greatly resemble a child, and are roasted in that manner. A
hand and arm of a monkey, roasted in this way, are exhibited in a museum
in Paris." "Monkeys have a curious way of introducing their tails into the fissures
or hollows of trees, for the purpose of hooking out eggs and other
substances. On approaching a spot where there is a supply of food, they
do not alight at once, but take a survey of the neighborhood, a general
cry being kept up by the party." One afternoon, Minnie ran out of breath to the parlor. "Mamma," she
exclaimed, "cook says monkeys are real cruel in their families. "I suppose, my dear," she responded, "that there is a
difference of disposition among them. I have heard that they are very
fond of their young, and that, when threatened with danger, they mount
them on their back, or clasp them to their breast with great affection. "But I saw lately an anecdote of the cruelty of a monkey to his wife,
and if I can find the book, I will read it to you." "There is an animal called the fair monkey, which, though the most
beautiful of its tribe, is gloomy and cruel. One of these, which, from
its extreme beauty and apparent gentleness, was allowed to ramble at
liberty over a ship, soon became a great favorite with the crew, and in
order to make him perfectly happy, as they imagined, they procured him a
wife. "For some weeks, he was a devoted husband, and showed her every
attention and respect. He then grew cool, and began to use her with much
cruelty. "One day, the crew noticed that he treated her with more kindness than
usual, but did not suspect the wicked scheme he had in mind. At last,
after winning her favor anew, he persuaded her to go aloft with him, and
drew her attention to an object in the distance, when he suddenly gave
her a push, which threw her into the sea. "This cruel act seemed to afford him much gratification, for he
descended in high spirits." "I should think they would have punished him," said Minnie, with great
indignation. At any rate, it proves that beauty is by no
means always to be depended upon." Lee then took her sewing, but Minnie plead so earnestly for one
more story, a good long one, that her mother, who loved to gratify her,
complied, and read the account which I shall give you in closing this
chapter on Minnie's pet monkey. "A gentleman, returning from India, brought a monkey, which he presented
to his wife. She called it Sprite, and soon became very fond of it. "Sprite was very fond of beetles, and also of spiders, and his mistress
used sometimes to hold his chain, lengthened by a string, and make him
run up the curtains, and clear out the cobwebs for the housekeeper. "On one occasion, he watched his opportunity, and snatching the chain,
ran off, and was soon seated on the top of a cottage, grinning and
chattering to the assembled crowd of schoolboys, as much as to say,
'Catch me if you can.' He got the whole town in an uproar, but finally
leaped over every thing, dragging his chain after him, and nestled
himself in his own bed, where he lay with his eyes closed, his mouth
open, his sides ready to burst with his running. "Another time, the little fellow got loose, but remembering his former
experience, only stole into the shed, where he tried his hand at
cleaning knives. He did not succeed very well in this, however, for the
handle was the part he attempted to polish, and, cutting his fingers, he
relinquished the sport. "Resolved not to be defeated, he next set to work to clean the shoes and
boots, a row of which were awaiting the boy. But Sprite, not remembering
all the steps of the performance, first covered the entire shoe, sole
and all, with the blacking, and then emptied the rest of the Day &
Martin into it, nearly filling it with the precious fluid. His coat was
a nice mess for some days after. "One morning, when the servants returned to the kitchen, they found
Sprite had taken all the kitchen candlesticks out of the cupboard, and
arranged them on the fender, as he had once seen done. As soon as he
heard the servants returning, he ran to his basket, and tried to look as
though nothing had happened. "Sprite was exceedingly fond of a bath. Occasionally a bowl of water was
given him, when he would cunningly try the temperature by putting in his
finger, after which he gradually stepped in, first one foot, then the
other, till he was comfortably seated. Then he took the soap and rubbed
himself all over. Having made a dreadful splashing all around, he jumped
out and ran to the fire, shivering. If any body laughed at him during
this performance, he made threatening gestures, chattering with all his
might to show his displeasure, and sometimes he splashed water all over
them. As he was brought from a
very warm climate, he often suffered exceedingly, in winter, from the
cold. "The cooking was done by a large fire on the open hearth, and as his
basket, where he slept, was in one corner of the kitchen, before morning
he frequently awoke shivering and blue. The cook was in the habit of
making the fire, and then returning to her room to finish her toilet. "One morning, having lighted the pile of kindlings as usual, she hung on
the tea-kettle and went out, shutting the door carefully behind her. "Sprite thought this a fine opportunity to warm himself. He jumped from
his basket, ran to the hearth, and took the lid of the kettle off. Cautiously touching the water with the tip of his finger, he found it
just the right heat for a bath, and sprang in, sitting down, leaving
only his head above the water. "This he found exceedingly comfortable for a time; but soon the water
began to grow hot. He rose, but the air outside was so cold, he quickly
sat down again. He did this several times, and would, no doubt, have
been boiled to death, and become a martyr to his own want of pluck and
firmness in action, had it not been for the timely return of the cook,
who, seeing him sitting there almost lifeless, seized him by the head
and pulled him out. "He was rolled in blankets, and laid in his basket, where he soon
recovered, and, it is to be hoped, learned a lesson from this hot
experience, not to take a bath when the water is on the fire." When Minnie was nine years of age, she accompanied her parents to a
menagerie, and there, among other animals, she saw a baboon. She was
greatly excited by his curious, uncouth manoeuvres, asking twenty
questions about him, without giving her father time to answer. On their
way home, she inquired,--

"Are baboons one kind of monkeys, father?" "Yes, my daughter; and a more disagreeable, disgusting animal I cannot
conceive of." "I hope you are not wishing for a baboon to add to your pets," added her
mother, laughing. "I don't believe Jacko would get along with that great fellow at all,"
answered the child. "But, father, will you please tell me something
more about the curious animals?" The conversation was here interrupted by seeing that a carriage had
stopped just in front of their own, and that quite a crowd had gathered
about some person who seemed to be hurt. Minnie's sympathies were alive in an instant. She begged her father to
get out, as possibly he might be of some use. The driver stopped of his own accord, and inquired what had happened,
and then they saw that it was a spaniel that was hurt. He had been in
the road, and not getting out of the way quick enough, the wheel had
gone over his body. The young lady who was in the buggy was greatly distressed, from which
Minnie argued that she was kind to animals, and that they should like
her. The owner of the dog held the poor creature in her arms, though it
seemed to be in convulsions, and wept bitterly as she found it must die. Lee, to please his little daughter, waited a few minutes; but he
found her getting so much excited over the suffering animal, he gave
John orders to proceed. During the rest of the drive, she could talk of nothing else, wondering
whether the spaniel was alive now, or whether the young man in the buggy
paid for hurting it. The next day, however, having made up her mind that the poor creature
must be dead, and his sufferings ended, and having given Tiney many
admonitions to keep out of the road when carriages were passing, her
thoughts turned once more to the baboon. Lee found in his library a book which gave a short account of the
animal, which he read to her. "The baboon is of the monkey tribe, notwithstanding its long, dog-like
head, flat, compressed cheeks, and strong and projecting teeth. The form
and position of the eyes, combined with the similarity of the arms and
hands, give to these creatures a resemblance to humanity as striking as
it is disgusting." "Then follows an account," the gentleman went on, "of the peculiarities
of different kinds of baboons, which you would not understand." "But can't you tell me something about them yourself, father?" "I know very little about the creatures, my dear; but I have read that
they are exceedingly strong, and of a fiery, vicious temper. "They can never be wholly tamed, and it is only while restraint of the
severest kind is used, that they can be governed at all. If left to
their own will, their savage nature resumes its sway, and their actions
are cruel, destructive, and disgusting." "I saw the man at the menagerie giving them apples," said Minnie; "but
he did not give them any meat all the time I was there." "No; they subsist exclusively on fruits, seeds, and other vegetable
matter. In the countries where they live, especially near the Cape of
Good Hope, the inhabitants chase them with dogs and guns in order to
destroy them, on account of the ravages they commit in the fields and
gardens. It is said that they make a very obstinate resistance to the
dogs, and often have fierce battles with them; but they greatly fear the
gun. "As the baboon grows older, instead of becoming better, his rage
increases, so that the slightest cause will provoke him to terrible
fury." "Why, Minnie, in order to satisfy you, any one must become a walking
encyclopaedia. "Why, they must have something to eat, and how are they to get it unless
they go into gardens?" "I rather think I should soon convince them they
were not to enter my garden," he said, emphatically. "But seriously,
they descend in vast numbers upon the orchards of fruit, destroying, in
a few hours, the work of months, or even of years. In these excursions,
they move on a concerted plan, placing sentinels on commanding spots, to
give notice of the approach of an enemy. As soon as he perceives danger,
the sentinel gives a loud yell, and then the whole troop rush away with
the greatest speed, cramming the fruit which they have gathered into
their cheek pouches." Minnie looked so much disappointed when he ceased speaking, that her
mother said, "I read somewhere an account of a baboon that was named
Kees, who was the best of his kind that I ever heard of." "Yes, that was quite an interesting story, if you can call it to mind,"
said the gentleman, rising. "It was in a book of travels in Africa," the lady went on. "The
traveller, whose name was Le Vaillant, took Kees through all his
journey, and the creature really made himself very useful. As a
sentinel, he was better than any of the dogs. Indeed, so quick was his
sense of danger, that he often gave notice of the approach of beasts of
prey, when every thing was apparently secure. "There was another way in which Kees made himself useful. Whenever they
came across any fruits or roots with which the Hottentots were
unacquainted, they waited to see whether Kees would taste them. If he
threw them down, the traveller concluded they were poisonous or
disagreeable, and left them untasted. "Le Vaillant used to hunt, and frequently took Kees with him on these
excursions. The poor fellow understood the preparations making for the
sport, and when his master signified his consent that he should go, he
showed his joy in the most lively manner. On the way, he would dance
about, and then run up into the trees to search for gum, of which he was
very fond. "I recall one amusing trick of Kees," said the lady, laughing, "which
pleased me much when I read it. He sometimes found honey in the hollows
of trees, and also a kind of root of which he was very fond, both of
which his master insisted on sharing with him. On such occasions, he
would run away with his treasure, or hide it in his pouches, or eat it
as fast as possible, before Le Vaillant could have time to reach him. "These roots were very difficult to pull from the ground. Kees' manner
of doing it was this. He would seize the top of the root with his strong
teeth, and then, planting himself firmly against the sod, drew himself
gradually back, which forced it from the earth. If it proved stubborn,
while he still held it in his teeth he threw himself heels over head,
which gave such a concussion to the root that it never failed to come
out. "Another habit that Kees had was very curious. He sometimes grew tired
with the long marches, and then he would jump on the back of one of the
dogs, and oblige it to carry him whole hours. At last the dogs grew
weary of this, and one of them determined not to be pressed into
service. As soon as Kees leaped on
his back, he stood still, and let the train pass without moving from the
spot. Kees sat quiet, determined that the dog should carry him, until
the party were almost out of sight, and then they both ran in great
haste to overtake their master. "Kees established a kind of authority over the dogs. They were
accustomed to his voice, and in general obeyed without hesitation the
slightest motions by which he communicated his orders, taking their
places about the tent or carriage, as he directed them. If any of them
came too near him when he was eating, he gave them a box on the ear,
and thus compelled them to retire to a respectful distance." "Why, mother, I think Kees was a very good animal, indeed," said Minnie,
with considerable warmth. "I have told you the best traits of his character," she answered,
smiling. "He was, greatly to his master's sorrow, an incurable thief. He
could not be left alone for a moment with any kind of food. He
understood perfectly how to loose the strings of a basket, or to take
the cork from a bottle. He was very fond of milk, and would drink it
whenever he had a chance. He was whipped repeatedly for these
misdemeanors, but the punishment did him no good. "Le Vaillant was accustomed to have eggs for his breakfast; but his
servants complained one morning there were none to be had. Whenever any
thing was amiss, the fault was always laid to Kees, who, indeed,
generally deserved it. "The next morning, hearing the cackling of a hen, he started for the
place; but found Kees had been before him, and nothing remained but the
broken shell. Having caught him in his pilfering, his master gave him a
severe beating; but he was soon at his old habit again, and the
gentleman was obliged to train one of his dogs to run for the egg as
soon as it was laid, before he could enjoy his favorite repast. "One day, Le Vaillant was eating his dinner, when he heard the voice of
a bird, with which he was not acquainted. Leaving the beans he had
carefully prepared for himself on his plate, he seized his gun, and ran
out of the tent. In a short time he returned, with the bird in his hand,
but found not a bean left, and Kees missing. "When he had been stealing, the baboon often staid out of sight for some
hours; but, this time, he hid himself for several days. They searched
every where for him, but in vain, till his master feared he had really
deserted them. On the third day, one of the men, who had gone to a
distance for water, saw him hiding in a tree. Le Vaillant went out and
spoke to him, but he knew he had deserved punishment, and he would not
come down; so that, at last, his master had to go up the tree and take
him." "No; he was forgiven that time, as he seemed so penitent. There is only
one thing more I can remember about him. An officer who was visiting Le
Vaillant, wishing to try the affection of the baboon for his master,
pretended to strike him. Kees flew into a violent rage, and from that
time could never endure the sight of the officer. If he only saw him at
a distance, he ground his teeth, and used every endeavor to fly at him;
and had he not been chained, he would speedily have revenged the
insult." *       *       *       *       *

    "Nature is man's best teacher. She unfolds
    Her treasures to his search, unseals his eye,
    Illumes his mind, and purifies his heart,--
    An influence breathes from all the sights and sounds
    Of her existence; she is wisdom's self." *       *       *       *       *

    "There's not a plant that springeth
      But bears some good to earth;
    There's not a life but bringeth
      Its store of harmless mirth;
    The dusty wayside clover
      Has honey in her cells,--
    The wild bee, humming over,
      Her tale of pleasure tells. The osiers, o'er the fountain,
      Keep cool the water's breast,
    And on the roughest mountain
      The softest moss is pressed. Thus holy Nature teaches
      The worth of blessings small;
    That Love pervades, and reaches,
      And forms the bliss of all." LESLIE'S JUVENILE SERIES. I. THE MOTHERLESS CHILDREN.
   " HOWARD AND HIS TEACHER.
   " JACK, THE CHIMNEY SWEEPER. I. TRYING TO BE USEFUL.
   " LITTLE AGNES.
   " I'LL TRY.
   " BY

                      MRS. MADELINE LESLIE,
  AUTHOR OF "THE LESLIE STORIES," "TIM, THE SCISSORS-GRINDER,"
                              ETC. BOSTON:
                        LEE AND SHEPARD,
              SUCCESSORS TO PHILLIPS, SAMPSON & CO. MINNIE'S PET PARROT. BY

                      MRS. MADELINE LESLIE,
  AUTHOR OF "THE LESLIE STORIES," "TIM, THE SCISSORS-GRINDER,"
                              ETC. BOSTON:
                        LEE AND SHEPARD,
              SUCCESSORS TO PHILLIPS, SAMPSON & CO. BY

                      MRS. MADELINE LESLIE,
  AUTHOR OF "THE LESLIE STORIES," "TIM, THE SCISSORS-GRINDER,"
                              ETC. BOSTON:
                        LEE AND SHEPARD,
              SUCCESSORS TO PHILLIPS, SAMPSON & CO. MINNIE'S PET LAMB. BY

                      MRS. MADELINE LESLIE,
  AUTHOR OF "THE LESLIE STORIES," "TIM, THE SCISSORS-GRINDER,"
                              ETC. BOSTON:
                        LEE AND SHEPARD,
              SUCCESSORS TO PHILLIPS, SAMPSON & CO. BY

                      MRS. MADELINE LESLIE,
  AUTHOR OF "THE LESLIE STORIES," "TIM, THE SCISSORS-GRINDER,"
                              ETC. BOSTON:
                        LEE AND SHEPARD,
              SUCCESSORS TO PHILLIPS, SAMPSON & CO. Transcriber's Note

The following typographical errors were corrected:

Page  Error
73    "good morning," changed to 'good morning,'
112   pet monkey." Howbeit, Nareda, the giver of water, was evidently also the ruler of
the clouds; and Odin had his throne in the skies. Indeed, many of the
musical water-spirits appear to have been originally considered as rain
deities. Their music may therefore be regarded as derived from the
clouds rather than from the sea. In short, the traditions respecting
spirits and water are not in contradiction to the opinion of the
ancient Hindus that music is of heavenly origin, but rather tend to
support it. The earliest musical instruments of the Hindus on record have, almost
all of them, remained in popular use until the present day scarcely
altered. Besides these, the Hindus possess several Arabic and Persian
instruments which are of comparatively modern date in Hindustan:
evidently having been introduced into that country scarcely a thousand
years ago, at the time of the Mahomedan irruption. There is a treatise
on music extant, written in Sanskrit, which contains a description of
the ancient instruments. Its title is _Sngita rthnakara_. If, as
may be hoped, it be translated by a Sanskrit scholar who is at the
same time a good musician, we shall probably be enabled to ascertain
more exactly which of the Hindu instruments of the present day are of
comparatively modern origin. The _vina_ is undoubtedly of high antiquity. It has seven wire strings,
and movable frets which are generally fastened with wax. Two hollowed
gourds, often tastefully ornamented, are affixed to it for the purpose
of increasing the sonorousness. There are several kinds of the _vina_
in different districts; but that represented in the illustration
is regarded as the oldest. The performer shown is Jeewan Shah, a
celebrated virtuoso on the _vina_, who lived about a hundred years ago. The Hindus divided their musical scale into several intervals smaller
than our modern semitones. They adopted twenty-two intervals called
_sruti_ in the compass of an octave, which may therefore be compared
to our chromatic intervals. As the frets of the _vina_ are movable the
performer can easily regulate them according to the scale, or mode,
which he requires for his music. [Illustration]

The harp, _chang_, has become almost obsolete. If some Hindu drawings
of it can be relied upon, it had at an early time a triangular frame
and was in construction as well as in shape and size almost identical
with the Assyrian harp. The Hindus claim to have invented the violin bow. They maintain that
the _ravanastron_, one of their old instruments played with the bow,
was invented about five thousand years ago by Ravanon, a mighty king
of Ceylon. However this may be there is a great probability that the
fiddle-bow originated in Hindustan; because Sanskrit scholars inform
us that there are names for it in works which cannot be less than
from 1500 to 2000 years old. The non-occurrence of any instrument
played with a bow on the monuments of the nations of antiquity is
by no means so sure a proof as has generally been supposed, that the
bow was unknown. The fiddle in its primitive condition must have been
a poor contrivance. It probably was despised by players who could
produce better tones with greater facility by twanging the strings
with their fingers, or with a plectrum. Thus it may have remained
through many centuries without experiencing any material improvement. It must also be borne in mind that the monuments transmitted to us
chiefly represent historical events, religious ceremonies, and royal
entertainments. On such occasions instruments of a certain kind only
were used, and these we find represented; while others, which may
have been even more common, never occur. In two thousand years time
people will possibly maintain that some highly perfected instrument
popular with them was entirely unknown to us, because it is at present
in so primitive a condition that no one hardly notices it. If the
_ravanastron_ was an importation of the Mahomedans it would most likely
bear some resemblance to the Arabian and Persian instruments, and it
would be found rather in the hands of the higher classes in the towns;
whereas it is principally met with among the lower order of people, in
isolated and mountainous districts. It is further remarkable that the
most simple kind of _ravanastron_ is almost identical with the Chinese
fiddle called _ur-heen_. This species has only two strings, and its
body consists of a small block of wood, hollowed out and covered with
the skin of a serpent. The _ur-heen_ has not been mentioned among the
most ancient instruments of the Chinese, since there is no evidence of
its having been known in China before the introduction of the Buddhist
religion into that country. From indications, which to point out would
lead too far here, it would appear that several instruments found
in China originated in Hindustan. They seem to have been gradually
diffused from Hindustan and Thibet, more or less altered in the course
of time, through the east as far as Japan. Another curious Hindu instrument, probably of very high antiquity,
is the _poongi_, also called _toumrie_ and _magoudi_. It consists
of a gourd or of the Cuddos nut, hollowed, into which two pipes are
inserted. The _poongi_ therefore somewhat resembles in appearance a
bagpipe. It is generally used by the _Sampuris_ or snake charmers,
who play upon it when they exhibit the antics of the cobra. The name
_magoudi_, given in certain districts to this instrument, rather
tends to corroborate the opinion of some musical historians that the
_magadis_ of the ancient Greeks was a sort of double-pipe, or bagpipe. Many instruments of Hindustan are known by different names in different
districts; and, besides, there are varieties of them. On the whole, the
Hindus possess about fifty instruments. To describe them properly would
fill a volume. Some, which are in the Kensington museum, will be found
noticed in the large catalogue of that collection. THE PERSIANS AND ARABS. Of the musical instruments of the ancient Persians, before the
Christian era, scarcely anything is known. It may be surmised that they
closely resembled those of the Assyrians, and probably also those of
the Hebrews. [Illustration]

The harp, _chang_, in olden time a favourite instrument of the
Persians, has gradually fallen into desuetude. The illustration of a
small harp given in the woodcut has been sketched from the celebrated
sculptures, perhaps of the sixth century, which exist on a stupendous
rock, called Tackt-i-Bostan, in the vicinity of the town of Kermanshah. These sculptures are said to have been executed during the lifetime
of the Persian monarch Khosroo Purviz. They form the ornaments of
two lofty arches, and consist of representations of field sports
and aquatic amusements. In one of the boats is seated a man in an
ornamental dress, with a halo round his head, who is receiving an
arrow from one of his attendants; while a female, who is sitting
near him, plays on a Trigonon. Towards the top of the bas-relief
is represented a stage, on which are performers on small straight
trumpets and little hand drums; six harpers; and four other musicians,
apparently females,--the first of whom plays a flute; the second,
a sort of pandean pipe; the third, an instrument which is too much
defaced to be recognizable; and the fourth, a bagpipe. Two harps of a
peculiar shape were copied by Sir Gore Ousely from Persian manuscripts
about four hundred years old resembling, in the principle on which they
are constructed, all other oriental harps. There existed evidently
various kinds of the _chang_. It may be remarked here that the
instrument _tschenk_ (or _chang_) in use at the present day in Persia,
is more like a dulcimer than a harp. The Arabs adopted the harp from
the Persians, and called it _junk_. An interesting representation of a
Turkish woman playing the harp (p. 53) sketched from life by Melchior
Lorich in the seventeenth century, probably exhibits an old Persian
_chang_; for the Turks derived their music principally from Persia. Here we have an introduction into Europe of the oriental frame without
a front pillar. [Illustration]

The Persians appear to have adopted, at an early period, smaller
musical intervals than semitones. When the Arabs conquered Persia (A.D. 641) the Persians had already attained a higher degree of civilisation
than their conquerors. The latter found in Persia the cultivation of
music considerably in advance of their own, and the musical instruments
superior also. They soon adopted the Persian instruments, and there
can be no doubt that the musical system exhibited by the earliest
Arab writers whose works on the theory of music have been preserved
was based upon an older system of the Persians. In these works the
octave is divided in seventeen _one-third-tones_--intervals which are
still made use of in the east. Some of the Arabian instruments are
constructed so as to enable the performer to produce the intervals
with exactness. The frets on the lute and tamboura, for instance, are
regulated with a view to this object. [Illustration]

The Arabs had to some extent become acquainted with many of the
Persian instruments before the time of their conquest of Persia. An
Arab musician of the name of Nadr Ben el-Hares Ben Kelde is recorded
as having been sent to the Persian king Khosroo Purviz, in the sixth
century, for the purpose of learning Persian singing and performing
on the lute. Through him, it is said, the lute was brought to Mekka. Saib Chatir, the son of a Persian, is spoken of as the first performer
on the lute in Medina, A.D. 682; and of an Arab lutist, Ebn Soreidsch
from Mekka, A.D. 683, it is especially mentioned that he played in the
Persian style; evidently the superior one. The lute, _el-oud_, had
before the tenth century only four strings, or four pairs producing
four tones, each tone having two strings tuned in unison. About the
tenth century a string for a fifth tone was added. The strings were
made of silk neatly twisted. The neck of the instrument was provided
with frets of string, which were carefully regulated according to
the system of seventeen intervals in the compass of an octave before
mentioned. Other favourite stringed instruments were the _tamboura_,
a kind of lute with a long neck, and the _kanoon_, a kind of dulcimer
strung with lambs gut strings (generally three in unison for each
tone) and played upon with two little plectra which the performer had
fastened to his fingers. The _kanoon_ is likewise still in use in
countries inhabited by Mahomedans. The engraving, taken from a Persian
painting at Teheran, represents an old Persian _santir_, the prototype
of our dulcimer, mounted with wire strings and played upon with two
slightly curved sticks. [Illustration]

Al-Farabi, one of the earliest Arabian musical theorists known, who
lived in the beginning of the tenth century, does not allude to the
fiddle-bow. This is noteworthy inasmuch as it seems in some measure
to support the opinion maintained by some historians that the bow
originated in England or Wales. Unfortunately we possess no exact
descriptions of the Persian and Arabian instruments between the tenth
and fourteenth centuries, otherwise we should probably have earlier
accounts of some instrument of the violin kind in Persia. Ash-shakandi,
who lived in Spain about A.D. 1200, mentions the _rebab_, which may
have been in use for centuries without having been thought worthy of
notice on account of its rudeness. Persian writers of the fourteenth
century speak of two instruments of the violin class, viz., the _rebab_
and the _kemangeh_. As regards the _kemangeh_, the Arabs themselves
assert that they obtained it from Persia, and their statement appears
all the more worthy of belief from the fact that both names, _rebab_
and _kemangeh_, are originally Persian. We engrave the _rebab_ from an
example at South Kensington. [Illustration]

The _nay_, a flute, and the _surnay_, a species of oboe, are still
popular in the east. The Arabs must have been indefatigable constructors of musical
instruments. Kiesewetter gives a list of above two hundred names of
Arabian instruments, and this does not include many known to us through
Spanish historians. A careful investigation of the musical instruments
of the Arabs during their sojourn in Spain is particularly interesting
to the student of medival music, inasmuch as it reveals the eastern
origin of many instruments which are generally regarded as European
inventions. Introduced into Spain by the Saracens and the Moors they
were gradually diffused towards northern Europe. The English, for
instance, adopted not only the Moorish dance (morrice dance) but also
the _kuitra_ (gittern), the _el-oud_ (lute), the _rebab_ (rebec), the
_nakkarah_ (naker), and several others. In an old Cornish sacred drama,
supposed to date from the fourteenth century, we have in an enumeration
of musical instruments the _nakrys_, designating kettle-drums. It
must be remembered that the Cornish language, which has now become
obsolete, was nearly akin to the Welsh. Indeed, names of musical
instruments derived from the Moors in Spain occur in almost every
European language. Not a few fanciful stories are traditionally preserved among the Arabs
testifying to the wonderful effects they ascribed to the power of their
instrumental performances. Al-Farabi had
acquired his proficiency in Spain, in one of the schools at Cordova
which flourished as early as towards the end of the ninth century: and
his reputation became so great that ultimately it extended to Asia. The mighty caliph of Bagdad himself desired to hear the celebrated
musician, and sent messengers to Spain with instructions to offer rich
presents to him and to convey him to the court. But Al-Farabi feared
that if he went he should be retained in Asia, and should never again
see the home to which he felt deeply attached. At last he resolved
to disguise himself, and ventured to undertake the journey which
promised him a rich harvest. Dressed in a mean costume, he made his
appearance at the court just at the time when the caliph was being
entertained with his daily concert. Al-Farabi, unknown to everyone, was
permitted to exhibit his skill on the lute. Scarcer had he commenced
his performance in a certain musical mode when he set all his audience
laughing aloud, notwithstanding the efforts of the courtiers to
suppress so unbecoming an exhibition of mirth in the royal presence. In
truth, even the caliph himself was compelled to burst out into a fit
of laughter. Presently the performer changed to another mode, and the
effect was that immediately all his hearers began to sigh, and soon
tears of sadness replaced the previous tears of mirth. Again he played
in another mode, which excited his audience to such a rage that they
would have fought each other if he, seeing the danger, had not directly
gone over to an appeasing mode. After this wonderful exhibition of his
skill Al-Farabi concluded in a mode which had the effect of making
his listeners fall into a profound sleep, during which he took his
departure. It will be seen that this incident is almost identical with one
recorded as having happened about twelve hundred years earlier at the
court of Alexander the great, and which forms the subject of Drydens
Alexanders Feast. The distinguished flutist Timotheus successively
aroused and subdued different passions by changing the musical modes
during his performance, exactly in the same way as did Al-Farabi. If the preserved antiquities of the American Indians, dating from a
period anterior to our discovery of the western hemisphere, possess
an extraordinary interest because they afford trustworthy evidence
of the degree of progress which the aborigines had attained in the
cultivation of the arts and in their social condition before they came
in contact with Europeans, it must be admitted that the ancient musical
instruments of the American Indians are also worthy of examination. Several of them are constructed in a manner which, in some degree,
reveals the characteristics of the musical system prevalent among the
people who used the instruments. And although most of these interesting
relics, which have been obtained from tombs and other hiding-places,
may not be of great antiquity, it has been satisfactorily ascertained
that they are genuine contrivances of the Indians before they were
influenced by European civilization. Some account of these relics is therefore likely to prove of interest
also to the ethnologist, especially as several facts may perhaps be
found of assistance in elucidating the still unsolved problem as to the
probable original connection of the American with Asiatic races. Among the instruments of the Aztecs in Mexico and of the Peruvians
none have been found so frequently, and have been preserved in their
former condition so unaltered, as pipes and flutes. They are generally
made of pottery or of bone, substances which are unsuitable for the
construction of most other instruments, but which are remarkably
well qualified to withstand the decaying influence of time. There
is, therefore, no reason to conclude from the frequent occurrence of
such instruments that they were more common than other kinds of which
specimens have rarely been discovered. [Illustration]

The Mexicans possessed a small whistle formed of baked clay, a
considerable number of which have been found. Some specimens (of which
we give engravings) are singularly grotesque in shape, representing
caricatures of the human face and figure, birds, beasts, and flowers. Some were provided at the top with a finger-hole which, when closed,
altered the pitch of the sound, so that two different tones were
producible on the instrument. Others had a little ball of baked clay
lying loose inside the air-chamber. When the instrument was blown the
current of air set the ball in a vibrating motion, thereby causing a
shrill and whirring sound. A similar contrivance is sometimes made
use of by Englishmen for conveying signals. The Mexican whistle most
likely served principally the same purpose, but it may possibly have
been used also in musical entertainments. In the Russian horn band
each musician is restricted to a single tone; and similar combinations
of performers--only, of course, much more rude--have been witnessed by
travellers among some tribes in Africa and America. [Illustration]

Rather more complete than the above specimens are some of the whistles
and small pipes which have been found in graves of the Indians of
Chiriqui in central America. The pipe or whistle which is represented
in the accompanying engraving appears, to judge from the somewhat
obscure description transmitted to us, to possess about half a dozen
tones. It is of pottery, painted in red and black on a cream-
ground, and in length about five inches. Among the instruments of this
kind from central America the most complete have four finger-holes. By means of three the following four sounds (including the sound
which is produced when none of the holes are closed) can be emitted:
[Illustration] the fourth finger-hole, when closed, has the effect of
lowering the pitch a semitone. By a particular process two or three
lower notes are obtainable. [Illustration]

[Illustration]

The pipe of the Aztecs, which is called by the Mexican Spaniards
_pito_, somewhat resembled our flageolet: the material was a reddish
pottery, and it was provided with four finger-holes. Although among
about half a dozen specimens which the writer has examined some are
considerably larger than others they all have, singularly enough, the
same pitch of sound. The smallest is about six inches in length, and
the largest about nine inches. Several _pitos_ have been found in a
remarkably well-preserved condition. They are easy to blow, and their
order of intervals is in conformity with the pentatonic scale, thus:
[Illustration] The usual shape of the _pito_ is that here represented;
showing the upper side of one pipe, and a side view of another. A
specimen of a less common shape, also engraved, is in the British
museum. Indications suggestive of the popular estimation in which the
flute (or perhaps, more strictly speaking, the pipe) was held by the
Aztecs are not wanting. It was played in religious observances and
we find it referred to allegorically in orations delivered on solemn
occasions. For instance, at the religious festival which was held in
honour of Tezcatlepoca--a divinity depicted as a handsome youth, and
considered second only to the supreme being--a young man was sacrificed
who, in preparation for the ceremony, had been instructed in the art of
playing the flute. Twenty days before his death four young girls, named
after the principal goddesses, were given to him as companions; and
when the hour arrived in which he was to be sacrificed he observed the
established symbolical rite of breaking a flute on each of the steps,
as he ascended the temple. Again, at the public ceremonies which took place on the accession of
a prince to the throne the new monarch addressed a prayer to the god,
in which occurred the following allegorical expression:--I am thy
flute; reveal to me thy will; breathe into me thy breath like into a
flute, as thou hast done to my predecessors on the throne. As thou
hast opened their eyes, their ears, and their mouth to utter what is
good, so likewise do to me. I resign myself entirely to thy guidance.
Similar sentences occur in the orations addressed to the monarch. In
reading them one can hardly fail to be reminded of Hamlets reflections
addressed to Guildenstern, when the servile courtier expresses his
inability to govern the ventages of the pipe and to make the
instrument discourse most eloquent music, which the prince bids him
to do. M. de Castelnau in his Expdition dans lAmrique gives among the
illustrations of objects discovered in ancient Peruvian tombs a flute
made of a human bone. It has four finger-holes at its upper surface
and appears to have been blown into at one end. Two bone-flutes, in
appearance similar to the engraving given by M. de Castelnau, which
have been disinterred at Truxillo are deposited in the British museum. They are about six inches in length, and each is provided with five
finger-holes. One of these has all the holes at its upper side, and one
of the holes is considerably smaller than the rest. The specimen which
we engrave (p. 64) is ornamented with some simple designs in black. The other has four holes at its upper side and one underneath, the
latter being placed near to the end at which the instrument evidently
was blown. In the aperture of this end some remains of a hardened
paste, or resinous substance, are still preserved. This substance
probably was inserted for the purpose of narrowing the end of the
tube, in order to facilitate the producing of the sounds. The same
contrivance is still resorted to in the construction of the bone-flutes
by some Indian tribes in Guiana. The bones of slain enemies appear
to have been considered especially appropriate for such flutes. The
Araucanians, having killed a prisoner, made flutes of his bones, and
danced and thundered out their dreadful war-songs, accompanied by the
mournful sounds of these horrid instruments. Alonso de Ovalle says
of the Indians in Chili: Their flutes, which they play upon in their
dances, are made of the bones of the Spaniards and other enemies whom
they have overcome in war. This they do by way of triumph and glory for
their victory. They make them likewise of bones of animals; but the
warriors dance only to the flutes made of their enemies. The Mexicans
and Peruvians obviously possessed a great variety of pipes and flutes,
some of which are still in use among certain Indian tribes. Those which
were found in the famous ruins at Palenque are deposited in the museum
in Mexico. They are:--The _cuyvi_, a pipe on which only five tones
were producible; the _huayllaca_, a sort of flageolet; the _pincullu_,
a flute; and the _chayna_, which is described as a flute whose
lugubrious and melancholy tones filled the heart with indescribable
sadness, and brought involuntary tears into the eyes. It was perhaps a
kind of oboe. [Illustration]

The Peruvians had the syrinx, which they called _huayra-puhura_. Some
clue to the proper meaning of this name may perhaps be gathered from
the word _huayra_, which signifies air. The _huayra-puhura_ was made
of cane, and also of stone. Sometimes an embroidery of needle-work was
attached to it as an ornament. One specimen which has been disinterred
is adorned with twelve figures precisely resembling Maltese crosses. The cross is a figure which may readily be supposed to suggest itself
very naturally; and it is therefore not so surprising, as it may appear
at a first glance, that the American Indians used it not unfrequently
in designs and sculptures before they came in contact with Christians. [Illustration]

The British museum possesses a _huayra-puhura_ consisting of fourteen
reed pipes of a brownish colour, tied together in two rows by means
of thread, so as to form a double set of seven reeds. Both sets are
almost exactly of the same dimensions and are placed side by side. The
shortest of these reeds measure three inches, and the longest six and
a half. In one set they are open at the bottom, and in the other they
are closed. The reader is probably
aware that the closing of a pipe at the end raises its pitch an octave. Thus, in our organ, the so-called stopped diapason, a set of closed
pipes, requires tubes of only half the length of those which constitute
the open diapason, although both these stops produce tones in the same
pitch; the only difference between them being the quality of sound,
which in the former is less bright than in the latter. The tones yielded by the _huayra-puhura_ in question are as follows:
[Illustration] The highest octave is indistinct, owing to some injury
done to the shortest tubes; but sufficient evidence remains to show
that the intervals were purposely arranged according to the pentatonic
scale. This interesting relic was brought to light from a tomb at Arica. [Illustration]

Another _huayra-puhura_, likewise still yielding sounds, was discovered
placed over a corpse in a Peruvian tomb, and was procured by the French
general, Paroissien. This instrument is made of a greenish stone which
is a species of talc, and contains eight pipes. In the Berlin museum
may be seen a good plaster cast taken from this curious relic. The
height is 5 inches, and its width 6 inches. Four of the tubes
have small lateral finger-holes which, when closed, lower the pitch a
semitone. These holes are on the second, fourth, sixth, and seventh
pipe, as shown in the engraving. When the holes are open, the tones
are: [Illustration] and when they are closed: [Illustration] The other
tubes have unalterable tones. The following notation exhibits all the
tones producible on the instrument:

[Illustration]

The musician is likely to speculate what could have induced the
Peruvians to adopt so strange a series of intervals: it seems rather
arbitrary than premeditated. [Illustration]

If (and this seems not to be improbable) the Peruvians considered those
tones which are produced by closing the lateral holes as additional
intervals only, a variety of scales or kinds of _modes_ may have been
contrived by the admission of one or other of these tones among the
essential ones. If we may conjecture from some remarks of Garcilasso
de la Vega, and other historians, the Peruvians appear to have used
different orders of intervals for different kinds of tunes, in a way
similar to what we find to be the case with certain Asiatic nations. We
are told for instance Each poem, or song, had its appropriate tune,
and they could not put two different songs to one tune; and this was
why the enamoured gallant, making music at night on his flute, with the
tune which belonged to it, told the lady and all the world the joy or
sorrow of his soul, the favour or ill-will which he possessed; so that
it might be said that he spoke by the flute. Thus also the Hindus have
certain tunes for certain seasons and fixed occasions, and likewise a
number of different modes or scales used for particular kinds of songs. Trumpets are often mentioned by writers who have recorded the manners
and customs of the Indians at the time of the discovery of America. There are, however, scarcely any illustrations to be relied on of these
instruments transmitted to us. The Conch was frequently used as a
trumpet for conveying signals in war. [Illustration]

The engraving represents a kind of trumpet made of wood, and nearly
seven feet in length, which Gumilla found among the Indians in the
vicinity of the Orinoco. It somewhat resembles the _juruparis_, a
mysterious instrument of the Indians on the Rio Haups, a tributary
of the Rio <DW64>, south America. The _juruparis_ is regarded as an
object of great veneration. So
stringent is this law that any woman obtaining a sight of it is put to
death--usually by poison. No youths are allowed to see it until they
have been subjected to a series of initiatory fastings and scourgings. The _juruparis_ is usually kept hidden in the bed of some stream, deep
in the forest; and no one dares to drink out of that sanctified stream,
or to bathe in its water. At feasts the _juruparis_ is brought out
during the night, and is blown outside the houses of entertainment. The inner portion of the instrument consists of a tube made of slips
of the Paxiaba palm (_Triartea exorrhiza_). When the Indians are about
to use the instrument they nearly close the upper end of the tube
with clay, and also tie above the oblong square hole (shown in the
engraving) a portion of the leaf of the Uaruma, one of the arrow-root
family. Round the tube are wrapped long strips of the tough bark of the
Jbaru (_Parivoa grandiflora_). This covering descends in folds below
the tube. The length of the instrument is from four to five feet. The
illustration, which exhibits the _juruparis_ with its cover and without
it, has been taken from a specimen in the museum at Kew gardens. The
mysteries connected with this trumpet are evidently founded on an old
tradition from prehistoric Indian ancestors. _Jurupari_ means demon;
and with several Indian tribes on the Amazon customs and ceremonies
still prevail in honour of Jurupari. The Caroados, an Indian tribe in Brazil, have a war trumpet which
closely resembles the _juruparis_. With this people it is the custom
for the chief to give on his war trumpet the signal for battle, and to
continue blowing as long as he wishes the battle to last. The trumpet
is made of wood, and its sound is described by travellers as very deep
but rather pleasant. The sound is easily produced, and its continuance
does not require much exertion; but a peculiar vibration of the lips
is necessary which requires practice. Another trumpet, the _tur_, is
common with many Indian tribes on the Amazon who use it chiefly in war. It is made of a long and thick bamboo, and there is a split reed in the
mouthpiece. It therefore partakes rather of the character of an oboe
or clarinet. The _tur_ is
especially used by the sentinels of predatory hordes, who, mounted on a
lofty tree, give the signal of attack to their comrades. Again, the aborigines in Mexico had a curious contrivance of this kind,
the _acocotl_, now more usually called _clarin_. The former word is
its old Indian name, and the latter appears to have been first given
to the instrument by the Spaniards. The _acocotl_ consists of a very
thin tube from eight to ten feet in length, and generally not quite
straight but with some irregular curves. This tube, which is often not
thicker than a couple of inches in diameter, terminates at one end in
a sort of bell, and has at the other end a small mouthpiece resembling
in shape that of a clarinet. The tube is made of the dry stalk of a
plant which is common in Mexico, and which likewise the Indians call
_acocotl_. The most singular characteristic of the instrument is that
the performer does not blow into it, but inhales the air through it; or
rather, he produces the sound by sucking the mouthpiece. It is said to
require strong lungs to perform on the _acocotl_ effectively according
to Indian notions of taste. [Illustration]

The _botuto_, which Gumilla saw used by some tribes near the river
Orinoco (of which we engrave two examples), was evidently an ancient
Indian contrivance, but appears to have fallen almost into oblivion
during the last two centuries. It was made of baked clay and was
commonly from three to four feet long: but some trumpets of this kind
were of enormous size. The _botuto_ with two bellies was usually made
thicker than that with three bellies and emitted a deeper sound, which
is described as having been really terrific. These trumpets were used
on occasions of mourning and funeral dances. Alexander von Humboldt saw
the _botuto_ among some Indian tribes near the river Orinoco. Besides those which have been noticed, other antique wind instruments
of the Indians are mentioned by historians; but the descriptions given
of them are too superficial to convey a distinct notion as to their
form and purport. Several of these barbarous contrivances scarcely
deserve to be classed with musical instruments. This may, for instance,
be said of certain musical jars or earthen vessels producing sounds,
which the Peruvians constructed for their amusement. These vessels
were made double; and the sounds imitated the cries of animals or
birds. A similar contrivance of the Indians in Chili, preserved in
the museum at Santiago, is described by the traveller S. S. Hill as
follows:--It consists of two earthen vessels in the form of our
india-rubber bottles, but somewhat larger, with a flat tube from four
to six inches in length, uniting their necks near the top and slightly
curved upwards, and with a small hole on the upper side one third of
the length of the tube from one side of the necks. To produce the
sounds the bottles were filled with water and suspended to the bough
of a tree, or to a beam, by a string attached to the middle of the
curved tube, and then swung backwards and forwards in such a manner as
to cause each end to be alternately the highest and lowest, so that
the water might pass backwards and forwards from one bottle to the
other through the tube between them. By this means soothing sounds were
produced which, it is said, were employed to lull to repose the drowsy
chiefs who usually slept away the hottest hours of the day. In the
meantime, as the bottles were porous, the water within them diminished
by evaporation, and the sound died gradually away.

[Illustration]

As regards instruments of percussion, a kind of drum deserves special
notice on account of the ingenuity evinced in its construction. The
Mexicans called it _teponaztli_. They generally made it of a single
block of very hard wood, somewhat oblong square in shape, which they
hollowed, leaving at each end a solid piece about three or four inches
in thickness, and at its upper side a kind of sound-board about a
quarter of an inch in thickness. In this sound-board, if it may be
called so, they made three incisions; namely, two running parallel some
distance lengthwise of the drum, and a third running across from one
of these to the other just in the centre. By this means they obtained
two vibrating tongues of wood which, when beaten with a stick, produced
sounds as clearly defined as are those of our kettle drums. By making
one of the tongues thinner than the other they ensured two different
sounds, the pitch of which they were enabled to regulate by shaving
off more or less of the wood. The bottom of the drum they cut almost
entirely open. The traveller, M. Nebel, was told by archologists in
Mexico that these instruments always contained the interval of a third,
but on examining several specimens which he saw in museums he found
some in which the two sounds stood towards each other in the relation
of a fourth; while in others they constituted a fifth, in others a
sixth, and in some even an octave. This is noteworthy in so far as it
points to a conformity with our diatonic series of intervals, excepting
the seventh. The _teponaztli_ (engraved above) was generally carved with various
fanciful and ingenious designs. It was beaten with two drumsticks
covered at the end with an elastic gum, called _ule_, which was
obtained from the milky juice extracted from the ule-tree. Some of
these drums were small enough to be carried on a string or strap
suspended round the neck of the player; others, again, measured
upwards of five feet in length, and their sound was so powerful that
it could be heard at a distance of three miles. In some rare instances
a specimen of the _teponaztli_ is still preserved by the Indians in
Mexico, especially among tribes who have been comparatively but little
affected by intercourse with their European aggressors. Herr Heller saw
such an instrument in the hands of the Indians of Huatusco--a village
near Mirador in the Tierra templada, or temperate region, occupying
the <DW72>s of the Cordilleras. Its sound is described as so very loud
as to be distinctly audible at an incredibly great distance. This
circumstance, which has been noticed by several travellers, may perhaps
be owing in some measure to the condition of the atmosphere in Mexico. [Illustration]

Instruments of percussion constructed on a principle more or less
similar to the _teponaztli_ were in use in several other parts of
America, as well as in Mexico. Oviedo gives a drawing of a drum from
San Domingo which, as it shows distinctly both the upper and under
side of the instrument, is here inserted. The largest kind of Mexican _teponaztli_ appears to have been
generally of a cylindrical shape. Clavigero gives a drawing of
such an instrument. Drums, also, constructed of skin or parchment
in combination with wood were not unknown to the Indians. Of this
description was, for instance, the _huehuetl_ of the Aztecs in Mexico,
which consisted, according to Clavigero, of a wooden cylinder somewhat
above three feet in height, curiously carved and painted and covered
at the top with carefully prepared deer-skin. And, what appears the
most remarkable, the parchment (we are told) could be tightened or
slackened by means of cords in nearly the same way as with our own
drum. The _huehuetl_ was not beaten with drumsticks but merely struck
with the fingers, and much dexterity was required to strike it in the
proper manner. Oviedo states that the Indians in Cuba had drums which
were stretched with human skin. And Bernal Diaz relates that when he
was with Corts in Mexico they ascended together the _Teocalli_ (House
of God), a large temple in which human sacrifices were offered by
the aborigines; and there the Spanish visitors saw a large drum which
was made, Diaz tells us, with skins of great serpents. This hellish
instrument, as he calls it, produced, when struck, a doleful sound
which was so loud that it could be heard at a distance of two leagues. The name of the Peruvian drum was _huanca_: they had also an instrument
of percussion, called _chhilchiles_, which appears to have been a sort
of tambourine. The rattle was likewise popular with the Indians before the discovery
of America. The Mexicans called it _ajacaxtli_. In construction it was
similar to the rattle at the present day commonly used by the Indians. It was oval or round in shape, and appears to have been usually made
of a gourd into which holes were pierced, and to which a wooden handle
was affixed. A number of little pebbles were enclosed in the hollowed
gourd. The little balls in the
_ajacaxtli_ of pottery, enclosed as they are, may at a first glance
appear a puzzle. Probably, when the rattle was being formed they were
attached to the inside as slightly as possible; and after the clay had
been baked they were detached by means of an implement passed through
the holes. [Illustration]

The Tezcucans (or Acolhuans) belonged to the same race as the Aztecs,
whom they greatly surpassed in knowledge and social refinement. Nezahualcoyotl, a wise monarch of the Tezcucans, abhorred human
sacrifices, and erected a large temple which he dedicated to The
unknown god, the cause of causes. This edifice had a tower nine
stories high, on the top of which were placed a number of musical
instruments of various kinds which were used to summon the worshippers
to prayer. Respecting these instruments especial mention is made
of a sonorous metal which was struck with a mallet. This is stated
in a historical essay written by Ixtlilxochitl, a native of Mexico
and of royal descent, who lived in the beginning of the seventeenth
century, and who may be supposed to have been familiar with the musical
practices of his countrymen. But whether the sonorous metal alluded to
was a gong or a bell is not clear from the vague record transmitted to
us. That the bell was known to the Peruvians appears to be no longer
doubtful, since a small copper specimen has been found in one of the
old Peruvian tombs. This interesting relic is now deposited in the
museum at Lima. M. de Castelnau has published a drawing of it, which
is here reproduced. The Peruvians called their bells _chanrares_; it
remains questionable whether this name did not designate rather the
so-called horse bells, which were certainly known to the Mexicans
who called them _yotl_. It is noteworthy that these _yotl_ are found
figured in the picture-writings representing the various objects which
the Aztecs used to pay as tribute to their sovereigns. The collection
of Mexican antiquities in the British museum contains a cluster of
yotl-bells. Being nearly round, they closely resemble the _Schellen_
which the Germans are in the habit of affixing to their horses,
particularly in the winter when they are driving their noiseless
sledges. [Illustration]

Again, in south America sonorous stones are not unknown, and were used
in olden time for musical purposes. The traveller G. T. Vigne saw
among the Indian antiquities preserved in the town of Cuzco, in Peru,
a musical instrument of green sonorous stone, about a foot long, and
an inch and a half wide, flat-sided, pointed at both ends, and arched
at the back, where it was about a quarter of an inch thick, whence it
diminished to an edge, like the blade of a knife.... In the middle of
the back was a small hole, through which a piece of string was passed;
and when suspended and struck by any hard substance a singularly
musical note was produced. Humboldt mentions the Amazon-stone, which
on being struck by any hard substance yields a metallic sound. It was
formerly cut by the American Indians into very thin plates, perforated
in the centre and suspended by a string. This kind of stone is not, as might be conjectured from its
name, found exclusively near the Amazon. The name was given to it as
well as to the river by the first European visitors to America, in
allusion to the female warriors respecting whom strange stories are
told. The natives pretending, according to an ancient tradition, that
the stone came from the country of Women without husbands, or Women
living alone.

As regards the ancient stringed instruments of the American Indians
our information is indeed but scanty. Clavigero says that the Mexicans
were entirely unacquainted with stringed instruments: a statement
the correctness of which is questionable, considering the stage of
civilization to which these people had attained. At any rate, we
generally find one or other kind of such instruments with nations
whose intellectual progress and social condition are decidedly
inferior. The Aztecs had many claims to the character of a civilized
community and (as before said) the Tezcucans were even more advanced
in the cultivation of the arts and sciences than the Aztecs. The
best histories, Prescott observes, the best poems, the best code
of laws, the purest dialect, were all allowed to be Tezcucan. The
Aztecs rivalled their neighbours in splendour of living, and even
in the magnificence of their structures. They displayed a pomp and
ostentatious pageantry, truly Asiatic. Unfortunately historians
are sometimes not sufficiently discerning in their communications
respecting musical questions. J. Ranking, in describing the grandeur
of the establishment maintained by Montezuma, says that during the
repasts of this monarch there was music of fiddle, flute, snail-shell,
a kettle-drum, and other strange instruments. But as this writer does
not indicate the source whence he drew his information respecting
Montezumas orchestra including the fiddle, the assertion deserves
scarcely a passing notice. The Peruvians possessed a stringed instrument, called _tinya_, which
was provided with five or seven strings. To conjecture from the
unsatisfactory account of it transmitted to us, the _tinya_ appears to
have been a kind of guitar. Considering the fragility of the materials
of which such instruments are generally constructed, it is perhaps
not surprising that we do not meet with any specimens of them in the
museums of American antiquities. A few remarks will not be out of place here referring to the musical
performances of the ancient Indians; since an acquaintance with the
nature of the performances is likely to afford additional assistance
in appreciating the characteristics of the instruments. In Peru, where
the military system was carefully organised, each division of the army
had its trumpeters, called _cqueppacamayo_, and its drummers, called
_huancarcamayo_. When the Inca returned with his troops victorious from
battle his first act was to repair to the temple of the Sun in order
to offer up thanksgiving; and after the conclusion of this ceremony
the people celebrated the event with festivities, of which music and
dancing constituted a principal part. Musical performances appear to
have been considered indispensable on occasions of public celebrations;
and frequent mention is made of them by historians who have described
the festivals annually observed by the Peruvians. About the month of October the Peruvians celebrated a solemn feast in
honour of the dead, at which ceremony they executed lugubrious songs
and plaintive instrumental music. Compositions of a similar character
were performed on occasion of the decease of a monarch. As soon as it
was made known to the people that their Inca had been called home to
the mansions of his father the sun they prepared to celebrate his
obsequies with becoming solemnity. Prescott, in his graphic description
of these observances, says: At stated intervals, for a year, the
people assembled to renew the expressions of their sorrow; processions
were made displaying the banner of the departed monarch; bards and
minstrels were appointed to chronicle his achievements, and their songs
continued to be rehearsed at high festivals in the presence of the
reigning monarch,--thus stimulating the living by the glorious example
of the dead. The Peruvians had also particular agricultural songs,
which they were in the habit of singing while engaged in tilling the
lands of the Inca; a duty which devolved upon the whole nation. The
subject of these songs, or rather hymns, referred especially to the
noble deeds and glorious achievements of the Inca and his dynasty. While thus singing, the labourers regulated their work to the rhythm
of the music, thereby ensuring a pleasant excitement and a stimulant in
their occupation, like soldiers regulating their steps to the music of
the military band. These hymns pleased the Spanish invaders so greatly
that they not only adopted several of them but also composed some in a
similar form and style. This appears, however, to have been the case
rather with the poetry than with the music. The name of the Peruvian elegiac songs was _haravi_. Some tunes of
these songs, pronounced to be genuine specimens, have been published
in recent works; but their genuineness is questionable. At all events
they must have been much tampered with, as they exhibit exactly the
form of the Spanish _bolero_. Even allowing that the melodies of
these compositions have been derived from Peruvian _harivaris_, it is
impossible to determine with any degree of certainty how much in them
has been retained of the original tunes, and how much has been supplied
besides the harmony, which is entirely an addition of the European
arranger. The Peruvians had minstrels, called _haravecs_ (_i.e._,
inventors), whose occupation it was to compose and to recite the
_haravis_. The Mexicans possessed a class of songs which served as a record
of historical events. Furthermore they had war-songs, love-songs,
and other secular vocal compositions, as well as sacred chants, in
the practice of which boys were instructed by the priests in order
that they might assist in the musical performances of the temple. It appertained to the office of the priests to burn incense, and
to perform music in the temple at stated times of the day. The
commencement of the religious observances which took place regularly
at sunrise, at mid-day, at sunset, and at midnight, was announced by
signals blown on trumpets and pipes. Persons of high position retained
in their service professional musicians whose duty it was to compose
ballads, and to perform vocal music with instrumental accompaniment. The nobles themselves, and occasionally even the monarch, not
unfrequently delighted in composing ballads and odes. Especially to be noticed is the institution termed Council of music,
which the wise monarch Nezahualcoyotl founded in Tezcuco. This
institution was not intended exclusively for promoting the cultivation
of music; its aim comprised the advancement of various arts, and of
sciences such as history, astronomy, &c. In fact, it was an academy
for general education. Probably no better evidence could be cited
testifying to the remarkable intellectual attainments of the Mexican
Indians before the discovery of America than this council of music. Although in some respects it appears to have resembled the board of
music of the Chinese, it was planned on a more enlightened and more
comprehensive principle. The Chinese board of music, called _Yo
Poo_, is an office connected with the _L Poo_ or board of rites,
established by the imperial government at Peking. The principal object
of the board of rites is to regulate the ceremonies on occasions
of sacrifices offered to the gods; of festivals and certain court
solemnities; of military reviews; of presentations, congratulations,
marriages, deaths, burials,--in short, concerning almost every possible
event in social and public life. The reader is probably aware that in one of the various hypotheses
which have been advanced respecting the Asiatic origin of the American
Indians China is assigned to them as their ancient home. Some
historians suppose them to be emigrants from Mongolia, Thibet, or
Hindustan; others maintain that they are the offspring of Phnician
colonists who settled in central America. Even more curious are the
arguments of certain inquirers who have no doubt whatever that the
ancestors of the American Indians were the lost ten tribes of Israel,
of whom since about the time of the Babylonian captivity history is
silent. Whatever may be thought as to which particular one of these
speculations hits the truth, they certainly have all proved useful
in so far as they have made ethnologists more exactly acquainted with
the habits and predilections of the American aborigines than would
otherwise have been the case. For, as the advocates of each hypothesis
have carefully collected and adduced every evidence they were able
to obtain tending to support their views, the result is that (so to
say) no stone has been left unturned. Nevertheless, any such hints as
suggest themselves from an examination of musical instruments have
hitherto remained unheeded. It may therefore perhaps interest the
reader to have his attention drawn to a few suggestive similarities
occurring between instruments of the American Indians and of certain
nations inhabiting the eastern hemisphere. We have seen that the Mexican pipe and the Peruvian syrinx were
purposely constructed so as to produce the intervals of the pentatonic
scale only. There are some additional indications of this scale having
been at one time in use with the American Indians. For instance, the
music of the Peruvian dance _cachua_ is described as having been very
similar to some Scotch national dances; and the most conspicuous
characteristics of the Scotch tunes are occasioned by the frequently
exclusive employment of intervals appertaining to the pentatonic scale. We find precisely the same series of intervals adopted on certain
Chinese instruments, and evidences are not wanting of the pentatonic
scale having been popular among various races in Asia at a remote
period. The series of intervals appertaining to the Chiriqui pipe,
mentioned page 61, consisted of a semitone and two whole tones, like
the _tetrachord_ of the ancient Greeks. In the Peruvian _huayra-puhura_ made of talc some of the pipes possess
lateral holes. This contrivance, which is rather unusual, occurs on the
Chinese _cheng_. The _chayna_, mentioned page 64, seems to have been
provided with a reed, like the oboe: and in Hindustan we find a species
of oboe called _shehna_. The _tur_ of the Indian tribes on the Amazon,
mentioned page 69, reminds us of the trumpets _tooree_, or _tootooree_,
of the Hindus. The name appears to have been known also to the Arabs;
but there is no indication whatever of its having been transmitted to
the peninsula by the Moors, and afterwards to south America by the
Portuguese and Spaniards. The wooden tongues in the drum _teponaztli_ may be considered as a
contrivance exclusively of the ancient American Indians. Nevertheless
a construction nearly akin to it may be observed in certain drums of
the Tonga and Feejee islanders, and of the natives of some islands
in Torres strait. Likewise some <DW64> tribes in western and central
Africa have certain instruments of percussion which are constructed on
a principle somewhat reminding us of the _teponaztli_. The method of
bracing the drum by means of cords, as exhibited in the _huehueil_ of
the Mexican Indians, is evidently of very high antiquity in the east. Rattles, pandean pipes made of reed, and conch trumpets, are found
almost all over the world, wherever the materials of which they are
constructed are easily obtainable. Still, it may be noteworthy that
the Mexicans employed the conch trumpet in their religious observances
apparently in much the same way as it is used in the Buddhist worship
of the Thibetans and Kalmuks. As regards the sonorous metal in the great temple at Tezcuco some
inquirers are sure that it was a gong: but it must be borne in mind
that these inquirers detect everywhere traces proving an invasion of
the Mongols, which they maintain to have happened about six hundred
years ago. Had they been acquainted with the little Peruvian bell
(engraved on page 75) they would have had more tangible musical
evidence in support of their theory than the supposed gong; for this
bell certainly bears a suggestive resemblance to the little hand-bell
which the Buddhists use in their religious ceremonies. The Peruvians interpolated certain songs, especially those which they
were in the habit of singing while cultivating the fields, with the
word _hailli_ which signified Triumph. As the subject of these
compositions was principally the glorification of the Inca, the burden
_hailli_ is perhaps all the more likely to remind Europeans of the
Hebrew _hallelujah_. Moreover, Adair, who lived among the Indians of
north America during a period of about forty years, speaks of some
other words which he found used as burdens in hymns sung on solemn
occasions, and which appeared to him to correspond with certain Hebrew
words of a sacred import. As regards the musical accomplishments of the Indian tribes at the
present day they are far below the standard which we have found among
their ancestors. A period of three hundred years of oppression has
evidently had the effect of subduing the melodious expressions of
happiness and contentedness which in former times appear to have
been quite as prevalent with the Indians as they generally are with
independent and flourishing nations. The innate talent for music
evinced by those of the North American Indians who were converted to
Christianity soon after the emigration of the puritans to New England
is very favourably commented on by some old writers. In the year 1661
John Elliot published a translation of the psalms into Indian verse. The singing of these metrical psalms by the Indian converts in their
places of worship appears to have been actually superior to the sacred
vocal performances of their Christian brethren from Europe; for we find
it described by several witnesses as excellent and most ravishing.

In other parts of America the catholic priests from Spain did not
neglect to turn to account the susceptibility of the Indians for
music. Thus, in central America the Dominicans composed as early as in
the middle of the sixteenth century a sacred poem in the Guatemalian
dialect containing a narrative of the most important events recorded
in the Bible. This production they sang to the natives, and to enhance
the effect they accompanied the singing with musical instruments. The
alluring music soon captivated the heart of a powerful cazique, who
was thus induced to adopt the doctrines embodied in the composition,
and to diffuse them among his subjects who likewise delighted in the
performances. In Peru a similar experiment, resorted to by the priests
who accompanied Pizarros expedition, proved equally successful. They
dramatized certain scenes in the life of Christ and represented them
with music, which so greatly fascinated the Indians that many of them
readily embraced the new faith. Nor are these entertainments dispensed
with even at the present day by the Indian Christians, especially
in the village churches of the Sierra in Peru; and as several
religious ceremonies have been retained by these people from their
heathen forefathers, it may be conjectured that their sacred musical
performances also retain much of their ancient heathen character. Most of the musical instruments found among the American Indians at
the present day are evidently genuine old Indian contrivances as they
existed long before the discovery of America. Take, for example, the
peculiarly shaped rattles, drums, flutes, and whistles of the North
American Indians, of which some specimens in the Kensington museum are
described in the large catalogue. A few African instruments, introduced
by the <DW64> slaves, are now occasionally found in the hands of the
Indians, and have been by some travellers erroneously described as
genuine Indian inventions. This is the case with the African _marimba_,
which has become rather popular with the natives of Guatemala in
central America: but such adaptations are very easily discernible. EUROPEAN NATIONS DURING THE MIDDLE AGES. Many representations of musical instruments of the middle ages have
been preserved in manuscripts, as well as in sculptures and paintings
forming ornamental portions of churches and other buildings. Valuable
facts and hints are obtainable from these evidences, provided they
are judiciously selected and carefully examined. The subject is,
however, so large that only a few observations on the most interesting
instruments can be offered here. Unfortunately there still prevails
much uncertainty respecting several of the earliest representations
as to the precise century from which they date, and there is reason
to believe that in some instances the archological zeal of musical
investigators has assigned a higher antiquity to such discoveries than
can be satisfactorily proved. It appears certain that the most ancient European instruments known to
us were in form and construction more like the Asiatic than was the
case with later ones. Before a nation has attained to a rather high
degree of civilisation its progress in the cultivation of music, as an
art, is very slow indeed. The instruments found at the present day in
Asia are scarcely superior to those which were in use among oriental
nations about three thousand years ago. It is, therefore, perhaps
not surprising that no material improvement is perceptible in the
construction of the instruments of European countries during the lapse
of nearly a thousand years. True, evidences to be relied on referring
to the first five or six centuries of the Christian era are but scanty;
although indications are not wanting which may help the reflecting
musician. [Illustration]

[Illustration]

There are some early monuments of Christian art dating from the fourth
century in which the lyre is represented. In one of them Christ is
depicted as Apollo touching the lyre. This instrument occurs at an
early period in western Europe as used in popular pastimes. In an
Anglo-saxon manuscript of the ninth century in the British museum
(Cleopatra C. are the figures of two gleemen, one playing the
lyre and the other a double-pipe. M. de Coussemaker has published in
the Annales Archologiques the figure of a crowned personage playing
the lyre, which he found in a manuscript of the ninth or tenth century
in the library at Angers. The player twangs the strings with his
fingers, while the Anglo-saxon gleeman before mentioned uses a plectrum. _Cithara_ was a name applied to several stringed instruments greatly
varying in form, power of sound, and compass. The illustration
represents a cithara from a manuscript of the ninth century, formerly
in the library of the great monastery of St. When in the year 1768 the monastery was destroyed by fire, this
valuable book perished in the flames; fortunately the celebrated abbot
Gerbert possessed tracings of the illustrations, which were saved from
destruction. He published them, in the year 1774, in his work De cantu
et musica sacra. Several illustrations in the following pages, it
will be seen, have been derived from this interesting source. As the
older works on music were generally written in Latin we do not learn
from them the popular names of the instruments; the writers merely
adopted such Latin names as they thought the most appropriate. Thus,
for instance, a very simple stringed instrument of a triangular shape,
and a somewhat similar one of a square shape were designated by the
name of _psalterium_; and we further give a woodcut of the square kind
(p. 86), and of a _cithara_ (above) from the same manuscript. [Illustration]

[Illustration]

This last instrument is evidently an improvement upon the triangular
psalterium, because it has a sort of small sound-board at the top. Scarcely better, with regard to acoustics, appears to have been the
instrument designated as _nablum_, which we engrave (p. 87) from a
manuscript of the ninth century at Angers. [Illustration]

A small psalterium with strings placed over a sound-board was
apparently the prototype of the _citole_; a kind of dulcimer which was
played with the fingers. The names were not only often vaguely applied
by the medival writers but they changed also in almost every century. The psalterium, or psalterion (Italian _salterio_, English _psaltery_),
of the fourteenth century and later had the trapezium shape of the
dulcimer. [Illustration]

The Anglo-saxons frequently accompanied their vocal effusions with a
harp, more or less triangular in shape,--an instrument which may be
considered rather as constituting the transition of the lyre into the
harp. The representation of king David playing the harp is from an
Anglo-saxon manuscript of the beginning of the eleventh century, in
the British museum. The harp was especially popular in central and
northern Europe, and was the favourite instrument of the German and
Celtic bards and of the Scandinavian skalds. In the next illustration
from the manuscript of the monastery of St. Blasius twelve strings
and two sound holes are given to it. A harp similar in form and size,
but without the front pillar, was known to the ancient Egyptians. Perhaps the addition was also non-existent in the earliest specimens
appertaining to European nations; and a sculptured figure of a small
harp constructed like the ancient eastern harp has been discovered in
the old church of Ullard in the county of Kilkenny. Of this curious
relic, which is said to date from a period anterior to the year 800, a
fac-simile taken from Buntings Ancient Music of Ireland is given (p. As Bunting was the first who drew attention to this sculpture his
account of it may interest the reader. The drawing he says is taken
from one of the ornamental compartments of a sculptured cross, at the
old church of Ullard. From the style of the workmanship, as well as
from the worn condition of the cross, it seems older than the similar
monument at Monasterboice which is known to have been set up before the
year 830. The sculpture is rude; the circular rim which binds the arms
of the cross together is not pierced in the quadrants, and many of the
figures originally in relievo are now wholly abraded. It is difficult
to determine whether the number of strings represented is six or seven;
but, as has been already remarked, accuracy in this respect cannot be
expected either in sculptures or in many picturesque drawings. The
Finns had a harp (_harpu_, _kantele_) with a similar frame, devoid of
a front pillar, still in use until the commencement of the present
century. [Illustration]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

One of the most interesting stringed instruments of the middle ages
is the _rotta_ (German, _rotte_; English, _rote_). It was sounded by
twanging the strings, and also by the application of the bow. The first
method was, of course, the elder one. There can hardly be a doubt
that when the bow came into use it was applied to certain popular
instruments which previously had been treated like the _cithara_ or
the _psalterium_. The Hindus at the present day use their _suroda_
sometimes as a lute and sometimes as a fiddle. In some measure we
do the same with the violin by playing occasionally _pizzicato_. The
_rotta_ (shown p. Blasius is called in
Gerberts work _cithara teutonica_, while the harp is called _cithara
anglica_; from which it would appear that the former was regarded as
pre-eminently a German instrument. Possibly its name may have been
originally _chrotta_ and the continental nations may have adopted it
from the Celtic races of the British isles, dropping the guttural
sound. This hypothesis is, however, one of those which have been
advanced by some musical historians without any satisfactory evidence. [Illustration]

[Illustration]

We engrave also another representation of David playing on the
_rotta_, from a psalter of the seventh century in the British museum
(Cott. According to tradition, this psalter is one of
the manuscripts which were sent by pope Gregory to St. The instrument much resembles the lyre in the hand of the musician
(see p. 22) who is supposed to be a Hebrew of the time of Joseph. In
the _rotta_ the ancient Asiatic lyre is easily to be recognized. An
illumination of king David playing the _rotta_ forms the frontispiece
of a manuscript of the eighth century preserved in the cathedral
library of Durham; and which is musically interesting inasmuch as
it represents a _rotta_ of an oblong square shape like that just
noticed and resembling the Welsh _crwth_. It has only five strings
which the performer twangs with his fingers. Again, a very interesting
representation (which we engrave) of the Psalmist with a kind of
_rotta_ occurs in a manuscript of the tenth century, in the British
museum (Vitellius F. The manuscript has been much injured by
a fire in the year 1731, but Professor Westwood has succeeded, with
great care, and with the aid of a magnifying glass, in making out
the lines of the figure. As it has been ascertained that the psalter
is written in the Irish semi-uncial character it is highly probable
that the kind of _rotta_ represents the Irish _cionar cruit_, which
was played by twanging the strings and also by the application of a
bow. Unfortunately we possess no well-authenticated representation
of the Welsh _crwth_ of an early period; otherwise we should in all
probability find it played with the fingers, or with a plectrum. Venantius Fortunatus, an Italian who lived in the second half of the
sixth century, mentions in a poem the Chrotta Britanna. He does
not, however, allude to the bow, and there is no reason to suppose
that it existed in England. Howbeit, the Welsh _crwth_ (Anglo-saxon,
_crudh_; English, _crowd_) is only known as a species of fiddle closely
resembling the _rotta_, but having a finger-board in the middle of the
open frame and being strung with only a few strings; while the _rotta_
had sometimes above twenty strings. As it may interest the reader to
examine the form of the modern _crwth_ we give a woodcut of it. Edward
Jones, in his Musical and poetical relicks of the Welsh bards,
records that the Welsh had before this kind of _crwth_ a three-stringed
one called Crwth Trithant, which was, he says, a sort of violin, or
more properly a rebeck. The three-stringed _crwth_ was chiefly used by
the inferior class of bards; and was probably the Moorish fiddle which
is still the favourite instrument of the itinerant bards of the Bretons
in France, who call it _rbek_. The Bretons, it will be remembered, are
close kinsmen of the Welsh. [Illustration]

A player on the _crwth_ or _crowd_ (a crowder) from a bas-relief on the
under part of the seats of the choir in Worcester cathedral (engraved
p. 95) dates from the twelfth or thirteenth century; and we give (p. 96) a copy of an illumination from a manuscript in the Bibliothque
royale at Paris of the eleventh century. The player wears a crown on
his head; and in the original some musicians placed at his side are
performing on the psalterium and other instruments. These last are
figured with uncovered heads; whence M. de Coussemaker concludes that
the _crout_ was considered by the artist who drew the figures as the
noblest instrument. It was probably identical with the _rotta_ of the
same century on the continent. [Illustration]

An interesting drawing of an Anglo-saxon fiddle--or _fithele_, as it
was called--is given in a manuscript of the eleventh century in the
British museum (Cotton, Tiberius, c. The instrument is of a pear
shape, with four strings, and the bridge is not indicated. A German
fiddle of the ninth century, called _lyra_, copied by Gerbert from the
manuscript of St. These are shown in the
woodcuts (p. Other records of the employment of the fiddle-bow
in Germany in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries are not wanting. For instance, in the famous Nibelungenlied Volker is described as
wielding the fiddle-bow not less dexterously than the sword. And in
Chronicon picturatum Brunswicense of the year 1203, the following
miraculous sign is recorded as having occurred in the village of
Ossemer: On Wednesday in Whitsun-week, while the parson was fiddling
to his peasants who were dancing, there came a flash of lightning
and struck the parsons arm which held the fiddle-bow, and killed
twenty-four people on the spot.

[Illustration]

Among the oldest representations of performers on instruments of the
violin kind found in England those deserve to be noticed which are
painted on the interior of the roof of Peterborough cathedral. They
are said to date from the twelfth century. One of these figures is
particularly interesting on account of the surprising resemblance which
his instrument bears to our present violin. Not only the incurvations
on the sides of the body but also the two sound-holes are nearly
identical in shape with those made at the present day. Respecting the
reliance to be placed on such evidence, it is necessary to state that
the roof, originally constructed between the years 1177 and 1194, was
thoroughly repaired in the year 1835. Although we find it asserted that
the greatest care was taken to retain every part, or to restore it
to its original state, so that the figures, even where retouched, are
in effect the same as when first painted, it nevertheless remains a
debatable question whether the restorers have not admitted some slight
alterations, and have thereby somewhat modernised the appearance of
the instruments. A slight touch with the brush at the sound-holes, the
screws, or the curvatures, would suffice to produce modifications which
might to the artist appear as being only a renovation of the original
representation, but which to the musical investigator greatly impair
the value of the evidence. Sculptures are, therefore, more to be
relied upon in evidence than frescoes. [Illustration]

[Illustration]




CHAPTER VIII. The construction of the _organistrum_ requires but little explanation. A glance at the finger-board reveals at once that the different
tones were obtained by raising the keys placed on the neck under the
strings, and that the keys were raised by means of the handles at
the side of the neck. Of the two bridges shown on the body, the one
situated nearest the middle was formed by a wheel in the inside, which
projected through the sound-board. The wheel which slightly touched
the strings vibrated them by friction when turned by the handle at
the end. The order of intervals was _c_, _d_, _e_, _f_, _g_, _a_,
_b-flat_, _b-natural_, _c_, and were obtainable on the highest string. There is reason to suppose that the other two strings were generally
tuned a fifth and an octave below the highest. The _organistrum_ may
be regarded as the predecessor of the hurdy-gurdy, and was a rather
cumbrous contrivance. Two persons seem to have been required to sound
it, one to turn the handle and the other to manage the keys. Thus it is
generally represented in medival concerts. [Illustration]

[Illustration]

The _monochord_ (p. 100) was mounted with a single string stretched
over two bridges which were fixed on an oblong box. The string could be
tightened or slackened by means of a turning screw inserted into one
end of the box. The intervals of the scale were marked on the side, and
were regulated by a sort of movable bridge placed beneath the string
when required. As might be expected, the _monochord_ was chiefly used
by theorists; for any musical performance it was but little suitable. About a thousand years ago when this monochord was in use the musical
scale was diatonic, with the exception of the interval of the seventh,
which was chromatic inasmuch as both _b-flat_ and _b-natural_ formed
part of the scale. The notation on the preceding page exhibits the
compass as well as the order of intervals adhered to about the tenth
century. This ought to be borne in mind in examining the representations of
musical instruments transmitted to us from that period. As regards the wind instruments popular during the middle ages, some
were of quaint form as well as of rude construction. The _chorus_, or _choron_, had either one or two tubes, as in the
woodcut page 101. There were several varieties of this instrument;
sometimes it was constructed with a bladder into which the tube is
inserted; this kind of _chorus_ resembled the bagpipe; another kind
resembled the _poongi_ of the Hindus, mentioned page 51. The name
_chorus_ was also applied to certain stringed instruments. One of
these had much the form of the _cithara_, page 86. It appears however,
probable that _chorus_ or _choron_ originally designated a horn
(Hebrew, _Keren_; Greek, _Keras_; Latin, _cornu_). [Illustration]

The flutes of the middle ages were blown at the end, like the
flageolet. Of the _syrinx_ there are extant some illustrations of the
ninth and tenth centuries, which exhibit the instrument with a number
of tubes tied together, just like the Pandean pipe still in use. In one
specimen engraved (page 102) from a manuscript of the eleventh century
the tubes were inserted into a bowl-shaped box. This is probably the
_frestele_, _fretel_, or _fretiau_, which in the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries was in favour with the French mntriers. Some large Anglo-saxon trumpets may be seen in a manuscript of the
eighth century in the British museum. The largest kind of trumpet was
placed on a stand when blown. Of the _oliphant_, or hunting horn, some
fine specimens are in the South Kensington collection. The _sackbut_
(of which we give a woodcut) probably made of metal, could be drawn
out to alter the pitch of sound. The sackbut of the ninth century had,
however, a very different shape to that in use about three centuries
ago, and much more resembled the present _trombone_. The name _sackbut_
is supposed to be a corruption of _sambuca_. The French, about the
fifteenth century, called it _sacqueboute_ and _saquebutte_. [Illustration]

[Illustration]

The most important wind instrument--in fact, the king of all the
musical instruments--is the organ. [Illustration]

[Illustration]

The _pneumatic organ_ is sculptured on an obelisk which was erected
in Constantinople under Theodosius the great, towards the end of the
fourth century. The bellows were pressed by men standing on them:
see page 103. This interesting monument also exhibits performers on
the double flute. The _hydraulic organ_, which is recorded to have
been already known about two hundred years before the Christian era,
was according to some statements occasionally employed in churches
during the earlier centuries of the middle ages. Probably it was more
frequently heard in secular entertainments for which it was more
suitable; and at the beginning of the fourteenth century appears to
have been entirely supplanted by the pneumatic organ. The earliest
organs had only about a dozen pipes. The largest, which were made
about nine hundred years ago, had only three octaves, in which the
chromatic intervals did not occur. Some progress in the construction
of the organ is exhibited in an illustration (engraved p. 104) dating
from the twelfth century, in a psalter of Eadwine, in the library of
Trinity college, Cambridge. The instrument has ten pipes, or perhaps
fourteen, as four of them appear to be double pipes. It required four
men exerting all their power to produce the necessary wind, and two men
to play the instrument. Moreover, both players seem also to be busily
engaged in directing the blowers about the proper supply of wind. It must be admitted that since the twelfth
century some progress has been made, at all events, in the construction
of the organ. [Illustration]

The pedal is generally believed to have been invented by Bernhard, a
German, who lived in Venice about the year 1470. There are, however,
indications extant pointing to an earlier date of its invention. Perhaps Bernhard was the first who, by adopting a more practicable
construction, made the pedal more generally known. On the earliest
organs the keys of the finger-board were of enormous size, compared
with those of the present day; so that a finger-board with only nine
keys had a breadth of from four to five feet. The organist struck the
keys down with his fist, as is done in playing the _carillon_ still in
use on the continent, of which presently some account will be given. [Illustration]

[Illustration]

Of the little portable organ, known as the _regal_ or _regals_,
often tastefully shaped and embellished, some interesting sculptured
representations are still extant in the old ecclesiastical edifices
of England and Scotland. There is, for instance, in Beverley minster
a figure of a man playing on a single regal, or a regal provided
with only one set of pipes; and in Melrose abbey the figure of an
angel holding in his arms a double regal, the pipes of which are in
two sets. The regal generally had keys like those of the organ but
smaller. A painting in the national Gallery, by Melozzo da Forli
who lived in the fifteenth century, contains a regal which has keys
of a peculiar shape, rather resembling the pistons of certain brass
instruments. To avoid misapprehension, it is necessary to mention that the name
_regal_ (or _regals_, _rigols_) was also applied to an instrument
of percussion with sonorous slabs of wood. This contrivance was, in
short, a kind of harmonica, resembling in shape as well as in the
principle of its construction the little glass harmonica, a mere toy,
in which slips of glass are arranged according to our musical scale. In England it appears to have been still known in the beginning of the
eighteenth century. Grassineau describes the Rigols as a kind of
musical instrument consisting of several sticks bound together, only
separated by beads. It makes a tolerable harmony, being well struck
with a ball at the end of a stick. In the earlier centuries of the
middle ages there appear to have been some instruments of percussion in
favour, to which Grassineaus expression a tolerable harmony would
scarcely have been applicable. Drums, of course, were known; and their
rhythmical noise must have been soft music, compared with the shrill
sounds of the _cymbalum_; a contrivance consisting of a number of metal
plates suspended on cords, so that they could be clashed together
simultaneously; or with the clangour of the _cymbalum_ constructed
with bells instead of plates; or with the piercing noise of the
_bunibulum_, or _bombulom_; an instrument which consisted of an angular
frame to which were loosely attached metal plates of various shapes
and sizes. The lower part of the frame constituted the handle: and to
produce the noise it evidently was shaken somewhat like the sistrum of
the ancient Egyptians. [Illustration]

The _triangle_ nearly resembled the instrument of this name in use
at the present day; it was more elegant in shape and had some metal
ornamentation in the middle. The _tintinnabulum_ consisted of a number of bells arranged in regular
order and suspended in a frame. [Illustration]




CHAPTER IX. Respecting the orchestras, or musical bands, represented on monuments
of the middle ages, there can hardly be a doubt that the artists who
sculptured them were not unfrequently led by their imagination rather
than by an adherence to actual fact. It is, however, not likely that
they introduced into such representations instruments that were never
admitted in the orchestras, and which would have appeared inappropriate
to the contemporaries of the artists. An examination of one or two
of the orchestras may therefore find a place here, especially as
they throw some additional light upon the characteristics of the
instrumental music of medival time. A very interesting group of music performers dating, it is said, from
the end of the eleventh century is preserved in a bas-relief which
formerly ornamented the abbey of St. Georges de Boscherville and which
is now removed to the museum of Rouen. The orchestra comprises twelve
performers, most of whom wear a crown. The first of them plays upon
a viol, which he holds between his knees as the violoncello is held. His instrument is scarcely as large as the smallest viola da gamba. By
his side are a royal lady and her attendant, the former playing on an
_organistrum_ of which the latter is turning the wheel. Next to these
is represented a performer on a _syrinx_ of the kind shown in the
engraving p. 112; and next to him a performer on a stringed instrument
resembling a lute, which, however, is too much dilapidated to be
recognisable. Then we have a musician with a small stringed instrument
resembling the _nablum_, p. The next musician, also represented as
a royal personage, plays on a small species of harp. Then follows a
crowned musician playing the viol which he holds in almost precisely
the same manner as the violin is held. Again, another, likewise
crowned, plays upon a harp, using with the right hand a plectrum
and with the left hand merely his fingers. The last two performers,
apparently a gentleman and a gentlewoman, are engaged in striking the
_tintinnabulum_,--a set of bells in a frame. [Illustration]

In this group of crowned minstrels the sculptor has introduced a
tumbler standing on his head, perhaps the vocalist of the company, as
he has no instrument to play upon. Possibly the sculptor desired to
symbolise the hilarious effects which music is capable of producing, as
well as its elevating influence upon the devotional feelings. [Illustration]

The two positions in which we find the viol held is worthy of notice,
inasmuch as it refers the inquirer further back than might be expected
for the origin of our peculiar method of holding the violin, and the
violoncello, in playing. There were several kinds of the viol in use
differing in size and in compass of sound. The most common number of
strings was five, and it was tuned in various ways. One kind had a
string tuned to the note [Illustration] running at the side of the
finger-board instead of over it; this string was, therefore, only
capable of producing a single tone. The four other strings were tuned
thus: [Illustration] Two other species, on which all the strings
were placed over the finger-board, were tuned: [Illustration] and:
[Illustration] The woodcut above represents a very beautiful _vielle_;
French, of about 1550, with monograms of Henry II. The contrivance of placing a string or two at the side of the
finger-board is evidently very old, and was also gradually adopted on
other instruments of the violin class of a somewhat later period than
that of the _vielle_; for instance, on the _lira di braccio_ of the
Italians. It was likewise adopted on the lute, to obtain a fuller power
in the bass; and hence arose the _theorbo_, the _archlute_, and other
varieties of the old lute. [Illustration:

  A. REID. ORCHESTRA, TWELFTH CENTURY, AT SANTIAGO.] A grand assemblage of musical performers is represented on the
Portico della gloria of the famous pilgrimage church of Santiago da
Compostella, in Spain. This triple portal, which is stated by an
inscription on the lintel to have been executed in the year 1188,
consists of a large semicircular arch with a smaller arch on either
side. The central arch is filled by a tympanum, round which are
twenty-four life-sized seated figures, in high relief, representing the
twenty-four elders seen by St. John in the Apocalypse, each with an
instrument of music. These instruments are carefully represented and
are of great interest as showing those in use in Spain at about the
twelfth century. A cast of this sculpture is in the Kensington museum. In examining the group of musicians on this sculpture the reader will
probably recognise several instruments in their hands, which are
identical with those already described in the preceding pages. The
_organistrum_, played by two persons, is placed in the centre of the
group, perhaps owing to its being the largest of the instruments rather
than that it was distinguished by any superiority in sound or musical
effect. Besides the small harp seen in the hands of the eighth and
nineteenth musicians (in form nearly identical with the Anglo-saxon
harp) we find a small triangular harp, without a front-pillar, held on
the lap by the fifth and eighteenth musicians. The _salterio_ on the
lap of the tenth and seventeenth musicians resembles the dulcimer, but
seems to be played with the fingers instead of with hammers. The most
interesting instrument in this orchestra is the _vihuela_, or Spanish
viol, of the twelfth century. The first, second, third, sixth, seventh,
ninth, twentieth, twenty-second, twenty-third, and twenty-fourth
musicians are depicted with a _vihuela_ which bears a close resemblance
to the _rebec_. The instrument is represented with three strings,
although in one or two instances five tuning-pegs are indicated. A
large species of _vihuela_ is given to the eleventh, fourteenth,
fifteenth, and sixteenth musicians. This instrument differs from the
_rebec_ in as far as its body is broader and has incurvations at the
sides. Also the sound-holes are different in form and position. The bow
does not occur with any of these viols. But, as will be observed, the
musicians are not represented in the act of playing; they are tuning
and preparing for the performance, and the second of them is adjusting
the bridge of his instrument. [Illustration: FRONT OF THE MINSTRELS GALLERY, EXETER CATHEDRAL. The minstrels gallery of Exeter cathedral dates from the fourteenth
century. The front is divided into twelve niches, each of which
contains a winged figure or an angel playing on an instrument of music. There is a cast also of this famous sculpture at South Kensington. The
instruments are so much dilapidated that some of them cannot be clearly
recognized; but, as far as may be ascertained, they appear to be as
follows:--1. The _clarion_, a small
trumpet having a shrill sound. The _gittern_, a
small guitar strung with catgut. The _timbrel_;
resembling our present tambourine, with a double row of gingles. _Cymbals._ Most of these instruments have been already noticed in the
preceding pages. The _shalm_, or _shawm_, was a pipe with a reed in
the mouth-hole. The _wait_ was an English wind instrument of the same
construction. If it differed in any respect from the _shalm_, the
difference consisted probably in the size only. The _wait_ obtained its
name from being used principally by watchmen, or _waights_, to proclaim
the time of night. Such were the poor ancestors of our fine oboe and
clarinet. CHAPTER X.


POST-MEDIVAL MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. Attention must now be drawn to some instruments which originated during
the middle ages, but which attained their highest popularity at a
somewhat later period. [Illustration]

Among the best known of these was the _virginal_, of which we give an
engraving from a specimen of the time of Elizabeth at South Kensington. Another was the _lute_, which about three hundred years ago was almost
as popular as is at the present day the pianoforte. Originally it had
eight thin catgut strings arranged in four pairs, each pair being tuned
in unison; so that its open strings produced four tones; but in the
course of time more strings were added. Until the sixteenth century
twelve was the largest number or, rather, six pairs. Eleven appear
for some centuries to have been the most usual number of strings:
these produced six tones, since they were arranged in five pairs and a
single string. The latter, called the _chanterelle_, was the highest. According to Thomas Mace, the English lute in common use during the
seventeenth century had twenty-four strings, arranged in twelve pairs,
of which six pairs ran over the finger-board and the other six by
the side of it. This lute was therefore, more properly speaking, a
theorbo. The neck of the lute, and also of the theorbo, had frets
consisting of catgut strings tightly fastened round it at the proper
distances required for ensuring a chromatic succession of intervals. The illustration on the next page represents a lute-player of the
sixteenth century. The frets are not indicated in the old engraving
from which the illustration has been taken. The order of tones adopted
for the open strings varied in different centuries and countries:
and this was also the case with the notation of lute music. The most
common practice was to write the music on six lines, the upper line
representing the first string; the second line, the second string, &c.,
and to mark with letters on the lines the frets at which the fingers
ought to be placed--_a_ indicating the open string, _b_ the first fret,
_c_ the second fret, and so on. The lute was made of various sizes according to the purpose for
which it was intended in performance. The treble-lute was of the
smallest dimensions, and the bass-lute of the largest. The _theorbo_,
or double-necked lute which appears to have come into use during
the sixteenth century, had in addition to the strings situated over
the finger-board a number of others running at the left side of
the finger-board which could not be shortened by the fingers, and
which produced the bass tones. The largest kinds of theorbo were the
_archlute_ and the _chitarrone_. It is unnecessary to enter here into a detailed description of some
other instruments which have been popular during the last three
centuries, for the museum at Kensington contains specimens of many
of them of which an account is given in the large catalogue of that
collection. It must suffice to refer the reader to the illustrations
there of the cither, virginal, spinet, clavichord, harpsichord, and
other antiquated instruments much esteemed by our forefathers. Students who examine these old relics will probably wish to know
something about their quality of tone. Might
they still be made effective in our present state of the art? are
questions which naturally occur to the musical inquirer having such
instruments brought before him. A few words bearing on these questions
may therefore not be out of place here. [Illustration]

It is generally and justly admitted that in no other branch of the art
of music has greater progress been made since the last century than
in the construction of musical instruments. Nevertheless, there are
people who think that we have also lost something here which might
with advantage be restored. Our various instruments by being more and
more perfected are becoming too much alike in quality of sound, or in
that character of tone which the French call _timbre_, and the Germans
_Klangfarbe_, and which professor Tyndall in his lectures on sound has
translated _clang-tint_. Every musical composer knows how much more
suitable one _clang-tint_ is for the expression of a certain emotion
than another. Our old instruments, imperfect though they were in many
respects, possessed this variety of _clang-tint_ to a high degree. Neither were they on this account less capable of expression than the
modern ones. That no improvement has been made during the last two
centuries in instruments of the violin class is a well-known fact. As
to lutes and cithers the collection at Kensington contains specimens
so rich and mellow in tone as to cause musicians to regret that these
instruments have entirely fallen into oblivion. As regards beauty of appearance our earlier instruments were certainly
superior to the modern. Indeed, we have now scarcely a musical
instrument which can be called beautiful. The old lutes, spinets,
viols, dulcimers, &c., are not only elegant in shape but are also often
tastefully ornamented with carvings, designs in marquetry, and painting. [Illustration]

The player on the _viola da gamba_, shown in the next engraving, is
a reduced copy of an illustration in The Division Violist, London,
1659. It shows exactly how the frets were regulated, and how the bow
was held. The most popular instruments played with a bow, at that time,
were the _treble-viol_, the _tenor-viol_, and the _bass-viol_. It was
usual for viol players to have a chest of viols, a case containing
four or more viols, of different sizes. Thus, Thomas Mace in his
directions for the use of the viol, Musicks Monument 1676, remarks,
Your best provision, and most complete, will be a good chest of viols,
six in number, viz., two basses, two tenors, and two trebles, all truly
and proportionably suited. The violist, to be properly furnished with
his requirements, had therefore to supply himself with a larger stock
of instruments than the violinist of the present day. [Illustration]

That there was, in the time of Shakespeare, a musical instrument
called _recorder_ is undoubtedly known to most readers from the stage
direction in Hamlet: _Re-enter players with recorders_. But not many
are likely to have ever seen a recorder, as it has now become very
scarce: we therefore give an illustration of this old instrument, which
is copied from The Genteel Companion; Being exact Directions for the
Recorder: etc. London, 1683. The _bagpipe_ appears to have been from time immemorial a special
favourite instrument with the Celtic races; but it was perhaps quite as
much admired by the Slavonic nations. In Poland, and in the Ukraine,
it used to be made of the whole skin of the goat in which the shape
of the animal, whenever the bagpipe was expanded with air, appeared
fully retained, exhibiting even the head with the horns; hence the
bagpipe was called _kosa_, which signifies a goat. 120
represents a Scotch bagpipe of the last century. The bagpipe is of high antiquity in Ireland, and is alluded to in Irish
poetry and prose said to date from the tenth century. A pig gravely
engaged in playing the bagpipe is represented in an illuminated Irish
manuscript, of the year 1300: and we give p. 121 a copy of a woodcut
from The Image of Ireland, a book printed in London in 1581. [Illustration]

The _bell_ has always been so much in popular favour in England that
some account of it must not be omitted. Paul Hentzner a German, who
visited England in the year 1598, records in his journal: The people
are vastly fond of great noises that fill the ear, such as the firing
of cannon, drums, and the ringing of bells; so that in London it is
common for a number of them that have got a glass in their heads to go
up into some belfry, and ring the bells for hours together for the sake
of exercise. This may be exaggeration,--not unusual with travellers. It is, however, a fact that bell-ringing has been a favourite amusement
with Englishmen for centuries. The way in which church bells are suspended and fastened, so as to
permit of their being made to vibrate in the most effective manner
without damaging by their vibration the building in which they are
placed, is in some countries very peculiar. The Italian _campanile_, or
tower of bells, is not unfrequently separated from the church itself. In Servia the church bells are often hung in a frame-work of timber
built near the west end of the church. In Zante and other islands of
Greece the belfry is usually separate from the church. The reason
assigned by the Greeks for having adopted this plan is that in case
of an earthquake the bells are likely to fall and, were they placed
in a tower, would destroy the roof of the church and might cause the
destruction of the whole building. Also in Russia a special edifice
for the bells is generally separate from the church. In the Russian
villages the bells are not unfrequently hung in the branches of an
oak-tree near the church. In Iceland the bell is usually placed in the
lych-gate leading to the graveyard. [Illustration]

[Illustration]

The idea of forming of a number of bells a musical instrument such
as the _carillon_ is said by some to have suggested itself first to
the English and Dutch; but what we have seen in Asiatic countries
sufficiently refutes this. Moreover, not only the Romans employed
variously arranged and attuned bells, but also among the Etruscan
antiquities an instrument has been discovered which is constructed of
a number of bronze vessels placed in a row on a metal rod. Numerous
bells, varying in size and tone, have also been found in Etruscan
tombs. Among the later contrivances of this kind in European countries
the sets of bells suspended in a wooden frame, which we find in
medival illuminations, deserve notice. In the British museum is a
manuscript of the fourteenth century in which king David is depicted
holding in each hand a hammer with which he strikes upon bells of
different dimensions, suspended on a wooden stand. It may be supposed that the device of playing tunes by means of bells
merely swung by the hand is also of ancient date. In Lancashire each
of the ringers manages two bells, holding one in either hand. Thus, an
assemblage of seven ringers insures fourteen different tones; and as
each ringer may change his two notes by substituting two other bells if
required, even compositions with various modulations, and of a somewhat
intricate character, may be executed,--provided the ringers are good
timeists; for each has, of course, to take care to fall in with his
note, just as a member of the Russian horn band contributes his single
note whenever it occurs. Peal-ringing is another pastime of the kind which may be regarded as
pre-eminently national to England. The bells constituting a peal are
frequently of the number of eight, attuned to the diatonic scale. Also
peals of ten bells, and even of twelve, are occasionally formed. A
peculiar feature of peal-ringing is that the bells, which are provided
with clappers, are generally swung so forcibly as to raise the mouth
completely upwards. The largest peal, and one of the finest, is at
Exeter cathedral: another celebrated one is that of St. Margarets,
Leicester, which consists of ten bells. Peal-ringing is of an early
date in England; Egelric, abbot of Croyland, is recorded to have cast
about the year 960 a set of six bells. The _carillon_ (engraved on the opposite page) is especially popular
in the Netherlands and Belgium, but is also found in Germany, Italy,
and some other European countries. It is generally placed in the church
tower and also sometimes in other public edifices. The statement
repeated by several writers that the first carillon was invented in
the year 1481 in the town of Alost is not to be trusted, for the town
of Bruges claims to have possessed similar chimes in the year 1300. There are two kinds of carillons in use on the continent, viz. : clock
chimes, which are moved by machinery, like a self-acting barrel-organ;
and such as are provided with a set of keys, by means of which the
tunes are played by a musician. The carillon in the Parochial-Kirche
at Berlin, which is one of the finest in Germany, contains thirty-seven
bells; and is provided with a key-board for the hands and with a pedal,
which together place at the disposal of the performer a compass of
rather more than three octaves. The keys of the manual are metal rods
somewhat above a foot in length; and are pressed down with the palms of
the hand. The keys of the pedal are of wood; the instrument requires
not only great dexterity but also a considerable physical power. It
is astonishing how rapidly passages can be executed upon it by the
player, who is generally the organist of the church in which he acts as
_carilloneur_. When engaged in the last-named capacity he usually wears
leathern gloves to protect his fingers, as they are otherwise apt to
become ill fit for the more delicate treatment of the organ. The want of a contrivance in the _carillon_ for stopping the vibration
has the effect of making rapid passages, if heard near, sound as a
confused noise; only at some distance are they tolerable. It must be
remembered that the _carillon_ is intended especially to be heard from
a distance. Successions of tones which form a consonant chord, and
which have some duration, are evidently the most suitable for this
instrument. Indeed, every musical instrument possesses certain characteristics
which render it especially suitable for the production of some
particular effects. The invention of a new instrument of music has,
therefore, not unfrequently led to the adoption of new effects in
compositions. Take the pianoforte, which was invented in the beginning
of the eighteenth century, and which has now obtained so great a
popularity: its characteristics inspired our great composers to the
invention of effects, or expressions, which cannot be properly rendered
on any other instrument, however superior in some respects it may be to
the pianoforte. Thus also the improvements which have been made during
the present century in the construction of our brass instruments, and
the invention of several new brass instruments, have evidently been
not without influence upon the conceptions displayed in our modern
orchestral works. Imperfect though this essay may be it will probably have convinced
the reader that a reference to the history of the music of different
nations elucidates many facts illustrative of our own musical
instruments, which to the unprepared observer must appear misty and
impenetrable. In truth, it is with this study as with any other
scientific pursuit. The unassisted eye sees only faint nebul where
with the aid of the telescope bright stars are revealed. Al-Farabi, a great performer on the lute, 57

  American Indian instruments, 59, 77

    "      value of inquiry, 59

    "      trumpets, 67

    "      theories as to origin from musical instruments, 80

  Arab instruments very numerous, 56

  Archlute, 109, 115

  Ashantee trumpet, 2

  Asor explained, 19

  Assyrian instruments, 16

  Aulos, 32


  Bagpipe, Hebrew, 23

    "      Greek, 31

    "      Celtic, 119

  Barbiton, 31, 34

  Bells, Hebrew, 25

    "    Peruvian, 75

    "    and ringing, 121-123

  Blasius, Saint, the manuscript, 86

  Bones, traditions about them, 47

    "    made into flutes, 64

  Bottles, as musical instruments, 71

  Bow, see Violin

  Bruce, his discovery of harps on frescoes, 11


  Capistrum, 35

  Carillon, 121, 124

  Catgut, how made, 1

  Chanterelle, 114

  Chelys, 30

  Chinese instruments, 38

    "     bells, 40

    "     drum, 44

    "     flutes, 45

    "     board of music, 80

  Chorus, 99

  Cimbal, or dulcimer, 5

  Cithara, 86

    "   Anglican, 92

  Cittern, 113

  Clarion, 113

  Cornu, 36

  Crowd, 94

  Crwth, 34, 93

  Cymbals, Hebrew, 25

    "   or cymbalum, 105

    "   113


  Davids (King) private band, 19

    "   his favourite instrument, 20

  Diaulos, 32

  Drum, Hebrew, 24

    "   Greek, 32

    "   Chinese, 44

    "   Mexican, 71, 73

  Dulcimer, 5

    "   Assyrian, 17

    "   Hebrew, 19

    "   Persian prototype, 54


  Egyptian (ancient) musical instruments, 10

  Egyptian harps, 11

    "   flutes, 12

  Etruscan instruments, 33

    "   flutes, 33

    "   trumpet, 33

  Fiddle, originally a poor contrivance, 50

  Fiddle, Anglo-saxon, 95

    "   early German, 95

  Fistula, 36

  Flute, Greek, 32

    "   Persian, 56

    "   Mexican, 63

    "   Peruvian, 63

    "   medival, 100

  Free reed, whence imported, 5


  Gerbert, abbot, 86

  Greek instruments, 27

    "   music, whence derived, 27


  Hallelujah, compared with Peruvian song, 82

  Harmonicon, Chinese, 42

  Harp, Egyptian, 11

    "   Assyrian, 16

    "   Hebrew, 19

    "   Greek, 28

    "   Anglo-saxon, 89

    "   Irish, 90

  Hebrew instruments, 19, 26

    "   pipe, 22

    "   drum, 24

    "   cymbals, 25

    "   words among Indians, 83

  Hindu instruments, 46-48

  Hurdy-gurdy, 107

  Hydraulos, hydraulic organ, 33


  Instruments, curious shapes, 2

    "   value and use of collections, 4, 5, 7

  Instruments, Assyrian and Babylonian, 18


  Jubal, 26

  Juruparis, its sacred character, 68


  Kinnor, 20

  King, Chinese, 39

    "   various shapes, 40


  Lute, Chinese, 46

    "   Persian, 54

    "   Moorish, 57

    "   Elizabethan, 114

  Lyre, Assyrian, 17

    "   Hebrew, 19

    "      "   of the time of Joseph, 21

  Lyre, Greek, 29, 30

    "   Roman, 34

    "     "   various kinds, 34

    "   early Christian, 86

    "   early German _lyra_, 95


  Magadis, 27, 31

  Magrepha, 23

  Maori trumpet, 2

  Materials, commonly, of instruments, 1

  Medival musical instruments, 85

    "         "        "   derived from Asia, 85

  Mexican instruments, 60

    "   whistle, 60

    "   pipe, 61, 81

    "   flute, 63

    "   trumpet, 69, 82

    "   drum, 71

    "   songs, 79

    "   council of music, 80

  Minnim, 22

  Monochord, 98

  Moorish instruments adopted in England, 56

  Muses on a vase at Munich, 30

  Music one of the fine arts, 1


  Nablia, 35, 88

  Nadr ben el-Hares, 54

  Nareda, inventor of Hindu instruments, 46

  Nero coin with an organ, 34

  Nofre, a guitar, 11


  Oboe, Persian, 56

  Oliphant, 101

  Orchestra, 107

    "   modifications, 7

  Organistrum, 98, 111

  Organ, 101

    "   pneumatic and hydraulic, 101

    "   in MS. of Eadwine, 103


  Pandoura, 31

  Pedal, invented, 103

  Persian instruments, 51

    "    harp, 51

  Peruvian pipes, 65

    "   drum, 74

    "   bells, 75

    "   stringed instruments, 77

    "   songs, 78, 79

  Peterborough paintings of violins, 95

  Pipe, single and double, 22

    "   Mexican, 61

    "   Peruvian, 65

  Plektron, 30

  Poongi, Hindu, 51

  Pre-historic instruments, 9

  Psalterium, 35, 87, 89, 111, 113


  Rattle of Nootka Sound, 2

    "   American Indian, 74

  Rebeck, 94, 113

  Recorder, 119

  Regal, 103

  Roman musical instruments, 34

    "   lyre, 34

  Rotta, or rote, 91, 92


  Sackbut, 101, 113

  Sambuca, 35

  Santir, 5, 54

  Sbi, the, 12

  Shalm, 113

  Shophar, still used by the Jews, 24

  Sistrum, Hebrew, 25

    "   Roman, 37

  Songs, Peruvian and Mexican, 79

  Stringed instruments, 3

  Syrinx, 23, 113

    "   Greek, 32

    "   Roman, 36

    "   Peruvian, 64, 81


  Tamboura, 22, 47

  Temples in China, 46

  Theorbo, 109, 115

  Tibia, 35

  Timbrel, 113

  Tintinnabulum, 106

  Triangle, 106

  Trigonon, 27, 30, 35

  Trumpet, Assyrian, 18

    "   Hebrew, 24

    "   Greek, 32

    "   Roman, 36

    "   American Indian, 67

    "   of the Caroados, 69

    "   Mexican, 69, 82

  Tympanon, 32


  Universality of musical instruments, 1


  Vielle, 107, 108

  Vihuela, 111

  Vina, Hindu, 47

    "   performer, 48

  Viol, Spanish, 111, 117

    "   da gamba, 117

  Violin bow invented by Hindus? 49

     "   Persian, 50

     "   medival, 95

  Virginal, 114


  Wait, the instrument, 113

  Water, supposed origin of musical instruments, 47

  Whistle, prehistoric, 9

     "     Mexican, 60

  Wind instruments, 3


  Yu, Chinese stone, 39

    "     "   wind instrument, 45


DALZIEL AND CO., CAMDEN PRESS, N.W. *      *      *      *      *      *




Transcriber's note:

Inconsistent punctuation and capitalization are as in the original. Inconsistent spelling and hyphenation are as in the original. Water cost (142 x
3.00= $426.00) four hundred and twenty-six dollars. $6,134
  Cost of water for 300 days. 426
                                            ------
  Total cost of coal and water. $6,560

The water evaporated in the latter case to perform the same work was
(142 x 30 x 24 x 300 = 30,672,000) thirty million six hundred and
seventy-two thousand pounds of feed water against (40,320,000) forty
million three hundred and twenty thousand pounds in the former, a saving
of (9,648,000) nine million six hundred and forty-eight thousand pounds
per annum; or,

(40,320,000 - 30,672,000) / 9,648,000 = 31.4 per cent. --_thirty-one and four-tenths per cent_. And a saving in coal consumption of

(11,088 - 6,134) / 4,954 = 87.5 per cent. --_eighty-seven and one-half per cent_., or a saving in dollars and
cents of four thousand nine hundred and fifty-four dollars ($4,954). In this city, Philadelphia, no allowance for the consumption of water is
made in the case of first class engines, such engines being charged the
same rate per annum per horse-power as an inferior engine, while,
as shown by the above example, a saving in water of _thirty-one and
four-tenths per cent_. has been attained by the employment of a
first-class engine. The builders of such engines will always give a
guarantee of their consumption of water, so that the purchaser can be
able in advance to estimate this as accurately as he can the amount of
fuel he will use. *       *       *       *       *




RIVER IMPROVEMENTS NEAR ST. The efficacy of the jetty system is illustrated in the
lines of mattresses which showed accumulations of sand deposits ranging
from the surface of the river to nearly sixteen feet in height. At Twin
Hollow, thirteen miles from St. Louis and six miles from Horse-Tail Bar,
there was found a sand bar extending over the widest portion of the
river on which the engineering forces were engaged. Hurdles are built
out from the shore to concentrate the stream on the obstruction, and
then to protect the river from widening willows are interwoven between
the piles. At Carroll's Island mattresses 125 feet wide have been
placed, and the banks revetted with stone from ordinary low water to a
16 foot stage. There is plenty of water over the bar, and at the most
shallow points the lead showed a depth of twelve feet. Beard's Island, a
short distance further, is also being improved, the largest force of men
at any one place being here engaged. Four thousand feet of mattresses
have been begun, and in placing them work will be vigorously prosecuted
until operations are suspended by floating ice. The different sections
are under the direction of W. F. Fries, resident engineer, and E. M.
Currie, superintending engineer. There are now employed about 1,200 men,
thirty barges and scows, two steam launches, and the stern-wheel steamer
A. A. Humphreys. The improvements have cost, in actual money expended,
about $200,000, and as the appropriation for the ensuing year
approximates $600,000, the prospect of a clear channel is gratifying to
those interested in the river. *       *       *       *       *




BUNTE'S BURETTE FOR THE ANALYSIS OF FURNACE GASES. For analyzing the gases of blast-furnaces the various apparatus of Orsat
have long been employed; but, by reason of its simplicity, the burette
devised by Dr. Buente, and shown in the accompanying figures, is much
easier to use. Besides, it permits of a much better and more rapid
absorption of the oxide of carbon; and yet, for the lost fractions of
the latter, it is necessary to replace a part of the absorbing liquid
three or four times. The absorbing liquid is prepared by making a
saturated solution of chloride of copper in hydrochloric acid, and
adding thereto a small quantity of dissolved chloride of tin. Afterward,
there are added to the decanted mixture a few spirals of red copper, and
the mixture is then carefully kept from contact with the air. To fill the burette with gas, the three-way cock, _a_, is so placed that
the axial aperture shall be in communication with the graduated part, A,
of the burette. After this, water is poured into the funnel, t, and the
burette is put in communication with the gas reservoir by means of a
rubber tube. The lower point of the burette is put in communication with
a rubber pump, V (Fig. 2), on an aspirator (the cock, _b_, being left
open), and the gas is sucked in until all the air that was in the
apparatus has been expelled from it. The cocks, _a_ and _b_, are turned
90 degrees. The water in the funnel prevents the gases communicating
with the top. The point of the three-way cock is afterward closed with a
rubber tube and glass rod. If the gas happens to be in the reservoir of an aspirator, it is made
to pass into the apparatus in the following manner: The burette is
completely filled with water, and the point of the three-way cock is
put in communication with a reservoir. If the gas is under pressure, a
portion of it is allowed to escape through the capillary tube into the
water in the funnel, by turning the cock, _a_, properly, and thus all
the water in the conduit is entirely expelled. Afterward _a_ is turned
180 deg., and the lower cock, _b_, is opened. While the water is flowing
through _b_, the burette becomes filled with gas. _Mode of Measuring the Gases and Absorption_.--The tube that
communicates with the vessel, F, is put in communication, after the
latter has been completely filled with water, with the point of the
cock, _b_ (Fig. Then the latter is opened, as is also the pinch cock
on the rubber tubing, and water is allowed to enter the burette through
the bottom until the level is at the zero of the graduation. There are
then 100 cubic centimeters in the burette. The superfluous gas has
escaped through the cock, _a_, and passed through the water in the
funnel. The cock, _a_, is afterward closed by turning it 90 deg. To
cause the absorbing liquid to pass into the burette, the water in the
graduated cylinder is made to flow by connecting the rubber tube, s, of
the bottle, S, with the point of the burette. The cock is opened, and
suction is effected with the mouth of the tube, r. When the water has
flowed out to nearly the last drop, _b_ is closed and the suction bottle
is removed. The absorbing liquid (caustic potassa or pyrogallate of
potassa) is poured into a porcelain capsule, P, and the point of the
burette is dipped into the liquid. If the cock, _b_, be opened, the
absorbing liquid will be sucked into the burette. In order to hasten
the absorption, the cock, _b_, is closed, and the burette is shaken
horizontally, the aperture of the funnel being closed by the hand during
the operation. If not enough absorbing liquid has entered, there may be sucked into the
burette, by the process described above, a new quantity of liquid. The
reaction finished, the graduated cylinder is put in communication with
the funnel by turning the cock, _a_. The water is allowed to run from
the funnel, and the latter is filled again with water up to the mark. The gas is then again under the same pressure as at the beginning. After the level has become constant, the quantity of gas remaining is
measured. The contraction that has taken place gives, in hundredths of
the total volume, the volume of the gas absorbed. When it is desired to make an analysis of smoke due to combustion,
caustic potassa is first sucked into the burette. After complete
absorption, and after putting the gas at the same pressure, the
diminution gives the volume of carbonic acid. To determine the oxygen in the remaining gas, a portion of the caustic
potash is allowed to flow out, and an aqueous solution of pyrogallic
acid and potash is allowed to enter. The presence of oxygen is revealed
by the color of the liquid, which becomes darker. The gas is then agitated with the absorbing liquid until, upon opening
the cock, _a_, the liquid remains in the capillary tube, that is to say,
until no more water runs from the funnel into the burette. To make a
quantitative analysis of the carbon contained in gas, the pyrogallate of
potash must be entirely removed from the burette. To do this, the liquid
is sucked out by means of the flask, S, until there remain only a few
drops; then the cock, _a_, is opened and water is allowed to flow from
the funnel along the sides of the burette. Then _a_ is closed, and
the washing water is sucked in the same manner. By repeating this
manipulation several times, the absorbing liquid is completely removed. The acid solution of chloride of copper is then allowed to enter. As the absorbing liquids adhere to the glass, it is better, before
noting the level, to replace these liquids by water. The cocks, _a_ and
_b_, are opened, and water is allowed to enter from the funnel, the
absorbing liquid being made to flow at the same time through the cock,
_b_. When an acid solution of chloride of copper is employed, dilute
hydrochloric acid is used instead of water. 2 shows the arrangement of the apparatus for the quantitative
analysis of oxide of carbon and hydrogen by combustion. The gas in the
burette is first mixed with atmospheric air, by allowing the liquid to
flow through _b_, and causing air to enter through the axial aperture of
the three way cock, _a_, after cutting off communication at v. Then, as
shown in the figure, the burette is connected with the tube, B, which is
filled with water up to the narrow curved part, and the interior of the
burette is made to communicate with the combustion tube, v, by turning
the cock, a. The combustion tube is heated by means of a Bunsen burner
or alcohol lamp, L. It is necessary to proceed, so that all the water
shall be driven from the cock and the capillary tube, and that it shall
be sent into the burette. The combustion is effected by causing the
mixture of gas to pass from the burette into the tube, B, through the
tube, v, heated to redness, into which there passes a palladium wire. Water is allowed to flow through the point of the tube, B, while from
the flask, F, it enters through the bottom into the burette, so as to
drive out the gas. The water is allowed to rise into the burette as far
as the cock, and the cocks, _b_ and _b1_, are afterward closed. BUeNTE'S GAS BURETTE]

By a contrary operation, the gas is made to pass from B into the
burette. It is then allowed to cool, and, after the pressure has been
established again, the contraction is measured. If the gas burned is
hydrogen, the contraction multiplied by two-thirds gives the original
volume of the hydrogen gas burned. If the gas burned is oxide of carbon,
there forms an equal volume of carbonic acid, and the contraction is the
half of CO. Thus, to analyze CO, a portion of the liquid is removed from
the burette, then caustic potash is allowed to enter, and the process
goes on as explained above. The total contraction resulting from combustion and absorption,
multiplied by two-thirds, gives the volume of the oxide of carbon. The hydrogen and oxide carbon may thus be quantitatively analyzed
together or separately.--_Revue Industrielle_. *       *       *       *       *




THE "UNIVERSAL" GAS ENGINE. The accompanying engravings illustrate a new and very simple form of gas
engine, the invention of J. A. Ewins and H. Newman, and made by Mr. T.
B. Barker, of Scholefield-street, Bloomsbury, Birmingham. It is known as
the "Universal" engine, and is at present constructed in sizes varying
from one-eighth horse-power--one man power--to one horse-power, though
larger sizes are being made. The essentially new feature of the engine
is, says the _Engineer_, the simple rotary ignition valve consisting of
a ratchet plate or flat disk with a number of small radial slots which
successively pass a small slot in the end of the cylinder, and through
which the flame is drawn to ignite the charge. 4
is a sectional view of the chamber in which the gas and air are mixed,
with the valves appertaining thereto; Fig. 5 is a detail view of the
ratchet plate, with pawl and levers and valve gear shaft; Fig. 6 is
a sectional view of a pump employed in some cases to circulate water
through the jacket; Fig. 7 is a sectional view of arrangement for
lighting, and ratchet plate, j, with central spindle and igniting
apertures, and the spiral spring, k, and fly nut, showing the attachment
to the end of the working cylinder, f1; b5, b5, bevel wheels driving
the valve gear shaft; e, the valve gear driving shaft; e2, eccentric to
drive pump; e cubed, eccentric or cam to drive exhaust valve; e4, crank to
drive ratchet plate; e5, connecting rod to ratchet pawl; f, cylinder
jacket; f1, internal or working cylinder; f2, back cylinder cover; g,
igniting chamber; h, mixing chamber; h1, flap valve; h2, gas inlet
valve, the motion of which is regulated by a governor; h3, gas inlet
valve seat; h4, cover, also forming stop for gas inlet valve; h5, gas
inlet pipe; h6, an inlet valve; h8, cover, also forming stop for air
inlet valve; h9, inlet pipe for air with grating; i, exhaust chamber;
i2, exhaust valve spindle; i7, exhaust pipe; j6, lighting aperture
through cylinder end; l, igniting gas jet; m, regulating and stop valve
for gas. [Illustration: IMPROVED GAS ENGINE]

The engine, it will be seen, is single-acting, and no compression of the
explosive charge is employed. An explosive mixture of combustible gas
and air is drawn through the valves, h2 and h6, and exploded behind
the piston once in a revolution; but by a duplication of the valve and
igniting apparatus, placed also at the front end of the cylinder, the
engine may be constructed double-acting. At the proper time, when the
piston has proceeded far enough to draw in through the mixing chamber,
h, into the igniting chamber, g, the requisite amount of gas and air,
the ratchet plate, j, is pushed into such a position by the pawl, j3,
that the flame from the igniting jet, l, passes through one of the slots
or holes, j1, and explodes the charge when opposite j6, which is the
only aperture in the end of the working cylinder (see Fig. 2), thus driving the piston on to the end of its forward stroke. 9, though not exactly of the form shown, is kept
open during the whole of this return stroke by means of the eccentric,
e3, on the shaft working the ratchet, and thus allowing the products of
combustion to escape through the exhaust pipe, i7, in the direction of
the arrow. Between the ratchet disk and the igniting flame a small plate
not shown is affixed to the pipe, its edge being just above the burner
top. The flame is thus not blown out by the inrushing air when the slots
in ratchet plate and valve face are opposite. This ratchet plate or
ignition valve, the most important in any engine, has so very small a
range of motion per revolution of the engine that it cannot get out of
order, and it appears to require no lubrication or attention whatever. The engines are working very successfully, and their simplicity enables
them to be made at low cost. They cost for gas from 1/2d. *       *       *       *       *




GAS FURNACE FOR BAKING REFRACTORY PRODUCTS. In order that small establishments may put to profit the advantages
derived from the use of annular furnaces heated with gas, smaller
dimensions have been given the baking chambers of such furnaces. The
accompanying figure gives a section of a furnace of this kind, set into
the ground, and the height of whose baking chamber is only one and a
half meters. The chamber is not vaulted, but is covered by slabs of
refractory clay, D, that may be displaced by the aid of a small car
running on a movable track. This car is drawn over the compartment that
is to be emptied, and the slab or cover, D, is taken off and carried
over the newly filled compartment and deposited thereon. The gas passes from the channel through the pipe, a, into the vertical
conduits, b, and is afterward disengaged through the tuyeres into the
chamber. In order that the gas may be equally applied for preliminary
heating or smoking, a small smoking furnace, S, has been added to
the apparatus. The upper part of this consists of a wide cylinder
of refractory clay, in the center of whose cover there is placed an
internal tube of refractory clay, which communicates with the channel,
G, through a pipe, d. This latter leads the gas into the tube, t, of the
smoking furnace, which is perforated with a large number of small holes. The air requisite for combustion enters through the apertures, o, in the
cover of the furnace, and brings about in the latter a high temperature. The very hot gases descend into the lower iron portion of this small
furnace and pass through a tube, e, into the smoking chamber by the aid
of vertical conduits, b', which serve at the same time as gas tuyeres
for the extremity of the furnace that is exposed to the fire. [Illustration: GAS FURNACE FOR BAKING REFRACTORY PRODUCTS.] In the lower part of the smoking furnace, which is made of boiler plate
and can be put in communication with the tube, e, there are large
apertures that may be wholly or partially closed by means of registers
so as to carry to the hot gas derived from combustion any quantity
whatever of cold and dry air, and thus cause a variation at will of the
temperature of the gases which are disengaged from the tube, e.

The use of these smoking apparatus heated by gas does away also with the
inconveniences of the ordinary system, in which the products are soiled
by cinders or dust, and which render the gradual heating of objects to
be baked difficult. At the beginning, there is allowed to enter the
lower part of the small furnace, S, through the apertures, a very
considerable quantity of cold air, so as to lower the temperature of the
smoke gas that escapes from the tube, e, to 30 or 50 degrees. Afterward,
these secondary air entrances are gradually closed so as to increase the
temperature of the gases at will. *       *       *       *       *




THE EFFICIENCY OF FANS. Air, like every other gas or combination of gases, possesses weight;
some persons who have been taught that the air exerts a pressure of 14.7
lb. per square inch, cannot, however, be got to realize the fact that a
cubit foot of air at the same pressure and at a temperature of 62 deg. weighs the thirteenth part of a pound, or over one ounce; 13.141 cubic
feet of air weigh one pound. In round numbers 30,000 cubic feet of air
weigh one ton; this is a useful figure to remember, and it is easily
carried in the mind. A hall 61 feet long, 30 feet wide, and 17 feet high
will contain one ton of air. 1]

The work to be done by a fan consists in putting a weight--that of the
air--in motion. The resistances incurred are due to the inertia of the
air and various frictional influences; the nature and amount of these
last vary with the construction of the fan. As the air enters at the
center of the fan and escapes at the circumference, it will be seen that
its motion is changed while in the fan through a right angle. It may
also be taken for granted that within certain limits the air has no
motion in a radial direction when it first comes in contact with a fan
blade. It is well understood that, unless power is to be wasted, motion
should be gradually imparted to any body to be moved. Consequently, the
shape of the blades ought to be such as will impart motion at first
slowly and afterward in a rapidly increasing ratio to the air. It is
also clear that the change of motion should be effected as gradually as
possible. 1 shows how a fan should not be constructed; Fig. 2 will
serve to give an idea of how it should be made. 1 it will be seen that the air, as indicated by the bent arrows,
is violently deflected on entering the fan. 2 it will be seen
that it follows gentle curves, and so is put gradually in motion. The
curved form of the blades shown in Fig. 2 does not appear to add much to
the efficiency of a fan; but it adds something and keeps down noise. The
idea is that the fan blades when of this form push the air radially from
the center to the circumference. The fact is, however, that the air
flies outward under the influence of centrifugal force, and always tends
to move at a tangent to the fan blades, as in Fig. 3, where the circle
is the path of the tips of the fan blades, and the arrow is a tangent to
that path; and to impart this notion a radial blade, as at C, is perhaps
as good as any other, as far as efficiency is concerned. Concerning the
shape to be imparted to the blades, looked at back or front, opinions
widely differ; but it is certain that if a fan is to be silent the
blades must be narrower at the tips than at the center. Various forms
are adopted by different makers, the straight side and the curved sides,
as shown in Fig. The proportions as regards
length to breadth are also varied continually. In fact, no two makers of
fans use the same shapes. 3]

As the work done by a fan consists in imparting motion at a stated
velocity to a given weight of air, it is very easy to calculate the
power which must be expended to do a certain amount of work. The
velocity at which the air leaves the fan cannot be greater than that of
the fan tips. In a good fan it may be about two-thirds of that speed. The resistance to be overcome will be found by multiplying the area of
the fan blades by the pressure of the air and by the velocity of the
center of effort, which must be determined for every fan according to
the shape of its blades. The velocity imparted to the air by the fan
will be just the same as though the air fell in a mass from a given
height. This height can be found by the formula h = v squared / 64; that is to
say, if the velocity be multiplied by itself and divided by 64 we have
the height. Thus, let the velocity be 88 per second, then 88 x 88 =
7,744, and 7,744 / 64 = 121. A stone or other body falling from a height
of 121 feet would have a velocity of 88 per second at the earth. The
pressure against the fan blades will be equal to that of a column of air
of the height due to the velocity, or, in this case, 121 feet. We
have seen that in round numbers 13 cubic feet of air weigh one pound,
consequently a column of air one square foot in section and 121 feet
high, will weigh as many pounds as 13 will go times into 121. Now, 121
/ 13 = 9.3, and this will be the resistance in pounds per _square foot_
overcome by the fan. Let the aggregate area of all the blades be 2
square feet, and the velocity of the center of effort 90 feet per
second, then the power expended will bve (90 x 60 x 2 x 9.3) / 33,000
= 3.04 horse power. The quantity of air delivered ought to be equal in
volume to that of a column with a sectional area equal that of one fan
blade moving at 88 feet per second, or a mile a minute. The blade having
an area of 1 square foot, the delivery ought to be 5,280 feet per
minute, weighing 5,280 / 13 = 406.1 lb. In practice we need hardly say
that such an efficiency is never attained. 4]

The number of recorded experiments with fans is very small, and a great
deal of ignorance exists as to their true efficiency. Buckle is one
of the very few authorities on the subject. He gives the accompanying
table of proportions as the best for pressures of from 3 to 6 ounces per
square inch:

--------------------------------------------------------------
                  |         Vanes. | Diameter of inlet
Diameter of fans. |
--------------------------------------------------------------
     ft. 3  0        |   0   9    |  0   9    |        1   6
      3  6        |   0  101/2   |  0  101/2   |        1   9
      4  0        |   1   0    |  1   0    |        2   0
      4  6        |   1   11/2   |  1   11/2   |        2   3
      5  0        |   1   3    |  1   3    |        2   6
      6  0        |   1   6    |  1   6    |        3   0
                  |            |           |
--------------------------------------------------------------

For higher pressures the blades should be longer and narrower, and
the inlet openings smaller. The case is to be made in the form of an
arithmetical spiral widening, the space between the case and the blades
radially from the origin to the opening for discharge, and the upper
edge of the opening should be level with the lower side of the sweep of
the fan blade, somewhat as shown in Fig. 5]

A considerable number of patents has been taken out for improvements
in the construction of fans, but they all, or nearly all, relate to
modifications in the form of the case and of the blades. So far,
however, as is known, it appears that, while these things do exert a
marked influence on the noise made by a fan, and modify in some degree
the efficiency of the machine, that this last depends very much more on
the proportions adopted than on the shapes--so long as easy curves
are used and sharp angles avoided. In the case of fans running at low
speeds, it matters very little whether the curves are present or not;
but at high speeds the case is different.--_The Engineer_. *       *       *       *       *




MACHINE FOR COMPRESSING COAL REFUSE INTO FUEL. The problem as to how the refuse of coal shall be utilized has been
solved in the manufacture from it of an agglomerated artificial
fuel, which is coming more and more into general use on railways and
steamboats, in the industries, and even in domestic heating. The qualities that a good agglomerating machine should present are as
follows:

1. Very great simplicity, inasmuch as it is called upon to operate in
an atmosphere charged with coal dust, pitch, and steam; and, under such
conditions, it is important that it may be easily got at for cleaning,
and that the changing of its parts (which wear rapidly) may be effected
without, so to speak, interrupting its running. The compression must be powerful, and, that the product may be
homogeneous, must operate progressively and not by shocks. It must
especially act as much as possible upon the entire surface of the
conglomerate, and this is something that most machines fail to do. The removal from the mould must be effected easily, and not depend
upon a play of pistons or springs, which soon become foul, and the
operation of which is very irregular. The operations embraced in the manufacture of this kind of fuel are as
follows:

The refuse is sifted in order to separate the dust from the grains of
coal. The grains are classed
into two sizes, after removing the nut size, which is sold separately. The washed grains are
either drained or dried by a hydro-extractor in order to free them from
the greater part of the water, the presence of this being an obstacle to
their perfect agglomeration. The water, however, should not be entirely
extracted because the combustibles being poor conductors of heat, a
certain amount of dampness must be preserved to obtain an equal division
of heat in the paste when the mixture is warmed. After being dried the grains are mixed with the coal dust, and broken
coal pitch is added in the proportion of eight to ten per cent. The mixture is then thrown into a crushing machine, where it is
reduced to powder and intimately mixed. It then passes into a pug-mill
into which superheated steam is admitted, and by this means is converted
into a plastic paste. This paste is then led into an agitator for the
double purpose of freeing it from the steam that it contains, and of
distributing it in the moulds of the compressing machine. [Illustration: IMPROVED MACHINE FOR COMPRESSING REFUSE COAL INTO FUEL.] Bilan's machine, shown in the accompanying cut, is designed for
manufacturing spherical conglomerates for domestic purposes. It consists
of a cast iron frame supporting four vertical moulding wheels placed at
right angles to each other and tangent to the line of the centers. These
wheels carry on their periphery cavities that have the form of a quarter
of a sphere. They thus form at the point of contact a complete sphere
in which the material is inclosed. The paste is thrown by shovel, or
emptied by buckets and chain, into the hopper fixed at the upper part
of the frame. From here it is taken up by two helices, mounted on a
vertical shaft traversing the hopper, and forced toward the point where
the four moulding wheels meet. The driving pulley of the machine is
keyed upon a horizontal shaft which is provided with two endless screws
that actuate two gear-wheels, and these latter set in motion the four
moulding wheels by means of beveled pinions. The four moulding wheels
being accurately adjusted so that their cavities meet each other at
every revolution, carry along the paste furnished them by the hopper,
compress it powerfully on the four quarters, and, separating by a
further revolution, allow the finished ball to drop out. The external crown of the wheels carrying the moulds consists of four
segments, which may be taken apart at will to be replaced by others when
worn. This machine produces about 40 tons per day of this globular artificial
fuel.--_Annales Industrielles_. *       *       *       *       *




HANK SIZING AND WRINGING MACHINE. We give a view of a hank sizing machine by Messrs. Heywood & Spencer,
of Radcliffe, near Manchester. The machine is also suitable for fancy
dyeing. It is well known, says the _Textile Manufacturer_, that when
hanks are wrung by hand, not only is the labor very severe, but in
dyeing it is scarcely possible to obtain even colors, and, furthermore,
the production is limited by the capabilities of the man. The machine
we illustrate is intended to perform the heavy part of the work with
greater expedition and with more certainty than could be relied upon
with hand labor. The illustration represents the machine that we
inspected. It consists
of two vats, between which is placed the gearing for driving the hooks. The large wheel in this gear, although it always runs in one direction,
contains internal segments, which fall into gear alternately with
pinions on the shanks of the hooks. The motion is a simple one, and it
appeared to us to be perfectly reliable, and not liable to get out of
order. The action is as follows: The attendant lifts the hank out of the
vat and places it on the hooks. The hook connected to the gearing then
commences to turn; it puts in two, two and a half, three, or more twists
into the hank and remains stationary for a few seconds to allow an
interval for the sizer to "wipe off" the excess of size, that is, to
run his hand along the twisted hank. This done, the hook commences to
revolve the reverse way, until the twists are taken out of the hank. It is then removed, either by lifting off by hand or by the apparatus
shown, attached to the right hand side. This arrangement consists of a
lattice, carrying two arms that, at the proper moment, lift the hank off
the hooks on to the lattice proper, by which it is carried away, and
dropped upon a barrow to be taken to the drying stove. In sizing, a
double operation is customary; the first is called running, and the
second, finishing. In the machine shown, running is carried on one side
simultaneously with finishing in the other, or, if required, running
may be carried on on both sides. If desired, the lifting off motion is
attached to both running and finishing sides, and also the roller partly
seen on the left hand for running the hanks through the size. The
machine we saw was doing about 600 bundles per day at running and at
finishing, but the makers claim the production with a double machine to
be at the rate of about 36 10 lb. bundles per hour (at finishing), wrung
in 11/2 lb. wringers (or I1/2 lb. of yarn at a time), or at running at the
rate of 45 bundles in 2 lb. The distance between the hooks
is easily adjusted to the length or size of hanks, and altogether the
machine seems one that is worth the attention of the trade. [Illustration: IMPROVED HANK SIZING MACHINE.] *       *       *       *       *




IMPROVED COKE BREAKER. The working parts of the breaker now in use by the South Metropolitan
Gas Company consist essentially of a drum provided with cutting edges
projecting from it, which break up the coke against a fixed grid. The
drum is cast in rings, to facilitate repairs when necessary, and the
capacity of the machine can therefore be increased or diminished by
varying the number of these rings. The degree of fineness of the coke
when broken is determined by the regulated distance of the grid from the
drum. Thus there is only one revolving member, no toothed gearing being
required. Consequently the machine works with little power; the one at
the Old Kent Road, which is of the full size for large works, being
actually driven by a one horse power "Otto" gas-engine. Under these
conditions, at a recent trial, two tons of coke were broken in half an
hour, and the material delivered screened into the three classes of
coke, clean breeze (worth as much as the larger coke), and dust, which
at these works is used to mix with lime in the purifiers. The special
advantage of the machine, besides the low power required to drive it and
its simple action, lies in the small quantity of waste. On the occasion
of the trial in question, the dust obtained from two tons of coke
measured only 31/2 bushels, or just over a half hundredweight per ton. The following statement, prepared from the actual working of the first
machine constructed, shows the practical results of its use. It should
be premised that the machine is assumed to be regularly employed and
driven by the full power for which it is designed, when it will easily
break 8 tons of coke per hour, or 80 tons per working day:

    500 feet of gas consumed by a 2 horse power
      gas-engine, at cost price of gas delivered   s. d.
      in holder. 0  9
    Oil and cotton waste. 0  6
    Two men supplying machine with large
      coke, and shoveling up broken, at 4s. 9  0
    Interest and wear and tear (say). 0  3
                                                  -----
         Total per day. 10  6
                                                  -----
    For 80 tons per day, broken at the rate
      of. 0  11/2
    Add for loss by dust and waste, 1 cwt.,
      with price of coke at (say) 13s. 0  8
                                                  -----
        Cost of breaking, per ton. 0  91/2

As coke, when broken, will usually fetch from 2s. per ton
more than large, the result of using these machines is a net gain of
from 1s. It is not so much the actual
gain, however, that operates in favor of providing a supply of broken
coke, as the certainty that by so doing a market is obtained that would
not otherwise be available. [Illustration: IMPROVED COKE BREAKER.] It will not be overstating the case to say that this coke breaker is by
far the simplest, strongest, and most economical appliance of its kind
now manufactured. That it does its work well is proved by experience;
and the advantages of its construction are immediately apparent upon
comparison of its simple drum and single spindle with the flying hammers
or rocking jaws, or double drums with toothed gearing which characterize
some other patterns of the same class of plant. It should be remarked,
as already indicated, lest exception should be taken to the size of the
machine chosen here for illustration, that it can be made of any size
down to hand power. On the whole, however, as a few tons of broken coke
might be required at short notice even in a moderate sized works, it
would scarcely be advisable to depend upon too small a machine; since
the regular supply of the fuel thus improved may be trusted in a short
time to increase the demand. [Illustration: IMPROVED COKE BREAKER.] *       *       *       *       *




IMPROVEMENT IN PRINTING MACHINERY. This is the design of Alfred Godfrey, of Clapton. According to this
improvement, as represented at Figs. 1 and 2, a rack, A, is employed
vibrating on the pivot a, and a pinion, a1, so arranged that instead of
the pinion moving on a universal joint, or the rack moving in a parallel
line from side to side of the pinion at the time the motion of the table
is reversed, there is employed, for example, the radial arm, a2, mounted
on the shaft, a3, supporting the driving wheel, a4. The opposite or
vibrating end of the radial arm, a2, supports in suitable bearings the
pinion, a1, and wheel, a5, driving the rack through the medium of the
driving wheel, a4, the effect of which is that through the mechanical
action of the vibrating arm, a2, and pinion, a1 in conjunction with the
vibrating movement of the rack, A, an easy, uniform, and silent motion
is transmitted to the rack and table. [Illustration: IMPROVEMENTS IN PRINTING MACHINERY. 1]

[Illustration: IMPROVEMENTS IN PRINTING MACHINERY. *       *       *       *       *




A CHARACTERISTIC MINING "RUSH." --THE PROSPECTIVE MINING CENTER OF
SOUTHERN NEW MEXICO. A correspondent of the _Tribune_ describes at length the mining camps
about Lake Valley, New Mexico, hitherto thought likely to be the central
camp of that region, and then graphically tells the story of the recent
"rush" to the Perche district. Within a month of the first strike of
silver ore the country was swarming with prospectors, and a thousand or
more prospects had been located. The Perche district is on the eastern flanks of the Mimbres Mountains,
a range which is a part of the Rocky Mountain range, and runs north and
south generally parallel with the Rio Grande, from which it lies about
forty miles to the westward. The northern half of these mountains is
known as the Black Range, and was the center of considerable mining
excitement a year and a half ago. It is there that the Ivanhoe is
located, of which Colonel Gillette was manager, and in which Robert
Ingersoll and Senator Plumb, of Kansas, were interested, much to the
disadvantage of the former. A new company has been organized, however,
with Colonel Ingersoll as president, and the reopening of work on the
Ivanhoe will probably prove a stimulus to the whole Black Range. From
this region the Perche district is from forty to sixty miles south. It
is about twenty-five miles northwest of Lake Valley, and ten miles west
of Hillsboro, a promising little mining town, with some mills and about
300 people. The Perche River has three forks coming down from the
mountains and uniting at Hillsboro, and it is in the region between
these forks that the recent strikes have been made. On August 15 "Jack" Shedd, the original discoverer of the Robinson mine
in Colorado, was prospecting on the south branch of the north fork of
the Perche River, when he made the first great strike in the district. On the summit of a heavily timbered ridge he found some small pieces of
native silver, and then a lump of ore containing very pure silver in the
form of sulphides, weighing 150 pounds, and afterward proved to be worth
on the average $11 a pound. All this was mere float, simply lying on the
surface of the ground. Afterward another block was found, weighing 87
pounds, of horn silver, with specimens nearly 75 per cent. The
strike was kept a secret for a few days. Said a mining man: "I went up
to help bring the big lump down. We took it by a camp of prospectors who
were lying about entirely ignorant of any find. When they saw it they
instantly saddled their horses, galloped off, and I believe they
prospected all night." A like excitement was created when the news of
this and one or two similar finds reached Lake Valley. Next morning
every waiter was gone from the little hotel, and a dozen men had left
the Sierra mines, to try their fortunes at prospecting. As the news spread men poured into the Perche district from no one knows
where, some armed with only a piece of salt pork, a little meal, and a
prospecting pick; some mounted on mules, others on foot; old men and men
half-crippled were among the number, but all bitten by the monomania
which possesses every prospector. Now there are probably 2,000 men in
the Perche district, and the number of prospects located must far exceed
1,000. Three miners from there with whom I was talking recently owned
forty-seven mines among them, and while one acknowledged that hardly one
prospect in a hundred turns out a prize, the other millionaire in embryo
remarked that he wouldn't take $50,000 for one of his mines. So it goes,
and the victims of the mining fever here seem as deaf to reason as the
buyers of mining stock in New York. Fuel was added to the flame by
the report that Shedd had sold his location, named the Solitaire, to
ex-Governor Tabor and Mr. Wurtzbach on August 25 for $100,000. I met Governor Tabor's representative, who came down recently
to examine the properties, and learned that the Governor had not up to
that date bought the mine. He undoubtedly bonded it, however, and his
representative's opinion of the properties seemed highly favorable. The Solitaire showed what appeared to be a contact vein, with walls of
porphyry and limestone in a ledge thirty feet wide in places, containing
a high assay of horned silver. The vein was composed of quartz, bearing
sulphides, with horn silver plainly visible, giving an average assay of
from $350 to $500. These were the results shown
simply by surface explorations, which were certainly exceedingly
promising. Recently it has been stated that a little development shows
the vein to be only a blind lead, but the statement lacks confirmation. In any case the effect of so sensational a discovery is the same in
creating an intense excitement and attracting swarms of prospectors. But the Perche district does not rest on the Solitaire, for there has
been abundance of mineral wealth discovered throughout its extent. Four
miles south of this prospect, on the middle fork of the Perche, is an
actual mine--the Bullion--which was purchased by four or five Western
mining men for $10,000, and yielded $11,000 in twenty days. The ore
contains horn and native silver. On the same fork are the Iron King and
Andy Johnson, both recently discovered and promising properties, and
there is a valuable mine now in litigation on the south fork of the
Perche, with scores of prospects over the entire district. Now that one
or two sensational strikes have attracted attention, and capital is
developing paying mines, the future of the Perche District seems
assured. *       *       *       *       *




THE SOY BEAN. The _British Medical Journal_ says that Prof. E. Kinch, writing in the
_Agricultural Students' Gazette_, says that the Soy bean approaches more
nearly to animal food than any other known vegetable production, being
singularly rich in fat and in albuminoids. It is largely used as
an article of food in China and Japan. Efforts have been made to
acclimatize it in various parts of the continent of Europe, and fair
success has been achieved in Italy and France; many foods are made from
it and its straw is a useful fodder. *       *       *       *       *




ON A NEW ARC ELECTRIC LAMP. [Footnote: Paper read at the British Association, Southampton. Revised
by the Author.--_Nature_.] Electric lamps on the arc principle are almost as numerous as the trees
in the forest, and it is somewhat fresh to come upon something that is
novel. In these lamps the carbons are consumed as the current flows, and
it is the variation in their consumption which occasions the flickering
and irregularity of the light that is so irritating to the eyes. Special
mechanical contrivances or regulators have to be used to compensate for
this destruction of the carbons, as in the Siemens and Brush type, or
else refractory materials have to be combined with the carbons, as in
the Jablochkoff candle and in the lamp Soleil. The steadiness of the
light depends upon the regularity with which the carbons are moved
toward each other as they are consumed, so as to maintain the electric
resistance between them a constant quantity. Each lamp must have a
certain elasticity of regulation of its own, to prevent irregularities
from the variable material of carbon used, and from variations in the
current itself and in the machinery. In all electric lamps, except the Brockie, the regulator is in the lamp
itself. In the Brockie system the regulation is automatic, and is made
at certain rapid intervals by the motor engine. This causes a periodic
blinking that is detrimental to this lamp for internal illumination. M. Abdank, the inventor of the system which I have the pleasure of
bringing before the Section, separates his regulator from his lamp. The regulator may be fixed anywhere, within easy inspection and
manipulation, and away from any disturbing influence in the lamp. The
lamp can be fixed in any inaccessible place. --The bottom or negative carbon is fixed,
but the top or positive carbon is movable, in a vertical line. It is
screwed at the point, C, to a brass rod, T (Fig. 2), which moves freely
inside the tubular iron core of an electromagnet, K. This rod is
clutched and lifted by the soft iron armature, A B, when a current
passes through the coil, M M. The mass of the iron in the armature is
distributed so that the greater portion is at one end, B, much nearer
the pole than the other end. Hence this portion is attracted first, the
armature assumes an inclined position, maintained by a brass button, t,
which prevents any adhesion between the armature and the core of the
electromagnet. The electric connection between the carbon and the coil
of the electromagnet is maintained by the flexible wire, S. 1), is fixed to a long and heavy rack, C,
which falls by its own weight and by the weight of the electromagnet and
the carbon fixed to it. The length of the rack is equal to the length of
the two carbons. The fall of the rack is controlled by a friction break,
B (Fig. 3), which acts upon the last of a train of three wheels put
in motion by the above weight. The break, B, is fixed at one end of
a lever, B A, the other end carrying a soft iron armature, F,
easily adjusted by three screws. This armature is attracted by the
electromagnet, E E (whose resistance is 1,200 ohms), whenever a current
circulates through it. The length of the play is regulated by the screw,
V. The spring, L, applies tension to the break. _The Regulator_.--This consists of a balance and a cut-off. 4 and 5) is made with two solenoids. S and S',
whose relative resistances is adjustable. S conveys the main current,
and is wound with thick wire having practically no resistance, and S'
is traversed by a shunt current, and is wound with fine wire having a
resistance of 600 ohms. In the axes of these two coils a small and light
iron tube (2 mm. length) freely moves in a vertical
line between two guides. When magnetized it has one pole in the middle
and the other at each end. The upward motion is controlled by the
spring, N T. The spring rests upon the screw, H, with which it makes
contact by platinum electrodes. This contact is broken whenever the
little iron rod strikes the spring, N T.

The positive lead from the dynamo is attached to the terminal, B, then
passes through the coil, S, to the terminal, B', whence it proceeds to
the lamp. The negative lead is attached to terminal, A, passing directly
to the other terminal, A', and thence to the lamp. 4]

The shunt which passes through the fine coil, S', commences at the
point, P. The other end is fixed to the screw, H, whence it has two
paths, the one offering no resistance through the spring, T N, to the
upper negative terminal, A'; the other through the terminal, J, to the
electromagnet of the break, M, and thence to the negative terminal of
the lamp, L'. _The Cut-off_.--The last part of the apparatus (Fig. 4) to be described
is the cut-off, which is used when there are several lamps in series. It
is brought into play by the switch, C D, which can be placed at E or D.
When it is at E, the negative terminal, A, is in communication with
the positive terminal, B, through the resistance, R, which equals the
resistance of the lamp, which is, therefore, out of circuit. When it is
at D the cut-off acts automatically to do the same thing when required. This is done by a solenoid, V, which has two coils, the one of thick
wire offering no resistance, and the other of 2,000 ohms resistance. The
fine wire connects the terminals, A' and B. The solenoid has a movable
soft iron core suspended by the spring, U. It has a cross-piece of iron
which can dip into two mercury cups, G and K, when the core is sucked
into the solenoid. When this is the case, which happens when any
accident occurs to the lamp, the terminal, A, is placed in connection
with the terminal, B, through the thick wire of V and the resistance, R,
in the same way as it was done by the switch, C D. _Electrical Arrangement_.--The mode in which several lamps are connected
up in series is shown by Fig. The + lead is
connected to B1 of the balance it then passes to the lamp, L, returning
to the balance, and then proceeds to each other lamp, returning finally
to the negative pole of the machine. When the current enters the balance
it passes through the coil, S, magnetizing the iron core and drawing
it downward (Fig. It then passes to the lamp, L L', through the
carbons, then returns to the balance, and proceeds back to the negative
terminal of the machine. A small portion of the current is shunted off
at the point, P, passing through the coil, S', through the contact
spring, T N, to the terminal, A', and drawing the iron core in
opposition to S. The carbons are in contact, but in passing through
the lamp the current magnetizes the electromagnet, M (Fig. 2), which
attracts the armature, A B, that bites and lifts up the rod, T, with the
upper carbon, a definite and fixed distance that is easily regulated
by the screws, Y Y. The arc then is formed, and will continue to burn
steadily as long as the current remains constant. But the moment the
current falls, due to the increased resistance of the arc, a greater
proportion passes through the shunt, S' (Fig. 4), increasing its
magnetic moment on the iron core, while that of S is diminishing. The
result is that a moment arrives when equilibrium is destroyed, the iron
rod strikes smartly and sharply upon the spring, N T. Contact between T
and H is broken, and the current passes through the electromagnet of the
break in the lamp. The break is released for an instant, the carbons
approach each other. But the same rupture of contact introduces in the
shunt a new resistance of considerable magnitude (viz., 1,200 ohms),
that of the electromagnets of the break. Then the strength of the shunt
current diminishes considerably, and the solenoid, S, recovers briskly
its drawing power upon the rod, and contact is restored. The carbons
approach during these periods only about 0.01 to 0.02 millimeter. If this is not sufficient to restore equilibrium it is repeated
continually, until equilibrium is obtained. The result is that the
carbon is continually falling by a motion invisible to the eye, but
sufficient to provide for the consumption of the carbons. 6]

The contact between N T and H is never completely broken, the sparks are
very feeble, and the contacts do not oxidize. The resistances inserted
are so considerable that heating cannot occur, while the portion of the
current abstracted for the control is so small that it may be neglected. The balance acts precisely like the key of a Morse machine, and the
break precisely like the sounder-receiver so well known in telegraphy. It emits the same kind of sounds, and acts automatically like a skilled
and faithful telegraphist. This regulation, by very small and short successive steps, offers
several advantages: (1) it is imperceptible to the eye; (2) it does not
affect the main current; (3) any sudden instantaneous variation of the
main current does not allow a too near approach of the carbon points. Let, now, an accident occur; for instance, a carbon is broken. At once
the automatic cut-off acts, the current passes through the resistance,
R, instead of passing through the lamp. The current through the fine
coil is suddenly increased, the rod is drawn in, contact is made at G
and K, and the current is sent through the coil, R. As soon as contact
is again made by the carbons, the current in the coil, S, is increased,
that of the thick wire in V diminished, and the antagonistic spring,
U, breaks the contact at G and K. The rupture of the light is almost
invisible, because the relighting is so brisk and sharp. I have seen this lamp in action, and its constant steadiness leaves
nothing to be desired. *       *       *       *       *




APPARATUS FOR OBTAINING PURE WATER FOR PHOTOGRAPHIC USE. Our readers are well aware that water as found naturally is never
absolutely free from dissolved impurities; and in ordinary cases it
contains solid impurities derived both from the inorganic and organic
kingdoms, together with gaseous substances; these latter being generally
derived from the atmosphere. By far the purest water which occurs in nature is rain-water, and if
this be collected in a secluded district, and after the air has been
well washed by previous rain, its purity is remarkable; the extraneous
matter consisting of little else than a trace of carbonic acid and other
gases dissolved from the air. In fact, such water is far purer than any
distilled water to be obtained in commerce. The case is very different
when the rain-water is collected in a town or densely populated
district, more especially if the water has been allowed to flow over
dirty roofs. The black and foully-smelling liquid popularly known as
soft water is so rich in carbonaceous and organic constituents as to be
of very limited use to the photographer; but by taking the precaution of
fitting up a simple automatic shunt for diverting the stream until the
roofs have been thoroughly washed, it becomes possible to insure a good
supply of clean and serviceable soft water, even in London. Several
forms of shunt have been devised, some of these being so complex as
to offer every prospect of speedy disorganization; but a simple and
efficient apparatus is figured in _Engineering_ by a correspondent who
signs himself "Millwright," and as we have thoroughly proved the value
of an apparatus which is practically identical, we reproduce the
substance of his communication. A gentleman of Newcastle, a retired banker, having tried various filters
to purify the rain-water collected on the roof of his house, at length
had the idea to allow no water to run into the cistern until the roof
had been well washed. After first putting up a hard-worked valve, the
arrangement as sketched below has been hit upon. Now Newcastle is a very
smoky place, and yet my friend gets water as pure as gin, and almost
absolutely free from any smack of soot. [Illustration]

The sketch explains itself. The weight, W, and the angle of the lever,
L, are such, that when the valve, V, is once opened it goes full open. A
small hole in the can C, acts like a cataract, and brings matters to a
normal state very soon after the rain ceases. The proper action of the apparatus can only be insured by a careful
adjustment of the weight, W, the angle through which the valve opens,
and the magnitude of the vessel, C. It is an advantage to make
the vessel, C, somewhat broader in proportion to its height than
represented, and to provide it with a movable strainer placed about half
way down. This tends to protect the cataract hole, and any accumulation
of leaves and dirt can be removed once in six months or so. Clean soft
water is valuable to the photographer in very many cases. Iron developer
(wet plate) free from chlorides will ordinarily remain effective on the
plate much longer than when chlorides are present, and the pyrogallic
solution for dry-plate work will keep good for along time if made with
soft water, while the lime which is present in hard water causes the
pyrogallic acid to oxidize with considerable rapidity. Negatives that
have been developed with oxalate developer often become covered with a
very unsightly veil of calcium oxalate when rinsed with hard water, and
something of a similar character occasionally occurs in the case of
silver prints which are transferred directly from the exposure frame to
impure water. To the carbon printer clean rain-water is of considerable value, as he
can develop much more rapidly with soft water than with hard water;
or, what comes to the same thing, he can dissolve away his superfluous
gelatine at a lower temperature than would otherwise be necessary. The cleanest rain-water which can ordinarily be collected in a town is
not sufficiently pure to be used with advantage in the preparation of
the nitrate bath, it being advisable to use the purest distilled water
for this purpose; and in many cases it is well to carefully distill
water for the bath in a glass apparatus of the kind figured below. [Illustration]

A, thin glass flask serving as a retort. The tube, T, is fitted
air-tight to the flask by a cork, C.

B, receiver into which the tube, T, fits quite loosely. D, water vessel intended to keep the spiral of lamp wick, which is shown
as surrounding T, in a moist condition. This wick acts as a siphon, and
water is gradually drawn over into the lower receptacle, E.

L, spirit lamp, which may, in many cases, be advantageously replaced by
a Bunsen burner. A small metal still, provided with a tin condensing worm, is, however, a
more generally serviceable arrangement, and if ordinary precautions are
taken to make sure that the worm tube is clean, the resulting distilled
water will be nearly as pure as that distilled in glass vessels. Such a still as that figured below can be heated conveniently over an
ordinary kitchen fire, and should find a place among the appliances
of every photographer. Distilled water should always be used in the
preparation of emulsion, as the impurities of ordinary water may often
introduce disturbing conditions.--_Photographic News_. [Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *




BLACK PHOSPHORUS. The author refers to the customary view that black phosphorus is
merely a mixture of the ordinary phosphorus with traces of a metallic
phosphide, and contends that this explanation is not in all cases
admissible. A specimen of black or rather dark gray phosphorus, which
the author submitted to the Academy, became white if melted and remained
white if suddenly cooled, but if allowed to enter into a state of
superfusion it became again black on contact with either white or black
phosphorus. A portion of the black specimen being dissolved in carbon
disulphide there remained undissolved merely a trace of a very pale
yellow matter which seemed to be amorphous phosphorus.--_Comptes
Rendus_. *       *       *       *       *




COMPOSITION OF STEEP WATER. According to M. C. Leeuw, water in which malt has been steeped has the
following composition:

    Organic matter. 0.52    "
                           ----
    Total dry matter. 1.08    "
                           ----
    Nitrogen. 0.033    "

The mineral matter consists of--

    Potash. 0.193    "
    Phosphoric acid. 0.031    "
    Lime. 0.012    "
    Soda. 0.047    "
    Magnesia. 0.016    "
    Sulphuric acid. 0.007    "
    Oxide of iron. 0.212    "

       *       *       *       *       *




SCHREIBER'S APPARATUS FOR REVIVIFYING BONE-BLACK. We give opposite illustrations of Schreiber's apparatus for revivifying
bone-black or animal charcoal. The object of revivification is to render
the black fit to be used again after it has lost its decolorizing
properties through service--that is to say, to free its pores from the
absorbed salts and insoluble compounds that have formed therein
during the operation of sugar refining. There are two methods
employed--fermentation and washing. At present the tendency is to
abandon the former in order to proceed with as small a stock of black as
possible, and to adopt the method of washing with water and acid in a
rotary washer. 1 and 2 represent a plan and elevation of a bone-black room,
containing light filters, A, arranged in a circle around wells, B. These
latter have the form of a prism with trapezoidal base, whose small sides
end at the same point, d, and the large ones at the filter. The funnel,
E, of the washer, F, is placed in the space left by the small ends of
the wells, so that the black may be taken from these latter and thrown
directly into the washer. The washer is arranged so that the black may
flow out near the steam fitter, G, beneath the floor. The discharge of
this filter is toward the side of the elevator, H, which takes in the
wet black below, and carries it up and pours it into the drier situated
at the upper part of the furnace. 3 and 4, is
formed of two vertical wooden uprights, A, ten centimeters in thickness,
to which are fixed two round-iron bars the same as guides. The lift,
properly so-called, consists of an iron frame, C, provided at the four
angles with rollers, D, and supporting a swinging bucket, E, which, on
its arrival at the upper part of the furnace, allows the black to fall
to an inclined plane that leads it to the upper part of the drier. The
left is raised and lowered by means of a pitch-chain, F, fixed to the
middle of the frame, C, and passing over two pulleys, G, at the upper
part of the frame and descending to the mechanism that actuates it. This latter comprises a nut, I, acting directly on the chain; a toothed
wheel, K, and a pinion, J, gearing with the latter and keyed upon the
shaft of the pulleys, L and M. The diameter of the toothed wheel, K, is
0.295 of a meter, and it makes 53.4 revolutions per minute. The diameter
of the pinion is 0.197 of a meter, and it makes 80 revolutions per
minute. The pulleys, M and L, are 0.31 of a meter in diameter, and
make 80 revolutions per minute. Motion is transmitted to them by other
pulleys, N, keyed upon a shaft placed at the lower part, which receives
its motion from the engine of the establishment through the intermedium
of the pulley, O. The diameter of the latter is 0.385 of a meter, and
that of N is 0.58. 1.--ELEVATION OF BONE-BLACK REVIVIFYING PLANT
(SCHREIBER'S SYSTEM.) 3.--LATERAL VIEW OF ELEVATOR. 4.--FRONT VIEW OF ELEVATOR. 5.--CONTINUOUS FURNACE FOR REVIVIFYING BONE-BLACK.] The elevator is set in motion by the simple maneuver of the gearing
lever, P, and when this has been done all the other motions are effected
automatically. _The Animal Black Furnace_.--This consists of a masonry casing of
rectangular form, in which are arranged on each side of the same
fire-place two rows of cast-iron retorts, D, of undulating form, each
composed of three parts, set one within the other. These retorts, which
serve for the revivification of the black, are incased in superposed
blocks of refractory clay, P, Q, S, designed to regularize the
transmission of heat and to prevent burning. These pieces are kept in
their respective places by crosspieces, R. The space between the retorts
occupied by the fire-place, Y, is covered with a cylindrical dome, O, of
refractory tiles, forming a fire-chamber with the inner surface of the
blocks, P, Q, and S. The front of the surface consists of a cast-iron
plate, containing the doors to the fire-place and ash pan, and a larger
one to allow of entrance to the interior to make repairs. One of the principal disadvantages of furnaces for revivifying animal
charcoal has been that they possessed no automatic drier for drying the
black on its exit from the washer. It was for the purpose of remedying
this that Mr. Schreiber was led to invent the automatic system of drying
shown at the upper part of the furnace, and which is formed of two
pipes, B, of undulating form, like the retorts, with openings throughout
their length for the escape of steam. Between these pipes there is a
closed space into which enters the waste heat and products of combustion
from the furnace. These latter afterward escape through the chimney at
the upper part. In order that the black may be put in bags on issuing from the furnace,
it must be cooled as much as possible. For this purpose there are
arranged on each side of the furnace two pieces of cast iron tubes, F,
of rectangular section, forming a prolongation of the retorts and making
with them an angle of about 45 degrees. The extremities of these tubes
terminate in hollow rotary cylinders, G, which permit of regulating the
flow of the black into a car, J (Fig. From what precedes, it will be readily understood how a furnace is run
on this plan. The bone-black in the hopper, A, descends into the drier, B, enters the
retorts, D, and, after revivification, passes into the cooling pipes, F,
from whence it issues cold and ready to be bagged. A coke fire having
been built in the fire-place, Y, the flames spread throughout the fire
chamber, direct themselves toward the bottom, divide into two parts to
the right and left, and heat the back of the retorts in passing. Then
the two currents mount through the lateral flues, V, and unite so as to
form but one in the drier. Within the latter there are arranged plates
designed to break the current from the flames, and allow it to heat all
the inner parts of the pipes, while the apertures in the drier allow of
the escape of the steam. By turning one of the cylinders, G, so as to present its aperture
opposite that of the cooler, it instantly fills up with black. At this
moment the whole column, from top to bottom, is set in motion. The
bone-black, in passing through the undulations, is thrown alternately to
the right and left until it finally reaches the coolers. This operation
is repeated as many times as the cylinder is filled during the descent
of one whole column, that is to say, about forty times. With an apparatus of the dimensions here described, 120 hectoliters
of bone-black may be revivified in twenty four hours, with 360 to 400
kilogrammes of coke.--_Annales Industrielles_. *       *       *       *       *

[Continued from SUPPLEMENT, No. SOAP AND ITS MANUFACTURE, FROM A CONSUMER'S POINT OF VIEW. In our last article, under the above heading, the advantages to be
gained by the use of potash soap as compared with soda soap were pointed
out, and the reasons of this superiority, especially in the case of
washing wool or woolen fabrics, were pretty fully gone into. It was also
further explained why the potash soaps generally sold to the public were
unfit for general use, owing to their not being neutral--that is to say,
containing a considerable excess of free or unsaponified alkali, which
acts injuriously on the fiber of any textile material, and causes sore
hands if used for household or laundry purposes. It was shown that the
cause of this defect was owing to the old-fashioned method of making
potash or soft soap, by boiling with wood ashes or other impure form of
potash; but that a perfectly pure and neutral potash soap could readily
be made with pure caustic potash, which within the last few years has
become a commercial article, manufactured on a large scale; just in
the same manner as the powdered 98 per cent. caustic soda, which was
recommended in our previous articles on making hard soap without
boiling. The process of making pure neutral potash soap is very simple, and
almost identical with that for making hard soap with pure powdered
caustic soda. The following directions, if carefully and exactly
followed, will produce a first-class potash soap, suitable either for
the woolen manufacturer for washing his wool, and the cloth afterward
made from it, or for household and laundry purposes, for which uses it
will be found far superior to any soda soap, no matter how pure or well
made it may be. Dissolve twenty pounds of pure caustic potash in two gallons of water. Pure caustic potash is very soluble, and dissolves almost immediately,
heating the water. Let the lye thus made cool until warm to the
hand--say about 90 F. Melt eighty pounds of tallow or grease, which must
be free from salt, and let it cool until fairly hot to the hand--say
130 F.; or eighty pounds of any vegetable or animal oil may be taken
instead. Now pour the caustic potash lye into the melted tallow or oil,
stirring with a flat wooden stirrer about three inches broad, until both
are thoroughly mixed and smooth in appearance. This mixing may be done
in the boiler used to melt the tallow, or in a tub, or half an oil
barrel makes a good mixing vessel. Wrap the tub or barrel well up in
blankets or sheepskins, and put away for a week in some warm dry place,
during which the mixture slowly turns into soap, giving a produce of
about 120 pounds of excellent potash soap. If this soap is made with
tallow or grease it will be nearly as hard as soda soap. When made by
farmers or householders tallow or grease will generally be taken, as it
is the cheapest, and ready to hand on the spot. For manufacturers, or
for making laundry soap, nothing could be better than cotton seed oil. A
magnificent soap can be made with this article, lathering very freely. When made with oil it is better to remelt in a kettle the potash soap,
made according to the above directions, with half its weight of water,
using very little heat, stirring constantly, and removing the fire as
soon as the water is mixed with and taken up by the soap. A beautifully
bright soap is obtained in this way, and curiously the soap is actually
made much harder and stiffer by this addition of water than when it is
in a more concentrated state previously to the water being added. With reference to the caustic potash for making the soap, it can be
obtained in all sizes of drums, but small packages just sufficient for
a batch of soap are generally more economical than larger packages, as
pure caustic potash melts and deteriorates very quickly when exposed
to the air. The Greenbank Alkali Co., of St. Helens, seems to have
appreciated this, and put upon the market pure caustic potash in twenty
pound canisters, which are very convenient for potash soft soap making
by consumers for their own use. While on this subject of caustic potash, it cannot be too often repeated
that _caustic potash_ is a totally different article to _caustic soda_,
though just like it in appearance, and therefore often sold as such. One of the most barefaced instances of this is the so-called "crystal
potash," "ball potash," or "rock potash," of the lye packers, sold in
one pound packages, which absolutely, without exception, do not contain
a single grain of potash, but simply consist of caustic soda more or
less adulterated--as a rule very much "more" than "less!" It is much
to be regretted that this fraud on the public has been so extensively
practiced, as potash has been greatly discredited by this procedure. The subject of fleece scouring or washing the wool while growing on
the sheep, with a potash soap made on the spot with the waste tallow
generally to be had on every sheep farm, seems recently to have been
attracting attention in some quarters, and certainly would be a source
of profit to sheep owners by putting their wool on the market in the
best condition, and at the same time cleaning the skin of the sheep. It
therefore appears to be a move in the right direction. In concluding this series of articles on practical soap making from a
consumer's point of view, the writer hopes that, although the subject
has been somewhat imperfectly handled, owing to necessarily limited
space and with many unavoidable interruptions, yet that they may have
been found of some interest and assistance to consumers of soap who
desire easily and readily to make a pure and unadulterated article for
their own use. *       *       *       *       *




COTTON SEED OIL. Having had occasion during the last six years to manufacture lead
plaster in considerable quantities, it occurred to me that cotton seed
oil might be used instead of olive oil, at less expense, and with as
good results. The making of this plaster with cotton seed oil has been
questioned, as, according to some authorities, the product is not of
good consistence, and is apt to be soft, sticky, and dark colored;
but in my experience such is not the case. If the U. S. P. process is
followed in making this plaster, substituting for the olive oil cotton
seed oil, and instead of one half-pint of boiling water one and one-half
pint are added, the product obtained will be equally as good as that
from olive oil. My results with this oil in making lead plaster led me
to try it in making the different liniments of the Pharmacopoeia, with
the following results:

_Linimentum Ammoniae_.--This liniment, made with cotton seed oil, is of
much better consistency than when made with olive oil. It is not so
thick, will pour easily out of the bottle, and if the ammonia used is of
proper strength, will make a perfect liniment. _Linimentum Calcis_.--Cotton seed oil is not at all adapted to making
this liniment. It does not readily saponify, separates quickly, and it
is almost impossible to unite when separated. _Linimentum Camphorae_.--Cotton seed oil is far superior to olive oil in
making this liniment, it being a much better solvent of camphor. It has
not that disagreeable odor so commonly found in the liniment. _Linimentum Chloroformi_.--Cotton seed oil being very soluble in
chloroform, the liniment made with it leaves nothing to be desired. _Linimentum Plumbi Subacetatis_.--When liq. is mixed
with cotton seed oil and allowed to stand for some time the oil assumes
a reddish color similar to that of freshly made tincture of myrrh. When
the liquor is mixed with olive oil, if the oil be pure, no such change
takes place. Noticing this change, it occurred to me that this would be
a simple and easy way to detect cotton seed oil when mixed with olive
oil. This change usually takes place after standing from twelve to
twenty-four hours. It is easily detected in mixtures containing five
per cent., or even less, of the oils, and I am convinced, after making
numerous experiments with different oils, that it is peculiar to cotton
seed oil.--_American Journal of Pharmacy_. *       *       *       *       *




THE FOOD AND ENERGY OF MAN. [Footnote: From a lecture delivered at the Sanitary Congress, at
Newcastle-on-Tyne, September 28, 1882.] DE CHAUMONT, F.R.S. Although eating cannot be said to be in any way a new fashion, it has
nevertheless been reserved for modern times, and indeed we may say the
present generation, to get a fairly clear idea of the way in which
food is really utilized for the work of our bodily frame. We must not,
however, plume ourselves too much upon our superior knowledge, for
inklings of the truth, more or less dim, have been had through all ages,
and we are now stepping into the inheritance of times gone by, using the
long and painful experience of our predecessors as the stepping-stone
to our more accurate knowledge of the present time. In this, as in many
other things, we are to some extent in the position of a dwarf on the
shoulders of a giant; the dwarf may, indeed, see further than the giant;
but he remains a dwarf, and the giant a giant. The question has been much discussed as to what the original food of man
was, and some people have made it a subject of excited contention. The
most reasonable conclusion is that man is naturally a frugivorous or
fruit-eating animal, like his cousins the monkeys, whom he still so
much resembles. This forms a further argument in favor of his being
originated in warm regions, where fruits of all kinds were plentiful. It
is pretty clear that the resort to animal food, whether the result of
the pressure of want from failure of vegetable products, or a mere taste
and a desire for change and more appetizing food, is one that took place
many ages ago, probably in the earliest anthropoid, if not in the latest
pithecoid stage. No doubt some advantage was recognized in the more
rapid digestion and the comparative ease with which the hunter or fisher
could obtain food, instead of waiting for the ripening of fruits in
countries which had more or less prolonged periods of cold and inclement
weather. Some anatomical changes have doubtless resulted from the
practice, but they are not of sufficiently marked character to found
much argument upon; all that we can say being that the digestive
apparatus in man seems well adapted for digesting any food that is
capable of yielding nutriment, and that even when an entire change is
made in the mode of feeding, the adaptability of the human system
shows itself in a more or less rapid accommodation to the altered
circumstances. Food, then, is any substance which can be taken into the body and
applied to use, either in building up or repairing the tissues and
framework of the body itself, or in providing energy and producing
animal heat, or any substance which, without performing those functions
directly, controls, directs, or assists their performance. With this
wide definition it is evident that we include all the ordinary articles
recognized commonly as food, and that we reject all substances
recognized commonly as poisons. But it will also include such substances
as water and air, both of which are essential for nutrition, but are not
usually recognized as belonging to the list of food substances in the
ordinary sense. When we carry our investigation further, we find that
the organic substances may be again divided into two distinct classes,
namely, that which contains nitrogen (the casein), and those that do not
(the butter and sugar). On ascertaining this, we are immediately struck with the remarkable fact
that all the tissues and fluids of the body, muscles (or flesh),
bone, blood--all, in short, except the fat--contain nitrogen, and,
consequently, for their building up in the young, and for their repair
and renewal in the adult, nitrogen is absolutely required. We therefore
reasonably infer that the nitrogenous substance is necessary for this
purpose. Experiment has borne this out, for men who have been compelled
to live without nitrogenous food by dire necessity, and criminals on
whom the experiment has been tried, have all perished sooner or later in
consequence. When nitrogenous substances are used in the body, they
are, of course, broken up and oxidized, or perhaps we ought to say more
accurately, they take the place of the tissues of the body which wear
away and are carried off by oxidation and other chemical changes. Now, modern science tell us that such changes are accompanied with
manifestations of energy in some form or other, most frequently in
that of heat, and we must look, therefore, upon nitrogenous food
as contributing to the energy of the body in addition to its other
functions. What are the substances which we may class as nitrogenous. In the first
place, we have the typical example of the purest form in _albumin_,
or white of egg; and from this the name is now given to the class of
_albuminates_. The animal albuminates are: Albumin from eggs, fibrin
from muscles, or flesh, myosin, or synronin, also from animals, casein
(or cheesy matter) from milk, and the nitrogenous substances from blood. In the vegetable kingdom, we have glutin, or vegetable fibrin, which is
the nourishing constituent of wheat, barley, oats, etc. ; and legumin,
or vegetable casein, which is the peculiar substance found in peas and
beans. The other organic constituents--viz., the fats and the starches
and sugars--contain no nitrogen, and were at one time thought to be
concerned in producing animal heat. We now know--thanks to the labors of Joule, Lyon Playfair, Clausius,
Tyndall, Helmholtz, etc.--that heat itself is a mode of motion, a form
of convertible energy, which can be made to do useful or productive
work, and be expressed in terms of actual work done. Modern experiment
shows that all our energy is derived from that of food, and, in
particular from the non-nitrogenous part of it, that is, the fat,
starch, and sugar. The nutrition of man is best maintained when he is
provided with a due admixture of all the four classes of aliment which
we have mentioned, and not only that, but he is also better off if he
has a variety of each class. Thus he may and ought to have albumen,
fibrine, gluten, and casein among the albuminates, or at least two of
them; butter and lard, or suet, or oil among the fats; starch of wheat,
potato, rice, peas, etc., and cane-sugar, and milk-sugar among the
carbo-hydrates. The salts cannot be replaced, so far as we know. Life
may be maintained in fair vigor for some time on albuminates only, but
this is done at the expense of the tissues, especially the fat of the
body, and the end must soon come; with fat and carbo hydrates alone
vigor may also be maintained for some time, at the expense of the
tissues also, but the limit is a near one, In either of these cases we
suppose sufficient water and salts to be provided. We must now inquire into the quantities of food necessary; and this
necessitates a little consideration of the way in which the work of
the body is carried on. We must look upon the human body exactly as a
machine; like an engine with which we are all so familiar. A certain
amount of work requires to be done, say, a certain number of miles of
distance to be traversed; we know that to do this a certain number of
pounds, or hundredweights, or tons of coal must be put into the fire of
the boiler in order to furnish the requisite amount of energy through
the medium of steam. This amount of fuel must bear a certain proportion
to the work, and also to the velocity with which it is done, so both
quantity and time have to be accounted for. No lecture on diet would be complete without a reference to the vexed
question of alcohol. I am no teetotal advocate, and I repudiate the
rubbish too often spouted from teetotal platforms, talk that is,
perhaps, inseparable from the advocacy of a cause that imports a good
deal of enthusiasm. I am at one, however, in recognizing the evils of
excess, and would gladly hail their diminution. But I believe that
alcohol properly used may be a comfort and a blessing, just as I know
that improperly used it becomes a bane and a curse. But we are now
concerned with it as an article of diet in relation to useful work, and
it may be well to call attention markedly to the fact that its use in
this way is very limited. Parkes, made
in our laboratory, at Netley, were conclusive on the point, that beyond
an amount that would be represented by about one and a half to two pints
of beer, alcohol no longer provided any convertible energy, and that,
therefore, to take it in the belief that it did do so is an error. It may give a momentary stimulus in considerable doses, but this is
invariably followed by a corresponding depression, and it is a maxim now
generally followed, especially on service, never to give it before or
during work. There are, of course, some persons who are better without
it altogether, and so all moderation ought to be commended, if not
enjoyed. There are other beverages which are more useful than the alcoholic,
as restoratives, and for support in fatigue. Another excellent restorative is a weak solution
of Liebig's extract of meat, which has a remarkable power of removing
fatigue. Perhaps one of the most useful and most easily obtainable is
weak oatmeal gruel, either hot or cold. With regard to tobacco, it also
has some value in lessening fatigue in those who are able to take it,
but it may easily be carried to excess. Of it we may say, as of alcohol,
that in moderation it seems harmless, and even useful to some extent,
but, in excess, it is rank poison. There is one other point which I must refer to, and which is especially
interesting to a great seaport like this. This is the question of
scurvy--a question of vital importance to a maritime nation. Thomas Gray, of the Board of Trade, discloses the
regrettable fact that since 1873 there has been a serious falling off,
the outbreaks of scurvy having again increased until they reached
ninety-nine in 1881. Gray seems to think, is due to a neglect
of varied food scales; but it may also very probably have arisen from
the neglect of the regulation about lime-juice, either as to issue or
quality, or both. But it is also a fact of very great importance that
mere monotony of diet has a most serious effect upon health; variety
of food is not merely a pandering to gourmandism or greed, but a real
sanitary benefit, aiding digestion and assimilation. Our Board of Trade
has nothing to do with the food scales of ships, but Mr. Gray hints that
the Legislature will have to interfere unless shipowners look to it
themselves. The ease with which preserved foods of all kinds can be
obtained and carried now removes the last shadow of an excuse for
backwardness in this matter, and in particular the provision of a large
supply of potatoes, both fresh and dried, ought to be an unceasing care;
this is done on board American ships, and to this is doubtless owing in
a great part the healthiness of their crews. Scurvy in the present
day is a disgrace to shipowners and masters; and if public opinion is
insufficient to protect the seamen, the legislature will undoubtedly
step in and do so. And now let me close by pointing out that the study of this commonplace
matter of eating and drinking opens out to us the conception of the
grand unity of nature; since we see that the body of man differs in no
way essentially from other natural combinations, but is subject to
the same universal physical laws, in which there is no blindness, no
variableness, no mere chance, and disobedience of which is followed as
surely by retribution as even the keenest eschatologist might desire. *       *       *       *       *




RATTLESNAKE POISON. By HENRY H. CROFT. Some time since, in a paper to which I am unfortunately unable to refer,
a French chemist affirmed that the poisonous principle in snakes, or
eliminated by snakes, was of the nature of an alkaloid, and gave a name
to this class of bodies. Pedler has shown that snake poison is destroyed or neutralized
by means of platinic chloride, owing probably to the formation of an
insoluble double platinic chloride, such as is formed with almost if not
all alkaloids. In this country (Texas) where rattlesnakes are very common, and persons
camping out much exposed to their bites, a very favorite anecdote, or
_remedia_ as the Mexicans cull it, is a strong solution of iodine in
potassium iodide. [1]

[Footnote 1: The solution is applied as soon as possible to the wound,
preferably enlarged, and a few drops taken internally. The common
Mexican _remedia_ is the root of the _Agave virginica_ mashed or chewed
and applied to the wound, while part is swallowed. Great faith is placed in this root by all residents here, who are seldom
I without it, but, I have had no experience of it myself; and the
internal administration is no doubt useless. Even the wild birds know of this root; the queer paisano (? ground
woodpecker) which eats snakes, when wounded by a _vibora de cascabel_,
runs into woods, digs up and eats a root of the agave, just like the
mongoose; but more than that, goes back, polishes off his enemy, and
eats him. This has been told me by Mexicans who, it may be remarked, are
not _always_ reliable.] I have had occasion to prove the efficacy of this mixture in two cases
of _cascabel_ bites, one on a buck, the other on a dog; and it occurred
to me that the same explanation of its action might be given as above
for the platinum salt, viz., the formation of an insoluble iodo compound
as with ordinary alkaloids if the snake poison really belongs to this
class. Having last evening killed a moderate sized rattlesnake--_Crotalus
horridus_--which had not bitten anything, I found the gland fully
charged with the white opaque poison; on adding iodine solution to a
drop of this a dense light-brown precipitate was immediately formed,
quite similar to that obtained with most alkaloids, exhibiting under the
microscope no crystalline structure. In the absence of iodine a good extemporaneous solution for testing
alkaloids, and perhaps a snake poison antidote, may be made by adding a
few drops of ferric chloride to solution of potassium of iodide; this
is a very convenient test agent which I used in my laboratory for many
years. Although rattlesnake poison could be obtained here in very considerable
quantity, it is out of my power to make such experiments as I could
desire, being without any chemical appliances and living a hundred miles
or more from any laboratory. The same may be said with regard to books,
and possibly the above iodine reaction has been already described. Richards states that the cobra poison is destroyed by potassium
permanganate; but this is no argument in favor of that salt as an
antidote. Pedler also refers to it, but allows that it would not be
probably of any use after the poison had been absorbed. Of this I
think there can be no doubt, remembering the easy decomposition of
permanganate by most organic substances, and I cannot but think that the
medicinal or therapeutic advantages of that salt, taken internally, are
equally problematical, unless the action is supposed to take place in
the stomach. In the bladder of the same rattlesnake I found a considerable
quantity of light-brown amorphous ammonium urate, the urine pale
yellow.--_Chemical News_. *       *       *       *       *




THE CHINESE SIGN MANUAL. D. J. Macgowan, in Medical Reports of China. Two writers in _Nature_, both having for their theme "Skin-furrows on
the Hand," solicit information on the subject from China. [1] As the
subject is considered to have a bearing on medical jurisprudence and
ethnology as well, this report is a suitable vehicle for responding to
the demand. [Footnote 1: Henry Faulds, Tzukiyi Hospital, Tokio, Japan. W. J.
Herschel, Oxford, England.--_Nature_, 28th October and 25th November,
1880.] Faulds' observations on the finger-tips of the Japanese have an
ethnic bearing and relate to the subject of heredity. Herschel
considers the subject as an agent of Government, he having charge for
twenty years of registration offices in India, where he employed finger
marks as sign manuals, the object being to prevent personation and
repudiation. Doolittle, in his "Social Life of the Chinese," describes
the custom. I cannot now refer to native works where the practice of
employing digital rugae as a sign manual is alluded to. I doubt if its
employment in the courts is of ancient date. Well-informed natives think
that it came into vogue subsequent to the Han period; if so, it is in
Egypt that earliest evidence of the practice is to be found. Just as the
Chinese courts now require criminals to sign confessions by impressing
thereto the whorls of their thumb-tips--the right thumb in the case of
women, the left in the case of men--so the ancient Egyptians, it
is represented, required confessions to be sealed with their
thumbnails--most likely the tip of the digit, as in China. Great
importance is attached in the courts to this digital form of signature,
"finger form." Without a confession no criminal can be legally executed,
and the confession to be valid must be attested by the thumb-print
of the prisoner. No direct coercion is employed to secure this; a
contumacious culprit may, however, be tortured until he performs the
act which is a prerequisite to his execution. Digital signatures are
sometimes required in the army to prevent personation; the general
in command at Wenchow enforces it on all his troops. A document thus
attested can no more be forged or repudiated than a photograph--not so
easily, for while the period of half a lifetime effects great changes
in the physiognomy, the rugae of the fingers present the same appearance
from the cradle to the grave; time writes no wrinkles there. In the
army everywhere, when the description of a person is written down, the
relative number of volutes and coniferous finger-tips is noted. It
is called taking the "whelk striae," the fusiform being called "rice
baskets," and the volutes "peck measures." A person unable to write, the
form of signature which defies personation or repudiation is required in
certain domestic cases, as in the sale of children or women. Often when
a child is sold the parents affix their finger marks to the bill of
sale; when a husband puts away his wife, giving her a bill of divorce,
he marks the document with his entire palm; and when a wife is sold, the
purchaser requires the seller to stamp the paper with hands and feet,
the four organs duly smeared with ink. Professional fortune tellers in
China take into account almost the entire system of the person whose
future they attempt to forecast, and of course they include palmistry,
but the rugae of the finger-ends do not receive much attention. Amateur
fortune-tellers, however, discourse as glibly on them as phrenologists
do of "bumps"--it is so easy. In children the relative number of volute
and conical striae indicate their future. "If there are nine volutes,"
says a proverb, "to one conical, the boy will attain distinction without
toil." Regarded from an ethnological point of view, I can discover merely that
the rugae of Chinamen's fingers differ from Europeans', but there is so
little uniformity observable that they form no basis for distinction,
and while the striae may be noteworthy points in certain medico-legal
questions, heredity is not one of them. *       *       *       *       *




LUCIDITY. At the close of an interesting address lately delivered at the reopening
of the Liverpool University College and School of Medicine, Mr. Matthew
Arnold said if there was one word which he should like to plant in the
memories of his audience, and to leave sticking there after he had gone,
it was the word _lucidity_. If he had to fix upon the three great wants
at this moment of the three principal nations of Europe, he should say
that the great want of the French was morality, that the great want of
the Germans was civil courage, and that our own great want was lucidity. Our own want was, of course, what concerned us the most. People were apt
to remark the defects which accompanied certain qualities, and to think
that the qualities could not be desirable because of the defects which
they saw accompanying them. There was no greater and salutary lesson for
men to learn than that a quality may be accompanied, naturally perhaps,
by grave dangers; that it may actually present itself accompanied by
terrible defects, and yet that it might itself be indispensable. Let him
illustrate what he meant by an example, the force of which they would
all readily feel. Perhaps
seriousness was always accompanied by certain dangers. But, at any rate,
many of our French neighbors would say that they found our seriousness
accompanied by so many false ideas, so much prejudice, so much that was
disagreeable, that it could not have the value which we attributed to
it. Let them follow the same
mode of reasoning as to the quality of lucidity. The French had a
national turn for lucidity as we had a national turn for seriousness. Perhaps a national turn for lucidity carried with it always certain
dangers. Be this as it might, it was certain that we saw in the French,
along with their lucidity, a want of seriousness, a want of reverence,
and other faults, which greatly displeased us. Many of us were inclined
in consequence to undervalue their lucidity, or to deny that they
had it. We were wrong: it existed as our seriousness existed; it was
valuable as our seriousness was valuable. Both the one and the other
were valuable, and in the end indispensable. It was negatively that the French have it, and he
would therefore deal with its negative character merely. Negatively,
lucidity was the perception of the want of truth and validness in
notions long current, the perception that they are no longer possible,
that their time is finished, and they can serve us no more. All through
the last century a prodigious travail for lucidity was going forward
in France. Its principal agent was a man whose name excited generally
repulsion in England, Voltaire. Voltaire did a great deal of harm in
France. But it was not by his lucidity that he did harm; he did it by
his want of seriousness, his want of reverence, his want of sense for
much that is deepest in human nature. Conduct was three-fourths of life, and a man who
worked for conduct, therefore, worked for more than a man who worked for
intelligence. But having promised this, it might be said that the Luther
of the eighteenth century and of the cultivated classes was Voltaire. As Luther had an antipathy to what was immoral, so Voltaire had an
antipathy to what was absurd, and both of them made war upon the object
of their antipathy with such masterly power, with so much conviction,
so much energy, so much genius, that they carried their world with
them--Luther his Protestant world, and Voltaire his French world--and
the cultivated classes throughout the continent of Europe generally. Voltaire had more than negative lucidity; he had the large and true
conception that a number and equilibrium of activities were necessary
for man. "_Il faut douner a notre ame toutes les formes possibles_"
was a maxim which Voltaire really and truly applied in practice,
"advancing," as Michelet finely said of him, in every direction with
a marvelous vigor and with that conquering ambition which Vico called
_mens heroica_. Voltaire's signal characteristic was his
lucidity, his negative lucidity. There was a great and free intellectual movement in England in the
eighteenth century--indeed, it was from England that it passed into
France; but the English had not that strong natural bent for lucidity
which the French had. Our leading thinkers had not the genius and passion for lucidity which
distinguished Voltaire. In their free inquiry they soon found themselves
coming into collision with a number of established facts, beliefs,
conventions. Thereupon all sorts of practical considerations began to
sway them. The danger signal went up, they often stopped short, turned
their eyes another way, or drew down a curtain between themselves and
the light. "It seems highly probable," said Voltaire, "that nature has
made thinking a portion of the brain, as vegetation is a function of
trees; that we think by the brain just as we walk by the feet." So our
reason, at least, would lead us to conclude, if the theologians did not
assure us of the contrary; such, too, was the opinion of Locke, but he
did not venture to announce it. The French Revolution came, England grew
to abhor France, and was cut off from the Continent, did great things,
gained much, but not in lucidity. The Continent was reopened, the
century advanced, time and experience brought their lessons, lovers of
free and clear thought, such as the late John Stuart Mill, arose among
us. But we could not say that they had by any means founded among us the
reign of lucidity. Let them consider that movement of which we were hearing so much just
now: let them look at the Salvation Army and its operations. They would
see numbers, funds, energy, devotedness, excitement, conversions, and
a total absence of lucidity. A little lucidity would make the whole
movement impossible. That movement took for granted as its basis what
was no longer possible or receivable; its adherents proceeded in all
they did on the assumption that that basis was perfectly solid, and
neither saw that it was not solid, nor ever even thought of asking
themselves whether it was solid or not. Taking a very different movement, and one of far higher dignity and
import, they had all had before their minds lately the long-devoted,
laborious, influential, pure, pathetic life of Dr. Pusey, which had just
ended. Many of them had also been reading in the lively volumes of that
acute, but not always good-natured rattle, Mr. Mozley, an account of
that great movement which took from Dr. Of its
later stage of Ritualism they had had in this country a now celebrated
experience. It had produced men to
be respected, men to be admired, men to be beloved, men of learning,
goodness, genius, and charm. But could they resist the truth that
lucidity would have been fatal to it? The movers of all those questions
about apostolical succession, church patristic authority, primitive
usage, postures, vestments--questions so passionately debated, and on
which he would not seek to cast ridicule--did not they all begin by
taking for granted something no longer possible or receivable, build on
this basis as if it were indubitably solid, and fail to see that their
basis not being solid, all they built upon it was fantastic? He would not say that negative lucidity was in itself a satisfactory
possession, but he said that it was inevitable and indispensable, and
that it was the condition of all serious construction for the future. Without it at present a man or a nation was intellectually and
spiritually all abroad. If they saw it accompanied in France by much
that they shrank from, they should reflect that in England it would
have influences joined with it which it had not in France--the natural
seriousness of the people, their sense of reverence and respect, their
love for the past. Come it must; and here where it had been so late in
coming, it would probably be for the first time seen to come without
danger. Capitals were natural centers of mental movement, and it was natural for
the classes with most leisure, most freedom, most means of cultivation,
and most conversance with the wide world to have lucidity though often
they had it not. To generate a spirit of lucidity in provincial towns,
and among the middle classes bound to a life of much routine and plunged
in business, was more difficult. Schools and universities, with serious
and disinterested studies, and connecting those studies the one with the
other and continuing them into years of manhood, were in this case the
best agency they could use. It might be slow, but it was sure. Such
an agency they were now going to employ. Might it fulfill all their
expectations! Might their students, in the words quoted just now,
advance in every direction with a marvelous vigor, and with that
conquering ambition which Vico called _mens heroica_! And among the many
good results of this, might one result be the acquisition in their midst
of that indispensable spirit--the spirit of lucidity! *       *       *       *       *




ON SOME APPARATUS THAT PERMIT OF ENTERING FLAMES. [Footnote: A. de Rochas in the _Revue Scientifique_.] In the following notes I shall recall a few experiments that indicate
under what conditions the human organism is permitted to remain unharmed
amid flames. These experiments were published in England in 1882, in the
twelfth letter from Brewster to Walter Scott on natural magic. They are,
I believe, not much known in France, and possess a practical interest
for those who are engaged in the art of combating fires. At the end of the last century Humphry Davy observed that, on placing a
very fine wire gauze over a flame, the latter was cooled to such a
point that it could not traverse the meshes. This phenomenon, which he
attributed to the conductivity and radiating power of the metal, he soon
utilized in the construction of a lamp for miners. Some years afterward Chevalier Aldini, of Milan, conceived the idea of
making a new application of Davy's discovery in the manufacture of an
envelope that should permit a man to enter into the midst of flames. This envelope, which was made of metallic gauze with 1-25th of an inch
meshes, was composed of five pieces, as follows: (1) a helmet, with
mask, large enough, to allow a certain space between it and the internal
bonnet of which I shall speak; (2) a cuirass with armlets; (3) a skirt
for the lower part of the belly and the thighs; (4) a pair of boots
formed of a double wire gauze; and (5) a shield five feet long by one
and a half wide, formed of metallic gauze stretched over a light iron
frame. Beneath this armor the experimenter was clad in breeches and a
close coat of coarse cloth that had previously been soaked in a solution
of alum. The head, hands, and feet were covered by envelopes of asbestos
cloth whose fibers were about a half millimeter in diameter. The bonnet
contained apertures for the eyes, nose, and ears, and consisted of a
single thickness of fabric, as did the stockings, but the gloves were of
double thickness, so that the wearer could seize burning objects with
the hands. Aldini, convinced of the services that his apparatus might render to
humanity, traveled over Europe and gave gratuitous representations with
it. The exercises generally took place in the following order: Aldini
began by first wrapping his finger in asbestos and then with a double
layer of wire gauze. He then held it for some instants in the flame of
a candle or alcohol lamp. One of his assistants afterward put on the
asbestos glove of which I have spoken, and, protecting the palm of his
hand with another piece of asbestos cloth, seized a piece of red-hot
iron from a furnace and slowly carried it to a distance of forty or
fifty meters, lighted some straw with it, and then carried it back to
the furnace. On other occasions, the experimenters, holding firebrands
in their hands, walked for five minutes over a large grating under which
fagots were burning. In order to show how the head, eyes, and lungs were protected by the
wire gauze apparatus, one of the experimenters put on the asbestos
bonnet, helmet, and cuirass, and fixed the shield in front of his
breast. Then, in a chafing dish placed on a level with his shoulder, a
great fire of shavings was lighted, and care was taken to keep it up. Into the midst of these flames the experimenter then plunged his head
and remained thus five or six minutes with his face turned toward them. In an exhibition given at Paris before a committee from the Academic
des Sciences, there were set up two parallel fences formed of straw,
connected by iron wire to light wicker work, and arranged so as to leave
between them a passage 3 feet wide by 30 long. The heat was so intense,
when the fences were set on fire, that no one could approach nearer than
20 or 25 feet; and the flames seemed to fill the whole space between
them, and rose to a height of 9 or 10 feet. Six men clad in the Aldini
suit went in, one behind the other, between the blazing fences, and
walked slowly backward and forward in the narrow passage, while the fire
was being fed with fresh combustibles from the exterior. One of these
men carried on his back, in an ozier basket covered with wire gauze, a
child eight years of age, who had on no other clothing than an asbestos
bonnet. This same man, having the child with him, entered on another
occasion a clear fire whose flames reached a height of 18 feet, and
whose intensity was such that it could not be looked at. He remained
therein so long that the spectators began to fear that he had succumbed;
but he finally came out safe and sound. One of the conclusions to be drawn from the facts just stated is that
man can breathe in the midst of flames. This marvelous property cannot
be attributed exclusively to the cooling of the air by its passage
through the gauze before reaching the lungs; it shows also a very great
resistance of our organs to the action of heat. The following, moreover,
are direct proofs of such resistance. In England, in their first
experiment, Messrs. Joseph Banks, Charles Blagden, and Dr. Solander
remained for ten minutes in a hot-house whose temperature was 211 deg. Fahr., and their bodies preserved therein very nearly the usual heat. On
breathing against a thermometer they caused the mercury to fall several
degrees. Each expiration, especially when it was somewhat strong,
produced in their nostrils an agreeable impression of coolness, and the
same impression was also produced on their fingers when breathed upon. When they touched themselves their skin seemed to be as cold as that of
a corpse; but contact with their watch chains caused them to experience
a sensation like that of a burn. A thermometer placed under the tongue
of one of the experimenters marked 98 deg. Fahr., which is the normal
temperature of the human species. Emboldened by these first results, Blagden entered a hot-house in which
the thermometer in certain parts reached 262 deg. He remained therein
eight minutes, walked about in all directions, and stopped in the
coolest part, which was at 240 deg. During all this time he
experienced no painful sensations; but, at the end of seven minutes, he
felt an oppression of the lungs that inquieted him and caused him to
leave the place. His pulse at that moment showed 144 beats to the
minute, that is to say, double what it usually did. To ascertain whether
there was any error in the indications of the thermometer, and to find
out what effect would take place on inert substances exposed to the hot
air that he had breathed, Blogden placed some eggs in a zinc plate in
the hot-house, alongside the thermometer, and found that in twenty
minutes they were baked hard. A case is reported where workmen entered a furnace for drying moulds, in
England, the temperature of which was 177 deg., and whose iron sole plate
was so hot that it carbonized their wooden shoes. In the immediate
vicinity of this furnace the temperature rose to 160 deg. Persons not of
the trade who approached anywhere near the furnace experienced pain in
the eyes, nose, and ears. A baker is cited in Angoumois, France, who spent ten minutes in a
furnace at 132 deg. C.

The resistance of the human organism to so high temperatures can be
attributed to several causes. First, it has been found that the quantity
of carbonic acid exhaled by the lungs, and consequently the chemical
phenomena of internal combustion that are a source of animal heat,
diminish in measure as the external temperature rises. Hence, a conflict
which has for result the retardation of the moment at which a living
being will tend, without obstacle, to take the temperature of the
surrounding medium. On another hand, it has been observed that man
resists heat so much the less in proportion as the air is saturated
with vapors. Berger, who supported for seven minutes a temperature
varying from 109 deg. C. in dry air, could remain only twelve
minutes in a bagnio whose temperature rose from 41 deg. At the
Hammam of Paris the highest temperature obtained is 87 deg., and Dr. E.
Martin has not been able to remain therein more than five minutes. This
physician reports that in 1743, the thermometer having exceeded 40 deg. at
Pekin, 14,000 persons perished. These facts are explained by the cooling
that the evaporation of perspiration produces on the surface of the
body. Edwards has calculated that such evaporation is ten times greater
in dry air in motion than in calm and humid air. The observations become
still more striking when the skin is put in contact with a liquid or a
solid which suppresses perspiration. Lemoine endured a bath of Bareges
water of 37 deg. for half an hour; but at 45 deg. he could not remain in it more
than seven minutes, and the perspiration began to flow at the end of six
minutes. According to Brewster, persons who experience no malaise near
a fire which communicates a temperature of 100 deg. C. to them, can hardly
bear contact with alcohol and oil at 55 deg. The facts adduced permit us to understand how it was possible to bear
one of the proofs to which it is said those were submitted who wished
to be initiated into the Egyptian mysteries. In a vast vaulted chamber
nearly a hundred feet long, there were erected two fences formed of
posts, around which were wound branches of Arabian balm, Egyptian thorn,
and tamarind--all very flexible and inflammable woods. When this was set
on fire the flames arose as far as the vault, licked it, and gave the
chamber the appearance of a hot furnace, the smoke escaping through
pipes made for the purpose. Then the door was suddenly opened before the
neophyte, and he was ordered to traverse this burning place, whose floor
was composed of an incandescent grating. The Abbe Terrason recounts all these details in his historic romance
"Sethos," printed at the end of last century. Unfortunately literary
frauds were in fashion then, and the book, published as a translation of
an old Greek manuscript, gives no indication of sources. I have sought
in special works for the data which the abbe must have had as a basis,
but I have not been able to find them. I suppose, however, that
this description, which is so precise, is not merely a work of the
imagination. The author goes so far as to give the dimensions of the
grating (30 feet by 8), and, greatly embarrassed to explain how his hero
was enabled to traverse it without being burned, is obliged to suppose
it to have been formed of very thick bars, between which Sethos had care
to place his feet. He who had the
courage to rush, head bowed, into the midst of the flames, certainly
would not have amused himself by choosing the place to put his feet. Braving the fire that surrounded his entire body, he must have had no
other thought than that of reaching the end of his dangerous voyage as
soon as possible. We cannot see very well, moreover, how this immense
grate, lying on the ground, was raised to a red heat and kept at such a
temperature. It is infinitely more simple to suppose that between the
two fences there was a ditch sufficiently deep in which a fire had
also been lighted, and which was covered by a grating as in the Aldini
experiments. It is even probable that this grating was of copper,
which, illuminated by the fireplace, must have presented a terrifying
brilliancy, while in reality it served only to prevent the flames from
the fireplace reaching him who dared to brave them. *       *       *       *       *




THE BUILDING STONE SUPPLY. The use of stone as a building material was not resorted to, except to
a trifling extent, in this country until long after the need of such a
solid substance was felt. The early settler contented himself with the
log cabin, the corduroy road, and the wooden bridge, and loose stone
enough for foundation purposes could readily be gathered from the
surface of the earth. Even after the desirability of more handsome and
durable building material for public edifices in the colonial cities
than wood became apparent, the ample resources which nature had afforded
in this country were overlooked, and brick and stone were imported by
the Dutch and English settlers from the Old World. Thus we find the
colonists of the New Netherlands putting yellow brick on their list
of non-dutiable imports in 1648; and such buildings in Boston as are
described as being "fairly set forth with brick, tile, slate, and
stone," were thus provided only with foreign products. Isolated
instances of quarrying stone are known to have occurred in the last
century; but they are rare. The edifice known as "King's Chapel,"
Boston, erected in 1752, is the first one on record as being built from
American stone; this was granite, brought from Braintree, Mass. Granite is a rock particularly abundant in New England, though also
found in lesser quantities elsewhere in this country. The first granite
quarries that were extensively developed were those at Quincy, Mass.,
and work began at that point early in the present century. The fame of
the stone became widespread, and it was sent to distant markets--even to
New Orleans. The old Merchants' Exchange in New York (afterward used as
a custom house) the Astor House in that city, and the Custom House in
New Orleans, all nearly or quite fifty years old, were constructed of
Quincy granite, as were many other fine buildings along the Atlantic
coast. In later years, not only isolated public edifices, but also whole
blocks of stores, have been constructed of this material. It was from
the Quincy quarries that the first railroad in this country was built;
this was a horse-railroad, three miles long, extending to Neponset
River, built in 1827. Other points in Massachusetts have been famed for their excellent
granite. After Maine was set off as a distinct State, Fox Island
acquired repute for its granite, and built up an extensive traffic
therein. Westerly, R.I., has also been engaged in quarrying this
valuable rock for many years, most of its choicer specimens having been
wrought for monumental purposes. Statues and other elaborate monumental
designs are now extensively made therefrom. Smaller pieces and a coarser
quality of the stone are here and elsewhere along the coast obtained in
large quantities for the construction of massive breakwaters to protect
harbors. Another point famous for its granite is Staten Island, New
York. This stone weighs 180 pounds to the cubic foot, while the Quincy
granite weighs but 165. The Staten Island product is used not only for
building purposes, but is also especially esteemed for paving after both
the Russ and Belgian patents. New York and other cities derive large
supplies from this source. The granite of Weehawken, N.J., is of the
same character, and greatly in demand. Port Deposit, Md., and Richmond,
Va, are also centers of granite production. Near Abbeville, S.C., and
in Georgia, granite is found quite like that of Quincy. Much southern
granite, however, decomposes readily, and is almost as soft as clay. This variety of stone is found in great abundance in the Rocky
Mountains; but, except to a slight extent in California, it is not yet
quarried there. Granite, having little grain, can be cut into blocks of almost any size
and shape. Specimens as much as eighty feet long have been taken out and
transported great distances. The quarrying is done by drilling a series
of small holes, six inches or more deep and almost the same distance
apart, inserting steel wedges along the whole line and then tapping each
gently with a hammer in succession, in order that the strain may be
evenly distributed. A building material that came into use earlier than granite is known as
freestone or sandstone; although its first employment does not date back
further than the erection of King's Chapel, Boston, already referred to
as the earliest well-known occasion where granite was used in building. Altogether the most famous American sandstone quarries are those at
Portland, on the Connecticut River, opposite Middletown. These were
worked before the Revolution; and their product has been shipped to many
distant points in the country. The long rows of "brownstone fronts" in
New York city are mostly of Portland stone, though in many cases the
walls are chiefly of brick covered with thin layers of the stone. The
old red sandstone of the Connecticut valley is distinguished in geology
for the discovery of gigantic fossil footprints of birds, first noticed
in the Portland quarries in 1802. Some of these footprints measured
ten to sixteen inches, and they were from four to six feet apart. The
sandstone of Belleville, N.J., has also extensive use and reputation. Trinity Church in New York city and the Boston Atheneum are built of the
product of these quarries; St. Lawrence County, New York, is noted also
for a fine bed of sandstone. At Potsdam it is exposed to a depth of
seventy feet. There are places though, in New England, New York, and
Eastern Pennsylvania, where a depth of three hundred feet has been
reached. The Potsdam sandstone is often split to the thinness of an
inch. It hardens by exposure, and is often used for smelting furnace
hearth-stones. Shawangunk Mountain, in Ulster County, yields a sandstone
of inferior quality, which has been unsuccessfully tried for paving;
as it wears very unevenly. From Ulster, Greene, and Albany Counties
sandstone slabs for sidewalks are extensively quarried for city use;
the principal outlets of these sections being Kingston, Saugerties,
Coxsackie, Bristol, and New Baltimore, on the Hudson. In this region
quantities amounting to millions of square feet are taken out in large
sheets, which are often sawed into the sizes desired. The vicinity of
Medina, in Western New York, yields a sandstone extensively used in that
section for paving and curbing, and a little for building. A rather poor
quality of this stone has been found along the Potomac, and some of it
was used in the erection of the old Capitol building at Washington. Ohio yields a sandstone that is of a light gray color; Berea, Amherst,
Vermilion, and Massillon are the chief points of production. Genevieve, Mo., yields a stone of fine grain of a light straw color,
which is quite equal to the famous Caen stone of France. The Lake
Superior sandstones are dark and coarse grained, but strong. In some parts of the country, where neither granite nor sandstone
is easily procured, blue and gray limestone are sometimes used for
building, and, when hammer dressed, often look like granite. A serious
objection to their use, however, is the occasional presence of iron,
which rusts on exposure, and defaces the building. In Western New York
they are widely used. Topeka stone, like the coquine of Florida and
Bermuda, is soft like wood when first quarried, and easily wrought,
but it hardens on exposure. The limestones of Canton, Mo., Joliet and
Athens, Ill., Dayton, Sandusky, Marblehead, and other points in Ohio,
Ellittsville, Ind., and Louisville and Bowling Green, Ky., are great
favorites west. In many of these regions limestone is extensively used
for macadamizing roads, for which it is excellently adapted. It also
yields excellent slabs or flags for sidewalks. One of the principal uses of this variety of stone is its conversion, by
burning, into lime for building purposes. All limestones are by no
means equally excellent in this regard. Thomaston lime, burned with
Pennsylvania coal, near the Penobscot River, has had a wide reputation
for nearly half a century. It has been shipped thence to all points
along the Atlantic coast, invading Virginia as far as Lynchburg, and
going even to New Orleans, Smithfield, R.I., and Westchester County,
N.Y., near the lower end of the Highlands, also make a particularly
excellent quality of lime. Kingston, in Ulster County, makes an inferior
sort for agricultural purposes. The Ohio and other western stones yield
a poor lime, and that section is almost entirely dependent on the east
for supplies. Marbles, like limestones, with which they are closely related, are very
abundant in this country, and are also to be found in a great variety of
colors. As early as 1804 American marble was used for statuary purposes. Early in the century it also obtained extensive employment for
gravestones. Its use for building purposes has been more recent than
granite and sandstone in this country; and it is coming to supersede the
latter to a great degree. For mantels, fire-places, porch pillars, and
like ornamental purposes, however, our variegated, rich colored and
veined or brecciated marbles were in use some time before exterior walls
were made from them. Among the earliest marble buildings were Girard
College in Philadelphia and the old City Hall in New York, and the
Custom House in the latter city, afterward used for a sub-treasury. The
new Capitol building at Washington is among the more recent structures
composed of this material. Our exports of marble to Cuba and elsewhere
amount to over $300,000 annually, although we import nearly the same
amount from Italy. And yet an article can be found in the United States
fully as fine as the famous Carrara marble. We refer to that which comes
from Rutland, Vt. This state yields the largest variety and choicest
specimens. The marble belt runs both ways from Rutland County, where
the only quality fit for statuary is obtained. Toward the north it
deteriorates by growing less sound, though finer in grain; while to
the south it becomes coarser. A beautiful black marble is obtained at
Shoreham, Vt. There are also handsome brecciated marbles in the same
state; and in the extreme northern part, near Lake Champlain, they
become more variegated and rich in hue. Such other marble as is found
in New England is of an inferior quality. The pillars of Girard
College came from Berkshire, Mass., which ranks next after Vermont in
reputation. The marble belt extends from New England through New York, Pennsylvania,
Maryland, the District of Columbia, and Virginia, Tennessee, and the
Carolinas, to Georgia and Alabama. Some of the variegated and high
colored varieties obtained near Knoxville, Tenn., nearly equal that of
Vermont. The Rocky Mountains contain a vast abundance and variety. Slate was known to exist in this country to a slight extent in colonial
days. It was then used for gravestones, and to some extent for roofing
and school purposes. It is
stated that a slate quarry was operated in Northampton County, Pa., as
early as 1805. In 1826 James M. Porter and Samuel Taylor engaged in the
business, obtaining their supplies from the Kittanninny Mountains. From
this time the business developed rapidly, the village of Slateford being
an outgrowth of it, and large rafts being employed to float the product
down the Schuylkill to Philadelphia. By 1860 the industry had reached
the capacity of 20,000 cases of slate, valued at $10 a case, annually. In 1839 quarries were opened in the Piscataquis River, forty miles
north of Bangor, Me., but poor transportation facilities retarded the
business. New York's quarries are
confined to Washington County, near the Vermont line. Maryland has
a limited supply from Harford County. The Huron Mountains, north of
Marquette, Mich., contain slate, which is also said to exist in Pike
County, Ga. Grindstones, millstones, and whetstones are quarried in New York, Ohio,
Michigan, Pennsylvania, and other States. Mica is found at Acworth and
Grafton, N. H., and near Salt Lake, but our chief supply comes from
Haywood, Yancey, Mitchell, and Macon counties, in North Carolina, and
our product is so large that we can afford to export it. Other stones,
such as silex, for making glass, etc., are found in profusion in various
parts of the country, but we have no space to enter into a detailed
account of them at present.--_Pottery and Glassware Reporter_. *       *       *       *       *




AN INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION. The most interesting change of which the Census gives account is the
increase in the number of farms. The number has virtually doubled within
twenty years. The population of the country has not increased in like
proportion. A large part of the increase in number of farms has been due
to the division of great estates. Nor has this occurred, as some may
imagine, exclusively in the Southern States and the States to which
immigration and migration have recently been directed. It is an
important fact that the multiplication of farms has continued even in
the older Northern States, though the change has not been as great in
these as in States of the far West or the South. In New York there has
been an increase of 25,000, or 11.5 per cent, in the number of farms
since 1870; in New Jersey the increase has been 12.2 per cent., and in
Pennsylvania 22.7 per cent., though the increase in population, and
doubtless in the number of persons engaged in farming, has been much
smaller. Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois also, have been considered fully
settled States for years, at least in an agricultural point of view, and
yet the number of farms has increased 26.1 per cent, in ten years in
Ohio, 20.3 percent, in Indiana, and 26.1 per cent, in Illinois. The
obvious explanation is that the growth of many cities and towns has
created a market for a far greater supply of those products which may be
most advantageously grown upon farms of moderate size; but even if this
fully accounts for the phenomenon, the change must be recognized as one
of the highest importance industrially, socially, and politically. The
man who owns or rents and cultivates a farm stands on a very different
footing from the laborer who works for wages. It is not a small matter
that, in these six States alone, there are 205,000 more owners or
managers of farms than there were only a decade ago. As we go further toward the border, west or north, the influence of the
settlement of new land is more distinctly felt. Even in Michigan, where
new railroads have opened new regions to settlement, the increase in
number of farms has been over 55 per cent. In Wisconsin, though the
increase in railroad mileage has been about the same as in Michigan, the
reported increase in number of farms has been only 28 per cent., but in
Iowa it rises to 60 per cent., and in Minnesota to nearly 100 per cent. In Kansas the number of farms is 138,561, against 38,202 in 1870; in
Nebraska 63,387, against 12,301; and in Dakota 17,435, against 1,720. In
these regions the process is one of creation of new States rather than a
change in the social and industrial condition of the population. Some Southern States have gained largely, but the increase in these,
though very great, is less surprising than the new States of the
Northwest. The prevailing tendency of Southern agriculture to large
farms and the employment of many hands is especially felt in States
where land is still abundant. The greatest increase is in Texas, where
174,184 farms are reported, against 61,125 in 1870; in Florida, with
23,438 farms, against 10,241 in 1870; and in Arkansas, with 94,433
farms, against 49,424 in 1870. In Missouri 215,575 farms are reported,
against 148,228 in 1870. In these States, though social changes have
been great, the increase in number of farms has been largely due to new
settlements, as in the States of the far Northwest. But the change in
the older Southern States is of a different character. Virginia, for example, has long been settled, and had 77,000 farms
thirty years ago. But the increase in number within the past ten years
has been 44,668, or 60.5 per cent. Contrasting this with the increase in
New York, a remarkable difference appears. West Virginia had few more
farms ten years ago than New Jersey; now it has nearly twice as many,
and has gained in number nearly 60 per cent. North Carolina, too, has
increased 78 per cent. in number of farms since 1870, and South Carolina
80 per cent. In Georgia the increase has been still greater--from 69,956
to 138,626, or nearly 100 per cent. In Alabama there are 135,864
farms, against 67,382 in 1870, an increase of over 100 per cent. These
proportions, contrasted with those for the older Northern States, reveal
a change that is nothing less than an industrial revolution. But the
force of this tendency to division of estates has been greatest in the
States named. Whereas the ratio of increase in number of farms becomes
greater in Northern States as we go from the East toward the Mississippi
River, at the South it is much smaller in Kentucky, Tennessee,
Mississippi, and Louisiana than in the older States on the Atlantic
coast. Thus in Louisiana the increase has been from 28,481 to 48,292
farms, or 70 per cent., and in Mississippi from 68,023 to 101,772 farms,
or less than 50 per cent., against 100 in Alabama and Georgia. In
Kentucky the increase has been from 118,422 to 166,453 farms, or 40 per
cent., and in Tennessee from 118,141 to 165,650 farms, or 40 per cent.,
against 60 in Virginia and West Virginia, and 78 in North Carolina. Thus, while the tendency to division is far greater than in the Northern
States of corresponding age, it is found in full force only in six of
the older Southern States, Alabama, West Virginia, and four on the
Atlantic coast. In these, the revolution already effected foreshadows
and will almost certainly bring about important political changes within
a few years. In these six States there 310,795 more farm owners or
occupants than there were ten years ago.--_N.Y. *       *       *       *       *




A FARMER'S LIME KILN. For information about burning lime we republish the following article
furnished by a correspondent of the _Country Gentleman_ several years
ago:

[Illustration: Fig. 1), Railway Track--B B B,
Iron Rods running through Kiln--C, Capstone over Arch--D, Arch--E, Well
without brick or ash lining.] I send you a description and sketch of a lime-kiln put up on my premises
about five years ago. The dimensions of this kiln are 13 feet square by
25 feet high from foundation, and its capacity 100 bushels in 24 hours. It was constructed of the limestone quarried on the spot. It has round
iron rods (shown in sketch) passing through, with iron plates fastened
to the ends as clamps to make it more firm; the pair nearest the top
should be not less than 2 feet from that point, the others interspersed
about 2 feet apart--the greatest strain being near the top. The arch
should be 7 feet high by 51/2 wide in front, with a gather on the top
and sides of about 1 foot, with plank floor; and if this has a little
incline it will facilitate shoveling the lime when drawn. The arch
should have a strong capstone; also one immediately under the well of
the kiln, with a hole 2 feet in diameter to draw the lime through; or
two may be used with semicircle cut in each. Iron bars 2 inches wide by
1/8 inch thick are used in this kiln for closing it, working in slots
fastened to capstone. These slots must be put in before the caps
are laid. When it is desired to draw lime, these bars may be
pushed laterally in the slots, or drawn out entirely, according to
circumstances; 3 bars will be enough. The slots are made of iron bars
11/2 inches wide, with ends rounded and turned up, and inserted in holes
drilled through capstone and keyed above. The well of the kiln is lined with fire-brick one course thick, with a
stratum of coal ashes three inches thick tamped in between the brick
and wall, which proves a great protection to the wall. About 2,000
fire-bricks were used. The proprietors of this kiln say about one-half
the lower part of the well might have been lined with a first quality of
common brick and saved some expense and been just as good. The form of
the well shown in Fig. 3 is 7 feet in diameter in the bilge, exclusive
of the lining of brick and ashes. Experiments in this vicinity have
proved this to be the best, this contraction toward the top being
absolutely necessary, the expansion of the stone by the heat is so
great that the lime cannot be drawn from perpendicular walls, as was
demonstrated in one instance near here, where a kiln was built on that
principle. The kiln, of course, is for coal, and our stone requires
about three-quarters of a ton per 100 bushels of lime, but this, I am
told, varies according to quality, some requiring more than others; the
quantity can best be determined by experimenting; also the regulation of
the heat--if too great it will cause the stones to melt or run together
as it were, or, if too little, they will not be properly burned. The
business requires skill and judgment to run it successfully. This kiln is located at the foot of a steep bluff, the top about level
with the top of the kiln, with railway track built of wooden sleepers,
with light iron bars, running from the bluff to the top of the kiln, and
a hand-car makes it very convenient filling the kiln. Such a location
should be had if possible. Your inquirer may perhaps get some ideas
of the principles of a kiln for using _coal_. The dimensions may be
reduced, if desired. If for _wood_, the arch would have to be formed for
that, and the height of kiln reduced. *       *       *       *       *




THE MANUFACTURE OF APPLE JELLY. [Footnote: From the report of the New York Agricultural Society.] Within the county of Oswego, New York, Dewitt C. Peck reports there are
five apple jelly factories in operation. The failure of the apple crop,
for some singular and unexplained reason, does not extend in great
degree to the natural or ungrafted fruit. Though not so many as common,
even of these apples, there are yet enough to keep these five mills and
the numerous cider mills pretty well employed. The largest jelly factory
is located near the village of Mexico, and as there are some features in
regard to this manufacture peculiar to this establishment which may be
new and interesting, we will undertake a brief description. The factory
is located on the Salmon Creek, which affords the necessary power. A
portion of the main floor, first story, is occupied as a saw mill,
the slabs furnishing fuel for the boiler furnace connected with the
evaporating department. Just above the mill, along the bank of the pond,
and with one end projecting over the water, are arranged eight large
bins, holding from five hundred to one thousand bushels each, into which
the apples are delivered from the teams. The floor in each of these has
a sharp pitch or inclination toward the water and at the lower end is a
grate through which the fruit is discharged, when wanted, into a trough
half submerged in the pond. The preparation of the fruit and extraction of the juice proceeds
as follows: Upon hoisting a gate in the lower end of this trough,
considerable current is caused, and the water carries the fruit a
distance of from thirty to one hundred feet, and passes into the
basement of the mill, where, tumbling down a four-foot perpendicular
fall, into a tank, tight in its lower half and slatted so as to permit
the escape of water and impurities in the upper half, the apples are
thoroughly cleansed from all earthy or extraneous matter. Such is the
friction caused by the concussion of the fall, the rolling and rubbing
of the apples together, and the pouring of the water, that decayed
sections of the fruit are ground off and the rotten pulp passes away
with other impurities. From this tank the apples are hoisted upon an
endless chain elevator, with buckets in the form of a rake-head with
iron teeth, permitting drainage and escape of water, to an upper story
of the mill, whence by gravity they descend to the grater. The press
is wholly of iron, all its motions, even to the turning of the screws,
being actuated by the water power. The cheese is built up with layers
inclosed in strong cotton cloth, which displaces the straw used in olden
time, and serves also to strain the cider. As it is expressed from
the press tank, the cider passes to a storage tank, and thence to the
defecator. This defecator is a copper pan, eleven feet long and about three feet
wide. At each end of this pan is placed a copper tube three inches in
diameter and closed at both ends. Lying between and connecting
these two, are twelve tubes, also of copper, 11/2 inches in diameter,
penetrating the larger tubes at equal distances from their upper and
under surfaces, the smaller being parallel with each other, and 11/2
inches apart. When placed in position, the larger tubes, which act as
manifolds, supplying the smaller with steam, rest upon the bottom of the
pan, and thus the smaller pipes have a space of three-fourths of an inch
underneath their outer surfaces. The cider comes from the storage tank in a continuous stream about
three-eighths of an inch in diameter. Steam is introduced to the large
or manifold tubes, and from them distributed through the smaller ones at
a pressure of from twenty-five to thirty pounds per inch. Trap valves
are provided for the escape of water formed by condensation within the
pipes. The primary object of the defecator is to remove all impurities
and perfectly clarify the liquid passing through it. All portions of
pomace and other minute particles of foreign matter, when heated,
expand and float in the form of scum upon the surface of the cider. An
ingeniously contrived floating rake drags off this scum and delivers it
over the side of the pan. To facilitate this removal, one side of the
pan, commencing at a point just below the surface of the cider, is
curved gently outward and upward, terminating in a slightly inclined
plane, over the edge of which the scum is pushed by the rake into a
trough and carried away. A secondary purpose served by the defecator
is that of reducing the cider by evaporation to a partial sirup of the
specific gravity of about 20 deg. When of this consistency the liquid
is drawn from the bottom and less agitated portion of the defecator by a
siphon, and thence carried to the evaporator, which is located upon the
same framework and just below the defecator. The evaporator consists of a separate system of six copper tubes, each
twelve feet long and three inches in diameter. These are each jacketed
or inclosed in an iron pipe of four inches internal diameter, fitted
with steam-tight collars so as to leave half an inch steam space
surrounding the copper tubes. The latter are open at both ends
permitting the admission and egress of the sirup and the escape of the
steam caused by evaporation therefrom, and are arranged upon the frame
so as to have a very slight inclination downward in the direction of
the current, and each nearly underneath its predecessor in regular
succession. Each is connected by an iron supply pipe, having a steam
gauge or indicator attached, with a large manifold, and that by other
pipes with a steam boiler of thirty horse power capacity. Steam being
let on at from twenty five to thirty pounds pressure, the stream of
sirup is received from the defecator through a strainer, which removes
any impurities possibly remaining into the upper evaporator tube;
passing in a gentle flow through that, it is delivered into a funnel
connected with the next tube below, and so, back and forth, through the
whole system. The sirup enters the evaporator at a consistency of from
20 deg. Baume, and emerges from the last tube some three minutes
later at a consistency of from 30 deg. Baume, which is found on
cooling to be the proper point for perfect jelly. This point is found to
vary one or two degrees, according to the fermentation consequent upon
bruises in handling the fruit, decay of the same, or any little delay in
expressing the juice from the cheese. The least fermentation occasions
the necessity for a lower reduction. To guard against this, no cheese
is allowed to stand over night, no pomace left in the grater or vat, no
cider in the tank; and further to provide against fermentation, a large
water tank is located upon the roof and filled by a force pump, and by
means of hose connected with this, each grater, press, vat, tank, pipe,
trough, or other article of machinery used, can be thoroughly washed and
cleansed. Hot water, instead of cider, is sometimes sent through the
defecator, evaporator, etc., until all are thoroughly scalded and
purified. If the saccharometer shows too great or too little reduction,
the matter is easily regulated by varying the steam pressure in the
evaporator by means of a valve in the supply pipe. If boiled cider
instead of jelly is wanted for making pies, sauces, etc., it is drawn
off from one of the upper evaporator tubes according to the consistency
desired; or can be produced at the end of the process by simply reducing
the steam pressure. As the jelly emerges from the evaporator it is transferred to a tub
holding some fifty gallons, and by mixing a little therein, any little
variations in reduction or in the sweetness or sourness of the fruit
used are equalized. From this it is drawn through faucets, while hot,
into the various packages in which it is shipped to market. A favorite
form of package for family use is a nicely turned little wooden
bucket with cover and bail, two sizes, holding five and ten pounds
respectively. The smaller packages are shipped in cases for convenience
in handling. The present product of this manufactory is from 1,500 to
1,800 pounds of jelly each day of ten hours. It is calculated that
improvements now in progress will increase this to something more than a
ton per day. Each bushel of fruit will produce from four to five pounds
of jelly, fruit ripening late in the season being more productive than
earlier varieties. Crab apples produce the finest jelly; sour, crabbed,
natural fruit makes the best looking article, and a mixture of all
varieties gives most satisfactory results as to flavor and general
quality. As the pomace is shoveled from the finished cheese, it is again ground
under a toothed cylinder, and thence drops into large troughs, through a
succession of which a considerable stream of water is flowing. Here it
is occasionally agitated by raking from the lower to the upper end of
the trough as the current carries it downward, and the apple seeds
becoming disengaged drop to the bottom into still water, while the pulp
floats away upon the stream. A succession of troughs serves to remove
nearly all the seeds. The value of the apple seeds thus saved is
sufficient to pay the daily wages of all the hands employed in the whole
establishment. The apples are measured in the wagon box, one and a half
cubic feet being accounted a bushel. This mill ordinarily employs about six men: One general superintendent,
who buys and measures the apples, keeps time books, attends to all the
accounts and the working details of the mill, and acts as cashier; one
sawyer, who manufactures lumber for the local market and saws the slabs
into short lengths suitable for the furnace; one cider maker, who grinds
the apples and attends the presses; one jelly maker, who attends the
defecator, evaporator, and mixing tub, besides acting as his own fireman
and engineer; one who attends the apple seed troughs and acts as general
helper, and one man-of-all-work to pack, ship and assist whenever
needed. The establishment was erected late in the season of 1880,
and manufactured that year about forty-five tons of jelly, besides
considerable cider exchanged to the farmers for apples, and some boiled
cider. The price paid for apples in 1880, when the crop was superabundant, was
six to eight cents per bushel; in 1881, fifteen cents. The proprietor
hopes next year to consume 100,000 bushels. These institutions are
important to the farmer in that they use much fruit not otherwise
valuable and very perishable. Fruit so crabbed and gnarled as to have no
market value, and even frozen apples, if delivered while yet solid, can
be used. (Such apples are placed in the water while frozen, the water
draws the frost sufficiently to be grated, and passing through the press
and evaporator before there is time for chemical change, they are found
to make very good jelly. They are valuable to the consumer by converting
the perishable, cheap, almost worthless crop of the bearing and abundant
years into such enduring form that its consumption may be carried over
to years of scarcity and furnish healthful food in cheap and pleasant
form to many who would otherwise be deprived; and lastly, they are of
great interest to society, in that they give to cider twice the value
for purposes of food that it has or can have, even to the manufacturer,
for use as a beverage and intoxicant. *       *       *       *       *




IMPROVED GRAPE BAGS. It stands to reason that were our summers warmer we should be able to
grow grapes successfully on open walls; it is therefore probable that
a new grape bag, the invention of M. Pelletier, 20 Rue de la Banque,
Paris, intended to serve a double purpose, viz., protecting the fruit
and hastening its maturity, will, when it becomes known, be welcomed in
this country. It consists of a square of curved glass so fixed to
the bag that the sun's rays are concentrated upon the fruit, thereby
rendering its ripening more certain in addition to improving its quality
generally. The glass is affixed to the bag by means of a light iron wire
support. It covers that portion of it next the sun, so that it increases
the amount of light and warms the grapes without scorching them, a
result due to the convexity of the glass and the layer of air between it
and the bag. M. Pelletier had the idea of rendering these bags cheaper
by employing plain squares instead of curved ones, but the advantage
thus obtained was more than counterbalanced by their comparative
inefficacy. In practice it was found that the curved squares gave an
average of 7 deg. more than the straight ones, while there was a difference
of 10 deg. when the bags alone were used, thus plainly demonstrating the
practical value of the invention. Whether these glass-fronted bags would have much value in the case of
grapes grown under glass in the ordinary way is a question that can only
be determined by actual experiment; but where the vines are on walls,
either under glass screens or in the open air, so that the bunches feel
the full force of the sun's rays, there can be no doubt as to their
utility, and it is probable that by their aid many of the continental
varieties which we do not now attempt to grow in the open, and which are
scarcely worthy of a place under glass, might be well ripened. At
any rate we ought to give anything a fair trial which may serve to
neutralize, if only in a slight degree, the uncertainty of our summers. As it is, we have only about two varieties of grapes, and these not the
best of the hardy kinds, as regards flavor and appearance, that ripen
out of doors, and even these do not always succeed. We know next to
nothing of the many really well-flavored kinds which are so much
appreciated in many parts of the Continent. The fact is, our outdoor
culture of grapes offers a striking contrast to that practiced under
glass, and although our comparatively sunless and moist climate affords
some excuse for our shortcomings in this respect, there is no valid
reason for the utter want of good culture which is to be observed in a
general way. [Illustration: GRAPE BAG.--OPEN.] Given intelligent training, constant care in stopping the laterals, and
checking mildew as well as thinning the berries, allowing each bunch to
get the full benefit of sun and air, and I believe good eatable grapes
would often be obtained even in summers marked by a low average
temperature. [Illustration: GRAPE BAG.--CLOSED.] If, moreover, to a good system of culture we add some such mechanical
contrivance as that under notice whereby the bunches enjoy an average
warmth some 10 deg. higher than they otherwise would do, we not only insure
the grapes coming to perfection in favored districts, but outdoor
culture might probably be practiced in higher latitudes than is now
practicable. [Illustration: CURVED GLASS FOR FRONT OF BAG.] The improved grape bag would also offer great facilities for destroying
mildew or guarantee the grapes against its attacks, as a light dusting
administered as soon as the berries were fairly formed would suffice for
the season, as owing to the glass protecting the berries from driving
rains, which often accompany south or south-west winds in summer and
autumn, the sulphur would not be washed off. [Illustration: CURVED GLASS FIXED ON BAG.] The inventor claims, and we should say with just reason, that these
glass fronted bags would be found equally serviceable for the ripening
of pears and other choice fruits, and with a view to their being
employed for such a purpose, he has had them made of varying sizes and
shapes. In conclusion, it may be observed that, in addition to advancing
the maturity of the fruits to which they are applied, they also serve to
preserve them from falling to the ground when ripe.--J. COBNHILL, _in
the Garden_. *       *       *       *       *




UTILIZATION OF SOLAR HEAT. At a popular fete in the Tuileries Gardens I was struck with an
experiment which seems deserving of the immediate attention of the
English public and military authorities. Among the attractions of the fete was an apparatus for the concentration
and utilization of solar heat, and, though the sun was not very
brilliant, I saw this apparatus set in motion a printing machine which
printed several thousand copies of a specimen newspaper entitled the
_Soleil Journal_. The sun's rays are concentrated in a reflector, which moves at the
same rate as the sun and heats a vertical boiler, setting the motive
steam-engine at work. As may be supposed, the only object was to
demonstrate the possibility of utilizing the concentrated heat of the
solar rays; but I closely examined it, because the apparatus seems
capable of great utility in existing circumstances. Here in France,
indeed, there is a radical drawback--the sun is often overclouded. Thousands of years ago the idea of utilizing the solar rays must have
suggested itself, and there are still savage tribes who know no other
mode of combustion; but the scientific application has hitherto been
lacking. About fifteen years ago
Professor Mouchon, of Tours, began constructing such an apparatus, and
his experiments have been continued by M. Pifre, who has devoted much
labor and expense to realizing M. Mouchou's idea. A company has now come
to his aid, and has constructed a number of apparatus of different sizes
at a factory which might speedily turn out a large number of them. It is
evident that in a country of uninterrupted sunshine the boiler might be
heated in thirty or forty minutes. A portable apparatus could boil two
and one-half quarts an hour, or, say, four gallons a day, thus supplying
by distillation or ebullition six or eight men. The apparatus can be
easily carried on a man's back, and on condition of water, even of the
worst quality, being obtainable, good drinking and cooking water is
insured. M. De Rougaumond, a young scientific writer, has just published
an interesting volume on the invention. I was able yesterday to verify
his statements, for I saw cider made, a pump set in motion, and coffee
made--in short, the calorific action of the sun superseding that of
fuel. The apparatus, no doubt, has not yet reached perfection, but as it
is it would enable the soldier in India or Egypt to procure in the field
good water and to cook his food rapidly. The invention is of especial
importance to England just now, but even when the Egyptian question is
settled the Indian troops might find it of inestimable value. Red tape should for once be disregarded, and a competent commission
forthwith sent to 30 Rue d'Assas, with instructions to report
immediately, for every minute saved may avoid suffering for Englishmen
fighting abroad for their country. I may, of course, be mistaken, but
a commission would decide, and if the apparatus is good the slightest
delay in its adoption would be deplorable.--_Paris Correspondence London
Times_. *       *       *       *       *




HOW TO ESTABLISH A TRUE MERIDIAN. [Footnote: A paper read before the Engineers' Club of Philadelphia.] By PROFESSOR L. M. HAUPT. The discovery of the magnetic needle was a boon to mankind, and has been
of inestimable service in guiding the mariner through trackless waters,
and the explorer over desert wastes. In these, its legitimate uses, the
needle has not a rival, but all efforts to apply it to the accurate
determination of permanent boundary lines have proven very
unsatisfactory, and have given rise to much litigation, acerbity, and
even death. For these and other cogent reasons, strenuous efforts are being made to
dispense, so far as practicable, with the use of the magnetic needle
in surveying, and to substitute therefor the more accurate method of
traversing from a true meridian. This method, however, involves a
greater degree of preparation and higher qualifications than are
generally possessed, and unless the matter can be so simplified as to be
readily understood, it is unreasonable to expect its general application
in practice. Much has been written upon the various methods of determining, the
true meridian, but it is so intimately related to the determination of
latitude and time, and these latter in turn upon the fixing of a true
meridian, that the novice can find neither beginning nor end. When to
these difficulties are added the corrections for parallax, refraction,
instrumental errors, personal equation, and the determination of the
probable error, he is hopelessly confused, and when he learns that time
may be sidereal, mean solar, local, Greenwich, or Washington, and he is
referred to an ephemeris and table of logarithms for data, he becomes
lost in "confusion worse confounded," and gives up in despair, settling
down to the conviction that the simple method of compass surveying is
the best after all, even if not the most accurate. Having received numerous requests for information upon the subject, I
have thought it expedient to endeavor to prepare a description of the
method of determining the true meridian which should be sufficiently
clear and practical to be generally understood by those desiring to make
use of such information. This will involve an elementary treatment of the subject, beginning with
the


DEFINITIONS. The _celestial sphere_ is that imaginary surface upon which all
celestial objects are projected. The _earth's axis_ is the imaginary line about which it revolves. The _poles_ are the points in which the axis pierces the surface of the
earth, or of the celestial sphere. A _meridian_ is a great circle of the earth cut out by a plane passing
through the axis. All meridians are therefore north and south lines
passing through the poles. From these definitions it follows that if there were a star exactly at
the pole it would only be necessary to set up an instrument and take a
bearing to it for the meridian. Such not being the case, however, we are
obliged to take some one of the near circumpolar stars as our object,
and correct the observation according to its angular distance from the
meridian at the time of observation. For convenience, the bright star known as Ursae Minoris or Polaris, is
generally selected. This star apparently revolves about the north pole,
in an orbit whose mean radius is 1 deg. 19' 13",[1] making the revolution in
23 hours 56 minutes. [Footnote 1: This is the codeclination as given in the Nautical Almanac. The mean value decreases by about 20 seconds each year.] During this time it must therefore cross the meridian twice, once above
the pole and once below; the former is called the _upper_, and the
latter the _lower meridian transit or culmination_. It must also pass
through the points farthest east and west from the meridian. The former
is called the _eastern elongation_, the latter the _western_. An observation may he made upon Polaris at any of these four points,
or at any other point of its orbit, but this latter case becomes too
complicated for ordinary practice, and is therefore not considered. If the observation were made upon the star at the time of its upper or
lower culmination, it would give the true meridian at once, but this
involves a knowledge of the true local time of transit, or the longitude
of the place of observation, which is generally an unknown quantity; and
moreover, as the star is then moving east or west, or at right angles to
the place of the meridian, at the rate of 15 deg. of arc in about one hour,
an error of so slight a quantity as only four seconds of time would
introduce an error of one minute of arc. If the observation be made,
however, upon either elongation, when the star is moving up or down,
that is, in the direction of the vertical wire of the instrument, the
error of observation in the angle between it and the pole will be
inappreciable. This is, therefore, the best position upon which to make
the observation, as the precise time of the elongation need not be
given. It can be determined with sufficient accuracy by a glance at the
relative positions of the star Alioth, in the handle of the Dipper,
and Polaris (see Fig. When the line joining these two stars is
horizontal or nearly so, and Alioth is to the _west_ of Polaris, the
latter is at its _eastern_ elongation, and _vice versa_, thus:

[Illustration]

But since the star at either elongation is off the meridian, it will
be necessary to determine the angle at the place of observation to be
turned off on the instrument to bring it into the meridian. This angle,
called the azimuth of the pole star, varies with the latitude of the
observer, as will appear from Fig 2, and hence its value must be
computed for different latitudes, and the surveyor must know his
_latitude_ before he can apply it. Let N be the north pole of the
celestial sphere; S, the position of Polaris at its eastern elongation;
then N S=1 deg. The azimuth of Polaris at the
latitude 40 deg. north is represented by the angle N O S, and that at 60 deg. north, by the angle N O' S, which is greater, being an exterior angle
of the triangle, O S O. From this we see that the azimuth varies at the
latitude. We have first, then, to _find the latitude of the place of observation_. Of the several methods for doing this, we shall select the simplest,
preceding it by a few definitions. A _normal_ line is the one joining the point directly overhead, called
the _zenith_, with the one under foot called the _nadir_. The _celestial horizon_ is the intersection of the celestial sphere by a
plane passing through the center of the earth and perpendicular to the
normal. A _vertical circle_ is one whose plane is perpendicular to the horizon,
hence all such circles must pass through the normal and have the zenith
and nadir points for their poles. The _altitude_ of a celestial object
is its distance above the horizon measured on the arc of a vertical
circle. As the distance from the horizon to the zenith is 90 deg., the
difference, or _complement_ of the altitude, is called the _zenith
distance_, or _co-altitude_. The _azimuth_ of an object is the angle between the vertical plane
through the object and the plane of the meridian, measured on the
horizon, and usually read from the south point, as 0 deg., through west, at
90, north 180 deg., etc., closing on south at 0 deg. These two co-ordinates, the altitude and azimuth, will determine the
position of any object with reference to the observer's place. The
latter's position is usually given by his latitude and longitude
referred to the equator and some standard meridian as co-ordinates. The _latitude_ being the angular distance north or south of the equator,
and the _longitude_ east or west of the assumed meridian. We are now prepared to prove that _the altitude of the pole is equal to
the latitude of the place of observation_. Let H P Z Q1, etc., Fig. 2, represent a meridian section of the sphere,
in which P is the north pole and Z the place of observation, then H H1
will be the horizon, Q Q1 the equator, H P will be the altitude of P,
and Q1 Z the latitude of Z. These two arcs are equal, for H C Z = P C
Q1 = 90 deg., and if from these equal quadrants the common angle P C Z be
subtracted, the remainders H C P and Z C Q1, will be equal. To _determine the altitude of the pole_, or, in other words, _the
latitude of the place_. Observe the altitude of the pole star _when on the meridian_, either
above or below the pole, and from this observed altitude corrected for
refraction, subtract the distance of the star from the pole, or its
_polar distance_, if it was an upper transit, or add it if a lower. The result will be the required latitude with sufficient accuracy for
ordinary purposes. The time of the star's being on the meridian can be determined with
sufficient accuracy by a mere inspection of the heavens. The refraction
is _always negative_, and may be taken from the table appended by
looking up the amount set opposite the observed altitude. Thus, if the
observer's altitude should be 40 deg. 39' the nearest refraction 01' 07",
should be subtracted from 40 deg. 37' 53" for the
latitude. TO FIND THE AZIMUTH OF POLARIS. As we have shown the azimuth of Polaris to be a function of the
latitude, and as the latitude is now known, we may proceed to find the
required azimuth. For this purpose we have a right-angled spherical
triangle, Z S P, Fig. 4, in which Z is the place of observation, P the
north pole, and S is Polaris. In this triangle we have given the polar
distance, P S = 10 deg. 19' 13"; the angle at S = 90 deg. ; and the distance Z
P, being the complement of the latitude as found above, or 90 deg.--L. Substituting these in the formula for the azimuth, we will have sin. of co-latitude, from
which, by assuming different values for the co-latitude, we compute the
following table:

       AZIMUTH TABLE FOR POINTS BETWEEN 26 deg. LATTITUDES
 ___________________________________________________________________
|      |         |          |         |         |         |         |
| Year |   26 deg. |
|______|_________|__________|_________|_________|_________|_________|
|      |         |          |         |         |         |         |
|      |  deg.'"  |
| 1882 | 1 28 05 | 1 29 40  | 1 31 25 | 1 33 22 | 1 35 30 | 1 37 52 |
| 1883 | 1 27 45 | 1 29 20  | 1 31 04 | 1 33 00 | 1 35 08 | 1 37 30 |
| 1884 | 1 27 23 | 1 28 57  | 1 30 41 | 1 32 37 | 1 34 45 | 1 37 05 |
| 1885 | 1 27 01 | 1 28 351/2 | 1 30 19 | 1 32 14 | 1 34 22 | 1 36 41 |
| 1886 | 1 26 39 | 1 28 13  | 1 29 56 | 1 31 51 | 1 33 57 | 1 36 17 |
|______|_________|__________|_________|_________|_________|_________|
|      |         |          |         |         |         |         |
| Year |   38 deg. |
|______|_________|__________|_________|_________|_________|_________|
|      |         |          |         |         |         |         |
|      |  deg.'"  |
| 1882 | 1 40 29 | 1 43 21  | 1 46 33 | 1 50 05 | 1 53 59 | 1 58 20 |
| 1883 | 1 40 07 | 1 42 58  | 1 46 08 | 1 49 39 | 1 53 34 | 1 57 53 |
| 1884 | 1 39 40 | 1 42 31  | 1 45 41 | 1 49 11 | 1 53 05 | 1 57 23 |
| 1885 | 1 39 16 | 1 42 07  | 1 45 16 | 1 48 45 | 1 52 37 | 1 56 54 |
| 1886 | 1 38 51 | 1 41 41  | 1 44 49 | 1 48 17 | 1 52 09 | 1 56 24 |
|______|_________|__________|_________|_________|_________|_________|
|      |         |
| Year |   50 deg. |
|______|_________|
|      |         |
|      |  deg.'"  |
| 1882 | 2 03 11 |
| 1883 | 2 02 42 |
| 1884 | 2 02 11 |
| 1885 | 2 01 42 |
| 1886 | 2 01 11 |
|______|_________|

An analysis of this table shows that the azimuth this year (1882)
increases with the latitude from 1 deg. It also shows that the azimuth of Polaris at
any one point of observation decreases slightly from year to year. This
is due to the increase in declination, or decrease in the star's polar
distance. north latitude, this annual decrease in the azimuth
is about 22", while at 50 deg. As the variation in
azimuth for each degree of latitude is small, the table is only computed
for the even numbered degrees; the intermediate values being readily
obtained by interpolation. We see also that an error of a few minutes of
latitude will not affect the result in finding the meridian, e.g., the
azimuth at 40 deg. 44'
56", the difference (01' 35") being the correction for one degree of
latitude between 40 deg. Or, in other words, an error of one degree
in finding one's latitude would only introduce an error in the azimuth
of one and a half minutes. With ordinary care the probable error of the
latitude as determined from the method already described need not exceed
a few minutes, making the error in azimuth as laid off on the arc of an
ordinary transit graduated to single minutes, practically zero. REFRACTION TABLE FOR ANY ALTITUDE WITHIN THE LATITUDE OF THE UNITED
STATES. _____________________________________________________
|           |              |           |              |
| Apparent  | Refraction   | Apparent  | Refraction   |
| Altitude. |
|___________|______________|___________|______________|
|           |              |           |              |
|    25 deg. 2' 4.2"   |    38 deg. 1' 14.4"  |
|    26     |    1 58.8    |    39     |    1  11.8   |
|    27     |    1 53.8    |    40     |    1   9.3   |
|    28     |    1 49.1    |    41     |    1   6.9   |
|    29     |    1 44.7    |    42     |    1   4.6   |
|    30     |    1 40.5    |    43     |    1   2.4   |
|    31     |    1 36.6    |    44     |    0   0.3   |
|    32     |    1 33.0    |    45     |    0  58.1   |
|    33     |    1 29.5    |    46     |    0  56.1   |
|    34     |    1 26.1    |    47     |    0  54.2   |
|    35     |    1 23.0    |    48     |    0  52.3   |
|    36     |    1 20.0    |    49     |    0  50.5   |
|    37     |    1 17.1    |    50     |    0  48.8   |
|___________|______________|___________|______________|


APPLICATIONS. In practice to find the true meridian, two observations must be made at
intervals of six hours, or they may be made upon different nights. The
first is for latitude, the second for azimuth at elongation. To make either, the surveyor should provide himself with a good transit
with vertical arc, a bull's eye, or hand lantern, plumb bobs, stakes,
etc. [1] Having "set up" over the point through which it is proposed to
establish the meridian, at a time when the line joining Polaris and
Alioth is nearly vertical, level the telescope by means of the attached
level, which should be in adjustment, set the vernier of the vertical
arc at zero, and take the reading. If the pole star is about making its
_upper_ transit, it will rise gradually until reaching the meridian as
it moves westward, and then as gradually descend. When near the highest
part of its orbit point the telescope at the star, having an assistant
to hold the "bull's eye" so as to reflect enough light down the tube
from the object end to illumine the cross wires but not to obscure the
star, or better, use a perforated silvered reflector, clamp the tube in
this position, and as the star continues to rise keep the _horizontal_
wire upon it by means of the tangent screw until it "rides" along this
wire and finally begins to fall below it. Take the reading of the
vertical arc and the result will be the observed altitude. [Footnote 1: A sextant and artificial horizon may be used to find the
_altitude_ of a star. In this case the observed angle must be divided by
2.] It is a little more accurate to find the altitude by taking the
complement of the observed zenith distance, if the vertical arc has
sufficient range. This is done by pointing first to Polaris when at
its highest (or lowest) point, reading the vertical arc, turning the
horizontal limb half way around, and the telescope over to get another
reading on the star, when the difference of the two readings will be the
_double_ zenith distance, and _half_ of this subtracted from 90 deg. The less the time intervening between these two
pointings, the more accurate the result will be. Having now found the altitude, correct it for refraction by subtracting
from it the amount opposite the observed altitude, as given in the
refraction table, and the result will be the latitude. The observer must
now wait about six hours until the star is at its western elongation,
or may postpone further operations for some subsequent night. In the
meantime he will take from the azimuth table the amount given for his
date and latitude, now determined, and if his observation is to be made
on the western elongation, he may turn it off on his instrument, so
that when moved to zero, _after_ the observation, the telescope will be
brought into the meridian or turned to the right, and a stake set by
means of a lantern or plummet lamp. [Illustration]

It is, of course, unnecessary to make this correction at the time of
observation, for the angle between any terrestrial object and the star
may be read and the correction for the azimuth of the star applied at
the surveyor's convenience. It is always well to check the accuracy of
the work by an observation upon the other elongation before putting in
permanent meridian marks, and care should be taken that they are not
placed near any local attractions. The meridian having been established,
the magnetic variation or declination may readily be found by setting
an instrument on the meridian and noting its bearing as given by the
needle. If, for example, it should be north 5 deg. _east_, the variation is
west, because the north end of the needle is _west_ of the meridian, and
_vice versa_. _Local time_ may also be readily found by observing the instant when the
sun's center[1] crosses the line, and correcting it for the equation of
time as given above--the result is the true or mean solar time. This,
compared with the clock, will show the error of the latter, and by
taking the difference between the local lime of this and any other
place, the difference of longitude is determined in hours, which can
readily be reduced to degrees by multiplying by fifteen, as 1 h. [Footnote 1: To obtain this time by observation, note the instant of
first contact of the sun's limb, and also of last contact of same, and
take the mean.] APPROXIMATE EQUATION OF TIME. _______________________
    |          |            |
    |   Date. |
    |__________|____________|
    |          |            |
    | Jan. 1 |        4   |
    |        3 |        5   |
    |        5 |        6   |
    |        7 |        7   |
    |        9 |        8   |
    |       12 |        9   |
    |       15 |       10   |
    |       18 |       11   |
    |       21 |       12   |
    |       25 |       13   |
    |       31 |       14   |
    | Feb. 10 |       15   |
    |       21 |       14   |  Clock
    |       27 |       13   |  faster
    | M'ch   4 |       12   |  than
    |        8 |       11   |  sun. |       12 |       10   |
    |       15 |        9   |
    |       19 |        8   |
    |       22 |        7   |
    |       25 |        6   |
    |       28 |        5   |
    | April  1 |        4   |
    |        4 |        3   |
    |        7 |        2   |
    |       11 |        1   |
    |       15 |        0   |
    |          |------------|
    |       19 |        1   |
    |       24 |        2   |
    |       30 |        3   |
    | May   13 |        4   |  Clock
    |       29 |        3   |  slower. | June   5 |        2   |
    |       10 |        1   |
    |       15 |        0   |
    |          |------------|
    |       20 |        1   |
    |       25 |        2   |
    |       29 |        3   |
    | July   5 |        4   |
    |       11 |        5   |
    |       28 |        6   |  Clock
    | Aug. 9 |        5   |  faster. |       15 |        4   |
    |       20 |        3   |
    |       24 |        2   |
    |       28 |        1   |
    |       31 |        0   |
    |          |------------|
    | Sept. 3 |        1   |
    |        6 |        2   |
    |        9 |        3   |
    |       12 |        4   |
    |       15 |        5   |
    |       18 |        6   |
    |       21 |        7   |
    |       24 |        8   |
    |       27 |        9   |
    |       30 |       10   |
    | Oct. 3 |       11   |
    |        6 |       12   |
    |       10 |       13   |
    |       14 |       14   |
    |       19 |       15   |
    |       27 |       16   |  Clock
    | Nov. 15 |       15   |  slower. |       20 |       14   |
    |       24 |       13   |
    |       27 |       12   |
    |       30 |       11   |
    | Dec. 2 |       10   |
    |        5 |        9   |
    |        7 |        8   |
    |        9 |        7   |
    |       11 |        6   |
    |       13 |        5   |
    |       16 |        4   |
    |       18 |        3   |
    |       20 |        2   |
    |       22 |        1   |
    |       24 |        0   |
    |          |------------|
    |       26 |        1   |
    |       28 |        2   |  Clock
    |       30 |        3   |  faster. |__________|____________|

       *       *       *       *       *




THE OCELLATED PHEASANT. The collections of the Museum of Natural History of Paris have just been
enriched with a magnificent, perfectly adult specimen of a species of
bird that all the scientific establishments had put down among their
desiderata, and which, for twenty years past, has excited the curiosity
of naturalists. This species, in fact, was known only by a few caudal
feathers, of which even the origin was unknown, and which figured in the
galleries of the Jardin des Plantes under the name of _Argus ocellatus_. This name was given by J. Verreaux, who was then assistant naturalist at
the museum. L. Bonaparte, in his Tableaux
Paralleliques de l'Ordre des Gallinaces, as _Argus giganteus_, and a
few years later it was reproduced by Slater in his Catalogue of the
Phasianidae, and by Gray is his List of the Gallinaceae. But it was not
till 1871 and 1872 that Elliot, in the Annals and Magazine of Natural
History, and in a splendid monograph of the Phasianidae, pointed out
the peculiarities that were presented by the feathers preserved at the
Museum of Paris, and published a figure of them of the natural size. The discovery of an individual whose state of preservation leaves
nothing to be desired now comes to demonstrate the correctness of
Verreaux's, Bonaparte's, and Elliot's suppositions. This bird, whose
tail is furnished with feathers absolutely identical with those that
the museum possessed, is not a peacock, as some have asserted, nor an
ordinary Argus of Malacca, nor an argus of the race that Elliot named
_Argus grayi_, and which inhabits Borneo, but the type of a new genus of
the family Phasianidae. This Gallinacean, in fact, which Mr. Maingonnat
has given up to the Museum of Natural History, has not, like the common
Argus of Borneo, excessively elongated secondaries; and its tail is not
formed of normal rectrices, from the middle of which spring two very
long feathers, a little curved and arranged like a roof; but it consists
of twelve wide plane feathers, regularly tapering, and ornamented with
ocellated spots, arranged along the shaft. Its head is not bare, but is
adorned behind with a tuft of thread-like feathers; and, finally, its
system of coloration and the proportions of the different parts of its
body are not the same as in the common argus of Borneo. There is reason,
then, for placing the bird, under the name of _Rheinardius ocellatus_,
in the family Phasianidae, after the genus _Argus_ which it connects,
after a manner, with the pheasants properly so-called. The specific name
_ocellatus_ has belonged to it since 1871, and must be substituted for
that of _Rheinardi_. The bird measures more than two meters in length, three-fourths of which
belong to the tail. The head, which is relatively small, appears to be
larger than it really is, owing to the development of the piliform tuft
on the occiput, this being capable of erection so as to form a crest
0.05 to 0.06 of a meter in height. The feathers of this crest are
brown and white. The back and sides of the head are covered with downy
feathers of a silky brown and silvery gray, and the front of the neck
with piliform feathers of a ruddy brown. The upper part of the body is
of a blackish tint and the under part of a reddish brown, the whole
dotted with small white or _cafe-au-lait_ spots. Analogous spots are
found on the wings and tail, but on the secondaries these become
elongated, and tear-like in form. On the remiges the markings are quite
regularly hexagonal in shape; and on the upper coverts of the tail
and on the rectrices they are accompanied with numerous ferruginous
blotches, some of which are irregularly scattered over the whole surface
of the vane, while others, marked in the center with a blackish spot,
are disposed in series along the shaft and resemble ocelli. This
similitude of marking between the rectrices and subcaudals renders the
distinction between these two kinds of feathers less sharp than in many
other Gallinaceans, and the more so in that two median rectrices are
considerably elongated and assume exactly the aspect of tail feathers. [Illustration: THE OCELLATED PHEASANT (_Rheinardius ocellatus_).] They are all absolutely plane,
all spread out horizontally, and they go on increasing in length
from the exterior to the middle. They are quite wide at the point of
insertion, increase in diameter at the middle, and afterward taper to
a sharp point. Altogether they form a tail of extraordinary length and
width which the bird holds slightly elevated, so as to cause it to
describe a graceful curve, and the point of which touches the soil. The
beak, whose upper mandible is less arched than that of the pheasants,
exactly resembles that of the arguses. It is slightly inflated at the
base, above the nostrils, and these latter are of an elongated-oval
form. In the bird that I have before me the beak, as well as the feet
and legs, is of a dark rose-color. The legs are quite long and are
destitute of spurs. They terminate in front in three quite delicate
toes, connected at the base by membranes, and behind in a thumb that is
inserted so high that it scarcely touches the ground in walking. This
magnificent bird was captured in a portion of Tonkin as yet unexplored
by Europeans, in a locality named Buih-Dinh, 400 kilometers to the south
of Hue.--_La Nature_. *       *       *       *       *




THE MAIDENHAIR TREE. The Maidenhair tree--Gingkgo biloba--of which we give an illustration,
is not only one of our most ornamental deciduous trees, but one of the
most interesting. Few persons would at first sight take it to be a
Conifer, more especially as it is destitute of resin; nevertheless,
to that group it belongs, being closely allied to the Yew, but
distinguishable by its long-stalked, fan-shaped leaves, with numerous
radiating veins, as in an Adiantum. These leaves, like those of the
larch but unlike most Conifers, are deciduous, turning of a pale yellow
color before they fall. The tree is found in Japan and in China, but
generally in the neighborhood of temples or other buildings, and is, we
believe, unknown in a truly wild state. As in the case of several other
trees planted in like situations, such as Cupressus funebris, Abies
fortunei, A. kaempferi, Cryptomeria japonica, Sciadopitys verticillata,
it is probable that the trees have been introduced from Thibet, or
other unexplored districts, into China and Japan. Though now a solitary
representative of its genus, the Gingkgo was well represented in the
coal period, and also existed through the secondary and tertiary epochs,
Professor Heer having identified kindred specimens belonging to sixty
species and eight genera in fossil remains generally distributed through
the northern hemisphere. Whatever inference we may draw, it is at least
certain that the tree was well represented in former times, if now it
be the last of its race. It was first known to Kaempfer in 1690, and
described by him in 1712, and was introduced into this country in the
middle of the eighteenth century. Loudon relates a curious tale as
to the manner in which a French amateur became possessed of it. The
Frenchman, it appears, came to England, and paid a visit to an English
nurseryman, who was the possessor of five plants, raised from Japanese
seeds. The hospitable Englishman entertained the Frenchman only too
well. He allowed his commercial instincts to be blunted by wine, and
sold to his guest the five plants for the sum of 25 guineas. Next
morning, when time for reflection came, the Englishman attempted to
regain one only of the plants for the same sum that the Frenchman had
given for all five, but without avail. The plants were conveyed to
France, where as each plant had cost about 40 crowns, _ecus_, the tree
got the name of _arbre a quarante ecus_. This is the story as given by
Loudon, who tells us that Andre Thouin used to relate the fact in his
lectures at the Jardin des Plantes, whether as an illustration of the
perfidy of Albion is not stated. The tree is dioecious, bearing male catkins on one plant, female on
another. All the female trees in Europe are believed to have originated
from a tree near Geneva, of which Auguste Pyramus de Candolle secured
grafts, and distributed them throughout the Continent. Nevertheless, the
female tree is rarely met with, as compared with the male; but it is
quite possible that a tree which generally produces male flowers only
may sometimes bear female flowers only. We have no certain evidence of
this in the case of the Gingkgo, but it is a common enough occurrence in
other dioecious plants, and the occurrence of a fruiting specimen near
Philadelphia, as recently recorded by Mr. Meehan, may possibly be
attributed to this cause. The tree of which we give a figure is growing at Broadlands, Hants, and
is about 40 feet in height, with a trunk that measures 7 feet in girth
at 3 feet from the ground, with a spread of branches measuring 45 feet. These dimensions have been considerably exceeded in other cases. In 1837
a tree at Purser's Cross measured 60 feet and more in height. Loudon
himself had a small tree in his garden at Bayswater on which a female
branch was grafted. It is to be feared that this specimen has long since
perished. We have already alluded to its deciduous character, in which it is
allied to the larch. It presents another point of resemblance both to
the larch and the cedar in the short spurs upon which both leaves and
male catkins are borne, but these contracted branches are mingled with
long extension shoots; there seems, however, no regular alternation
between the short and the long shoots, at any rate the _rationale_ of
their production is not understood, though in all probability a little
observation of the growing plant would soon clear the matter up. The fruit is drupaceous, with a soft outer coat and a hard woody shell,
greatly resembling that of a Cycad, both externally and internally. Whether the albumen contains the peculiar "corpuscles" common to Cycads
and Conifers, we do not for certain know, though from the presence of 2
to 3 embryos in one seed, as noted by Endlicher, we presume this is the
case. The interest of these corpuscles, it may be added, lies in the
proof of affinity they offer between Conifers and the higher Cryptogams,
such as ferns and lycopods--an affinity shown also in the peculiar
venation of the Gingkgo. Conifers are in some degree links between
ordinary flowering plants and the higher Cryptogams, and serve to
connect in genealogical sequence groups once considered quite distinct. In germination the two fleshy cotyledons of the Gingkgo remain within
the shell, leaving the three-sided plumule to pass upward; the young
stem bears its leaves in threes. We have no desire to enter further upon the botanical peculiarities of
this tree; enough if we have indicated in what its peculiar interest
consists. We have only to add that in gardens varieties exist some with
leaves more deeply cut than usual, others with leaves nearly entire, and
others with leaves of a golden-yellow color.--_Gardeners' Chronicle_. [Illustration: THE MAIDENHAIR TREE IN THE GARDENS AT BROADLANDS.] *       *       *       *       *




THE WOODS OF AMERICA. A collection of woods without a parallel in the world is now being
prepared for exhibition by the Directors of the American Museum of
Natural History. Scattered about the third floor of the Arsenal, in
Central Park, lie 394 logs, some carefully wrapped in bagging,
some inclosed in rough wooden cases, and others partially sawn
longitudinally, horizontally, and diagonally. These logs represent all
but 26 of the varieties of trees indigenous to this country, and
nearly all have a greater or less economic or commercial value. The 26
varieties needed to complete the collection will arrive before winter
sets in, a number of specimens being now on their way to this city from
the groves of California. S. D. Dill and a number of assistants are
engaged in preparing the specimens for exhibition. The logs as they
reach the workroom are wrapped in bagging and inclosed in cases, this
method being used so that the bark, with its growth of lichens and
delicate exfoliations, shall not be injured while the logs are in
process of transportation from various parts of the country to this
city. The logs are each 6 feet in length, and each is the most perfect
specimen of its class that could be found by the experts employed in
making the collection. With the specimens of the trees come to the
museum also specimens of the foliage and the fruits and flowers of the
tree. These come from all parts of the Union--from Alaska on the north
to Texas on the south, from Maine on the east to California on the
west--and there is not a State or Territory in the Union which has not a
representative in this collection of logs. On arrival here the logs are
green, and the first thing in the way of treatment after their arrival
is to season them, a work requiring great care to prevent them from
"checking," as it is technically called, or "season cracking," as the
unscientific term the splitting of the wood in radiating lines during
the seasoning process. As is well known, the sap-wood of a tree seasons
much more quickly than does the heart of the wood. The prevention of
this splitting is very necessary in preparing these specimens for
exhibition, for when once the wood has split its value for dressing for
exhibition is gone. A new plan to prevent this destruction of specimens
is now being tried with some success under the direction of Prof. Into the base of the log and
alongside the heart a deep hole is bored with an auger. As the wood
seasons this hole permits of a pressure inward and so has in many
instances doubtless saved valuable specimens. One of the finest in the
collection, a specimen of the persimmon tree, some two feet in diameter,
has been ruined by the seasoning process. On one side there is a huge
crack, extending from the top to the bottom of the log, which looks as
though some amateur woodman had attempted to split it with an ax and
had made a poor job of it. The great shrinking of the sap-wood of the
persimmon tree makes the wood of but trifling value commercially. It also has a discouraging effect upon collectors, as it is next to
impossible to cure a specimen, so that all but this one characteristic
of the wood can be shown to the public in a perfect form. Before the logs become thoroughly seasoned, or their lines of growth at
all obliterated, a diagram of each is made, showing in accordance with
a regular scale the thickness of the bark, the sap-wood, and the heart. There is also in this diagram a scale showing the growth of the tree
during each year of its life, these yearly growths being regularly
marked about the heart of the tree by move or less regular concentric
circles, the width of which grows smaller and smaller as the tree grows
older. In this connection attention may be called to a specimen in the
collection which is considered one of the most remarkable in the world. It is not a native wood, but an importation, and the tree from which
this wonderful slab is cut is commonly known as the "Pride of India." The heart of this particular tree was on the port side, and between it
and the bark there is very little sap-wood, not more than an inch. On the starbord side, so to speak, the sap-wood has grown out in an
abnormal manner, and one of the lines indicative of a year's growth is
one and seven-eighths inches in width, the widest growth, many experts
who have seen the specimen say, that was ever recorded. The diagrams
referred to are to be kept for scientific uses, and the scheme of
exhibition includes these diagrams as a part of the whole. After a log has become seasoned it is carefully sawed through the center
down about one-third of its length. A transverse cut is then made and
the semi-cylindrical section thus severed from the log is removed. The
upper end is then beveled. When a log is thus treated the inspector can
see the lower two-thirds presenting exactly the same appearance it did
when growing in the forest. The horizontal cut, through the sap-wood
and to the center of the heart, shows the life lines of the tree, and
carefully planed as are this portion, the perpendicular and the beveled
sections, the grain of the wood can thus be plainly seen. That these may
be made even more valuable to the architect and artisan, the right half
of this planed surface will be carefully polished, and the left half
left in the natural state. This portion of the scheme of treatment is
entirely in the interests of architects and artisans, and it is expected
by Prof. Bickmore that it will be the means of securing for some kinds
of trees, essentially of American growth, and which have been virtually
neglected, an important place in architecture and in ornamental
wood-work, and so give a commercial value to woods that are now of
comparatively little value. Among the many curious specimens in the collection now being prepared
for exhibition, one which will excite the greatest curiosity is a
specimen of the honey locust, which was brought here from Missouri. The bark is covered with a growth of thorns from one to four inches
in length, sharp as needles, and growing at irregular intervals. The
specimen arrived here in perfect condition, but, in order that it might
be transported without injury, it had to be suspended from the roof of
a box car, and thus make its trip from Southern Missouri to this city
without change. Another strange specimen in the novel collection is a
portion of the Yucca tree, an abnormal growth of the lily family. The
trunk, about 2 feet in diameter, is a spongy mass, not susceptible of
treatment to which the other specimens are subjected. Its bark is an
irregular stringy, knotted mass, with porcupine-quill-like leaves
springing out in place of the limbs that grow from all well-regulated
trees. One specimen of the yucca was sent to the museum two years ago,
and though the roots and top of the tree were sawn off, shoots sprang
out, and a number of the handsome flowers appeared. The tree was
supposed to be dead and thoroughly seasoned by this Fall, but now, when
the workmen are ready to prepare it for exhibition, it has shown new
life, new shoots have appeared, and two tufts of green now decorate the
otherwise dry and withered log, and the yucca promises to bloom again
before the winter is over. One of the most perfect specimens of the
Douglass spruce ever seen is in the collection, and is a decided
curiosity. It is a recent arrival from the Rocky Mountains. Its bark,
two inches or more in thickness, is perforated with holes reaching to
the-sap-wood. Many of these contain acorns, or the remains of acorns,
which have been stored there by provident woodpeckers, who dug the holes
in the bark and there stored their winter supply of food. The oldest
specimen in the collection is a section of the _Picea engelmanni_, a
species of spruce growing in the Rocky Mountains at a considerable
elevation above the sea. The specimen is 24 inches in diameter, and the
concentric circles show its age to be 410 years. The wood much resembles
the black spruce, and is the most valuable of the Rocky Mountain
growths. A specimen of the nut pine, whose nuts are used for food by the
Indians, is only 15 inches in diameter, and yet its life lines show its
age to be 369 years. The largest specimen yet received is a section of
the white ash, which is 46 inches in diameter and 182 years old. The
next largest specimen is a section of the _Platanus occidentalis_,
variously known in commerce as the sycamore, button-wood, or plane tree,
which is 42 inches in diameter and only 171 years of age. Specimens of
the redwood tree of California are now on their way to this city from
the Yosemite Valley. One specimen, though a small one, measures 5 feet
in diameter and shows the character of the wood. A specimen of
the enormous growths of this tree was not secured because of the
impossibility of transportation and the fact that there would be no room
in the museum for the storage of such a specimen, for the diameter of
the largest tree of the class is 45 feet and 8 inches, which represents
a circumference of about 110 feet. Then, too, the Californians object to
have the giant trees cut down for commercial, scientific, or any other
purposes. To accompany these specimens of the woods of America, Mr. Morris K.
Jesup, who has paid all the expense incurred in the collection of
specimens, is having prepared as an accompanying portion of the
exhibition water color drawings representing the actual size, color,
and appearance of the fruit, foliage, and flowers of the various trees. Their commercial products, as far as they can be obtained, will also be
exhibited, as, for instance, in the case of the long-leaved pine, the
tar, resin, and pitch, for which it is especially valued. Then, too, in
an herbarium the fruits, leaves, and flowers are preserved as nearly as
possible in their natural state. When the collection is ready for public
view next spring it will be not only the largest, but the only complete
one of its kind in the country. There is nothing like it in the world,
as far as is known; certainly not in the royal museums of England,
France, or Germany. Aside from the value of the collection, in a scientific way, it is
proposed to make it an adjunct to our educational system, which requires
that teachers shall instruct pupils as to the materials used for food
and clothing. The completeness of the exhibition will be of great
assistance also to landscape gardeners, as it will enable them to lay
out private and public parks so that the most striking effects of
foliage may be secured. The beauty of these effects can best be seen in
this country in our own Central Park, where there are more different
varieties and more combinations for foliage effects than in any other
area in the United States. To ascertain how these effects are obtained
one now has to go to much trouble to learn the names of the trees. With
this exhibition such information can be had merely by observation, for
the botanical and common names of each specimen will be attached to
it. It will also be of practical use in teaching the forester how to
cultivate trees as he would other crops. The rapid disappearance of
many valuable forest trees, with the increase in demand and decrease in
supply, will tend to make the collection valuable as a curiosity in
the not far distant future as representing the extinct trees of the
country.--_N.Y. *       *       *       *       *

A catalogue, containing brief notices of many important scientific
papers heretofore published in the SUPPLEMENT, may be had gratis at this
office. *       *       *       *       *




THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT. TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION, $5 A YEAR. Sent by mail, postage prepaid, to subscribers in any part of the United
States or Canada. Six dollars a year, sent, prepaid, to any foreign
country. All the back numbers of THE SUPPLEMENT, from the commencement, January
1, 1876, can be had. All the back volumes of THE SUPPLEMENT can likewise be supplied. Price of each volume, $2.50, stitched in
paper, or $3.50, bound in stiff covers. COMBINED RATES--One copy of SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN and one copy of
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT, one year, postpaid, $7.00. A liberal discount to booksellers, news agents, and canvassers. MUNN & CO., PUBLISHERS,

261 BROADWAY, NEW YORK, N. Y. *       *       *       *       *




PATENTS. In connection with the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, Messrs. are
Solicitors of American and Foreign Patents, have had 35 years'
experience, and now have the largest establishment in the world. Patents
are obtained on the best terms. A special notice is made in the SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN of all Inventions
patented through this Agency, with the name and residence of the
Patentee. By the immense circulation thus given, public attention is
directed to the merits of the new patent, and sales or introduction
often easily effected. Any person who has made a new discovery or invention can ascertain, free
of charge, whether a patent can probably be obtained, by writing to MUNN
& Co. We also send free our Hand Book about the Patent Laws, Patents, Caveats. Trade Marks, their costs, and how procured, with hints for procuring
advances on inventions. Address

MUNN & CO., 261 BROADWAY, NEW YORK. F and 7th Sts., Washington, D. C.











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Scientific American Supplement No. SATURDAY, JANUARY 9, 1841. [Illustration: CASTLE-CAULFIELD, COUNTY OF TYRONE.] The subject of our prefixed illustration is one of no small interest,
whether considered as a fine example--for Ireland--of the domestic
architecture of the reign of James I, or as an historical memorial of the
fortunes of the illustrious family whose name it bears--the noble house
of Charlemont, of which it was the original residence. It is situated
near the village of the same name, in the parish of Donaghmore, barony of
Dungannon, and about three miles west of Dungannon, the county town. Castle-Caulfield owes its erection to Sir Toby Caulfield, afterwards
Lord Charlemont--a distinguished English soldier who had fought in Spain
and the Low Countries in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and commanded a
company of one hundred and fifty men in Ireland in the war with ONeill,
Earl of Tyrone, at the close of her reign. For these services he was
rewarded by the Queen with a grant of part of Tyrones estate, and other
lands in the province of Ulster; and on King Jamess accession to the
British crown, was honoured with knighthood, and made governor of the
fort of Charlemont, and of the counties of Tyrone and Armagh. At the
plantation of Ulster he received further grants of lands, and among them
1000 acres called Ballydonnelly, or ODonnellys town, in the barony of
Dungannon, on which, in 1614, he commenced the erection of the mansion
subsequently called Castle-Caulfield. This mansion is described by Pynnar
in his Survey of Ulster in 1618-19, in the following words:--

Sir Toby Caulfield hath one thousand acres called Ballydonnell [_recte_
Ballydonnelly], whereunto is added beside what was certified by Sir
Josias Bodley, a fair house or castle, the front whereof is eighty feet
in length and twenty-eight feet in breadth from outside to outside, two
cross ends fifty feet in length and twenty-eight feet in breadth: the
walls are five feet thick at the bottom, and four at the top, very good
cellars under ground, and all the windows are of hewn stone. Between
the two cross ends there goeth a wall, which is eighteen feet high, and
maketh a small court within the building. This work at this time is but
thirteen feet high, and a number of men at work for the sudden finishing
of it. There is also a strong bridge over the river, which is of lime and
stone, with strong buttresses for the supporting of it. And to this is
joined a good water-mill for corn, all built of lime and stone. This is
at this time the fairest building I have seen. Near unto this Bawne there
is built a town, in which there is fifteen English families, who are able
to make twenty men with arms.

The ruins of this celebrated mansion seem to justify the opinion
expressed by Pynnar, that it was the fairest building he had seen, that
is, in the counties of the plantation, for there are no existing remains
of any house erected by the English or Scottish undertakers equal to
it in architectural style. It received, however, from the second Lord
Charlemont, the addition of a large gate-house with towers, and also of a
strong keep or donjon. From the ancient maps of Ulster of Queen Elizabeths time, preserved in
the State Paper Office, Castle-Caulfield appears to have been erected
on the site of a more ancient castle or fort, called Fort ODonallie,
from the chief of the ancient Irish family of ODonghaile or ODonnelly,
whose residence it was, previously to the confiscation of the northern
counties; and the small lake in its vicinity was called Lough ODonallie. This family of ODonnelly were a distinguished branch of the Kinel-Owen,
or northern Hy-Niall race, of which the ONeills were the chiefs in the
sixteenth century; and it was by one of the former that the celebrated
Shane or John ONeill, surnamed the proud, and who also bore the cognomen
of Donghailach, or the Donnellian, was fostered, as appears from the
following entry in the Annals of the Four Masters, at the year 1531:--

Ballydonnelly was assaulted by Niall Oge, the son of Art, who was the
son of Con ONeill. He demolished the castle, and having made a prisoner
of the son of ONeill, who was the foster-son of ODonnelly, he carried
him off, together with several horses and the other spoils of the place.

We have felt it necessary to state the preceding facts relative to the
ancient history of Ballydonnelly, or Castle-Caulfield, as it is now
denominated, because an error of Pynnars, in writing the ancient name as
Ballydonnell--not Ballydonnelly, as it should have been--has been copied
by Lodge, Archdall, and all subsequent writers; some of whom have fallen
into a still more serious mistake, by translating the name as the town
of ODonnell, thus attributing the ancient possession of the locality
to a family to whom it never belonged. That Ballydonnelly was truly,
as we have stated, the ancient name of the place, and that it was the
patrimonial residence of the chief of that ancient family, previously
to the plantation of Ulster, must be sufficiently indicated by the
authorities we have already adduced; but if any doubt on this fact could
exist, it would be removed by the following passage in an unpublished
Irish MS. Journal of the Rebellion of 1641, in our own possession,
from which it appears that, as usual with the representatives of the
dispossessed Irish families on the breaking out of that unhappy conflict,
the chief of the ODonnellys seized upon the Castle-Caulfield mansion as
of right his own:--

October 1641. Lord Caulfields castle in Ballydonnelly (_Baile I
Donghoile_) was taken by Patrick Moder (the gloomy) ODonnelly.

The Lord Charlemont, with his family, was at this time absent from
his home in command of the garrison of Charlemont, and it was not his
fate ever to see it afterwards; he was treacherously captured in his
fortress about the same period by the cruel Sir Phelim ONeill, and was
barbarously murdered while under his protection, if not, as seems the
fact, by his direction, on the 1st of March following. Nor was this
costly and fairest house of its kind in the north ever after inhabited
by any of his family; it was burned in those unhappy troubles, and left
the melancholy, though picturesque memorial of sad events which we now
see it. P.




THE LAKE OF THE LOVERS, A LEGEND OF LEITRIM. How many lovely spots in this our beautiful country are never embraced
within those pilgrimages after the picturesque, which numbers
periodically undertake, rather to see what is known to many, and
therefore should be so to them, than to visit nature, for her own sweet
sake, in her more devious and undistinguished haunts! For my part, I
am well pleased that the case stands thus. I love to think that I am
treading upon ground unsullied by the footsteps of the now numerous
tribe of mere professional peripatetics--that my eyes are wandering over
scenery, the freshness of which has been impaired by no transfer to the
portfolio of the artist or the tablets of the poetaster: that, save
the scattered rustic residents, there is no human link to connect its
memorials with the days of old, and, save their traditionary legends, no
story to tell of its fortunes in ancient times. The sentiment is no doubt
selfish as well as anti-utilitarian; but then I must add that it is only
occasional, and will so far be pardoned by all who know how delightful
it is to take refuge in the indulgent twilight of tradition from the
rugged realities of recorded story. At all events, a rambler in any of
our old, and especially mountainous tracts, will rarely lack abundant
aliment for his thus modified sense of beauty, sublimity, or antiquarian
fascination; and scenes have unexpectedly opened upon me in the solitudes
of the hills and lakes of some almost untrodden and altogether unwritten
districts, that have had more power to stir my spirit than the lauded and
typographed, the versified and pictured magnificence of Killarney or of
Cumberland, of Glendalough or of Lomond. It may have been perverseness
of taste, or the fitness of mood, or the influence of circumstance, but
I have been filled with a feeling of the beautiful when wandering among
noteless and almost nameless localities to which I have been a stranger,
when standing amid the most boasted beauties with the appliances of
hand-book and of guide, with appetite prepared, and sensibilities on the
alert. It is I suppose partly because the power of beauty being relative,
a high pitch of expectancy requires a proportionate augmentation of
excellence, and partly because the tincture of contrariety in our
nature ever inclines us to enact the perverse critic, when called on to
be the implicit votary. This in common with most others I have often
felt, but rarely more so than during a casual residence some short
time since among the little celebrated, and therefore perhaps a little
more charming, mountain scenery of the county, which either has been,
or might be, called Leitrim of the Lakes; for a tract more pleasantly
diversified with well-set sheets of water, it would I think be difficult
to name. Almost every hill you top has its still and solitary tarn, and
almost every amphitheatre you enter, encompasses its wild and secluded
lake--not seldom bearing on its placid bosom some little islet, linked
with the generations past, by monastic or castellated ruins, as its
seclusion or its strength may have invited the world-wearied anchorite to
contemplation, or the predatory chieftain to defence. On such a remote and lonely spot I lately chanced to alight, in the
course of a long summer days ramble among the heights and hollows of
that lofty range which for a considerable space abuts upon the borders
of Sligo and Roscommon. The ground was previously unknown to me, and
with all the zest which novelty and indefiniteness can impart, I started
staff in hand with the early sun, and ere the mists had melted from the
purple heather of their cloud-like summits, was drawing pure and balmy
breath within the lonely magnificence of the hills. About noon, as I was
casting about for some pre-eminently happy spot to fling my length for
an hour or twos repose, I reached the crest of a long gradual ascent
that had been some time tempting me to look what lay beyond; and surely
enough I found beauty sufficient to dissolve my weariness, had it been
tenfold multiplied, and to allay my pulse, had it throbbed with the
vehemence of fever. An oblong valley girdled a lovely lake on every side;
here with precipitous impending cliffs, and there with grassy <DW72>s of
freshest emerald that seemed to woo the dimpling waters to lave their
loving margins, and, as if moved with a like impulse, the little wavelets
met the call with the gentle dalliance of their ebb and flow. A small
wooded island, with its fringe of willows trailing in the water, stood
about a furlong from the hither side, and in the centre of its tangled
brake, my elevation enabled me to descry what I may call the remnants of
a ruin--for so far had it gone in its decay--here green, there grey, as
the moss, the ivy, or the pallid stains of time, had happened to prevail. A wild duck, with its half-fledged clutch, floated fearless from its
sedgy shore. More remote, a fishing heron stood motionless on a stone,
intent on its expected prey; and the only other animated feature in the
quiet scene was a fisherman who had just moored his little boat, and
having settled his tackle, was slinging his basket on his arm and turning
upward in the direction where I lay. I watched the old man toiling up
the steep, and as he drew nigh, hailed him, as I could not suffer him to
pass without learning at least the name, if it had one, of this miniature
Amhara. He readily complied, and placing his fish-basket on the ground,
seated himself beside it, not unwilling to recover his breath and recruit
his scanty stock of strength almost expended in the ascent. We call it,
said he in answer to my query, the Lake of the Ruin, or sometimes, to
such as know the story, the Lake of the Lovers, after the two over whom
the tombstone is placed inside yon mouldering walls. My grandfather told me, when a child, that he minded his grandfather
telling it to him, and for anything he could say, it might have come down
much farther. Had I time, Id be proud to tell it to your honour, who
seems a stranger in these parts, for its not over long; but I have to go
to the Hall, and thats five long miles off, with my fish for dinner, and
little time youll say I have to spare, though it be down hill nearly all
the way. It would have been too bad to allow such a well-met chronicler
to pass unpumped, and, putting more faith in the attractions of my pocket
than of my person, I produced on the instant my luncheon-case and
flask, and handing him a handsome half of the contents of the former,
made pretty sure of his company for a time, by keeping the latter in my
own possession till I got him regularly launched in the story, when, to
quicken at once his recollection and his elocution, I treated him to an
inspiring draught. When he had told his tale, he left me with many thanks
for the refection; and I descending to his boat, entered it, and with the
aid of a broken oar contrived to scull myself over to the island, the
scene of the final fortunes of Connor ORourke and Norah MDiarmod, the
faithful-hearted but evil-fated pair who were in some sort perpetuated in
its name. There, in sooth, within the crumbled walls, was the gravestone
which covered the dust of him the brave and her the beautiful; and
seating myself on the fragment of a sculptured capital, that showed
how elaborately reared the ruined edifice had been, I bethought me how
poorly mans existence shows even beside the work of his own hands, and
endeavoured for a time to make my thoughts run parallel with the history
of this once-venerated but now forsaken, and, save by a few, forgotten
structure; but finding myself fail in the attempt, settled my retrospect
on that brief period wherein it was identified with the two departed
lovers whose story I had just heard, and which, as I sat by their lowly
sepulchre, I again repeated to myself. This lake, as my informant told me, once formed a part of the boundary
between the possessions of ORourke the Left-handed and MDiarmod the
Dark-faced, as they were respectively distinguished, two small rival
chiefs, petty in property but pre-eminent in passion, to whom a most
magnificent mutual hatred had been from generations back bequeathed from
bleeding sire to son--a legacy constantly swelled by accruing outrages,
for their paramount pursuits were plotting each others detriment or
destruction, planning or parrying plundering inroads, inflicting or
avenging injuries by open violence or secret subtlety, as seemed more
likely to promote their purposes. At the name of an ORourke, MDiarmod
would clutch his battle-axe, and brandish it as if one of the detested
clan were within its sweep: and his rival, nothing behind in hatred,
would make the air echo to his deep-drawn imprecation on MDiarmod
and all his abominated breed when any thing like an opportunity was
afforded him. Their retainers of course shared the same spirit of mutual
abhorrence, exaggerated indeed, if that were possible, by their more
frequent exposure to loss in cattle and in crops, for, as is wont to be
the case, the cottage was incontinently ravaged when the stronghold was
prudentially respected. ORourke had a son, an only one, who promised
to sustain or even raise the reputation of the clan, for the youth knew
not what it was to blench before flesh and blood--his feet were over
foremost, in the wolf-hunt or the foray, and in agility, in valour, or
in vigour, none within the compass of a long days travel could stand
in comparison with young Connor ORourke. Detestation of the MDiarmods
had been studiously instilled from infancy, of course; but although the
youths cheek would flush and his heart beat high when any perilous
adventure was the theme, yet, so far at least, it sprang more from
the love of prowess and applause than from the deadly hostility that
thrilled in the pulses of his father and his followers. In the necessary
intervals of forbearance, as in seed-time, harvest, or other brief
breathing-spaces, he would follow the somewhat analogous and bracing
pleasures of the chase; and often would the wolf or the stag--for shaggy
forests then clothed these bare and desert hills--fall before his spear
or his dogs, as he fleetly urged the sport afoot. It chanced one evening
that in the ardour of pursuit he had followed a tough, long-winded stag
into the dangerous territory of MDiarmod. The chase had taken to the
water of the lake, and he with his dogs had plunged in after in the
hope of heading it; but having failed in this, and in the hot flush of
a hunters blood scorning to turn back, he pressed it till brought down
within a few spear-casts of the MDiarmods dwelling. Proud of having
killed his venison under the very nose of the latter, he turned homeward
with rapid steps; for, the fire of the chase abated, he felt how fatal
would be the discovery of his presence, and was thinking with complacency
upon the wrath of the old chief on hearing of the contemptuous feat, when
his eye was arrested by a white figure moving slowly in the shimmering
mists of nightfall by the margin of the lake. Though insensible to the
fear of what was carnal and of the earth, he was very far from being so
to what savoured of the supernatural, and, with a slight ejaculation half
of surprise and half of prayer, he was about changing his course to give
it a wider berth, when his dogs espied it, and, recking little of the
spiritual in its appearance, bounded after it in pursuit. With a slight
scream that proclaimed it feminine as well as human, the figure fled, and
the youth had much to do both with legs and lungs to reach her in time to
preserve her from the rough respects of his ungallant escort. Beautiful
indignation lightened from the dark eyes and sat on the pouting lip of
Norah MDiarmod--for it was the chieftains daughter--as she turned
disdainfully towards him. Is it the bravery of an ORourke to hunt a woman with his dogs? Young
chief, you stand upon the ground of MDiarmod, and your name from the
lips of her--she stopped, for she had time to glance again upon his
features, and had no longer heart to upbraid one who owned a countenance
so handsome and so gallant, so eloquent of embarrassment as well as
admiration. Her tone of asperity and wounded pride declined into a murmur of
acquiescence as she hearkened to the apologies and deprecations of the
youth, whose gallantry and feats had so often rung in her ears, though
his person she had but casually seen, and his voice she had never before
heard. He had often listened to the
praises of Norahs beauty; he had occasionally caught distant glimpses of
her graceful figure; and the present sight, or after recollection, often
mitigated his feelings to her hostile clan, and, to his advantage, the
rugged old chief was generally associated with the lovely dark-eyed girl
who was his only child. Such being their respective feelings, what could be the result of
their romantic rencounter? They were both young, generous children
of nature, with hearts fraught with the unhacknied feelings of youth
and inexperience: they had drunk in sentiment with the sublimities
of their mountain homes, and were fitted for higher things than the
vulgar interchange of animosity and contempt. Of this they soon were
conscious, and they did not separate until the stars began to burn above
them, and not even then, before they had made arrangements for at least
another--one more secret interview. The islet possessed a beautiful
fitness for their trysting place, as being accessible from either side,
and little obnoxious to observation; and many a moonlight meeting--for
the _one_ was inevitably multiplied--had these children of hostile
fathers, perchance on the very spot on which my eyes now rested, and
the unbroken stillness around had echoed to their gladsome greetings or
their faltering farewells. Neither dared to divulge an intercourse that
would have stirred to frenzy the treasured rancour of their respective
parents, each of whom would doubtless have preferred a connexion with
a blackamoor--if such were then in circulation--to their doing such
grievous despite to that ancient feud which as an heirloom had been
transmitted from ancestors whose very names they scarcely knew. MDiarmod
the Dark-faced was at best but a gentle tiger even to his only child; and
though his stern cast-iron countenance would now and then relax beneath
her artless blandishments, yet even with the lovely vision at his side,
he would often grimly deplore that she had not been a son, to uphold the
name and inherit the headship of the clan, which on his demise would
probably pass from its lineal course; and when he heard of the bold
bearing of the heir of ORourke, he thought he read therein the downfall
of the MDiarmods when he their chief was gone. With such ill-smothered
feelings of discontent he could not but in some measure repulse the
filial regards of Norah, and thus the confiding submission that would
have sprung to meet the endearments of his love, was gradually refused
to the inconsistencies of his caprice; and the maiden in her intercourse
with her proscribed lover rarely thought of her father, except as one
from whom it should be diligently concealed. One of the night marauders of his
clan chanced in an evil hour to see Connor ORourke guiding his coracle
to the island, and at the same time a cloaked female push cautiously
from the opposite shore for the same spot. Surprised, he crouched among
the fern till their landing and joyous greeting put all doubt of their
friendly understanding to flight; and then, thinking only of revenge or
ransom, the unsentimental scoundrel hurried round the lake to MDiarmod,
and informed him that the son of his mortal foe was within his reach. The old man leaped from his couch of rushes at the thrilling news, and,
standing on his threshold, uttered a low gathering-cry, which speedily
brought a dozen of his more immediate retainers to his presence. As he
passed his daughters apartment, he for the first time asked himself who
can the woman be? and at the same moment almost casually glanced at
Norahs chamber, to see that all there was quiet for the night. A shudder
of vague terror ran through his sturdy frame as his eye fell on the low
open window. He thrust in his head, but no sleeper drew breath within; he
re-entered the house and called aloud upon his daughter, but the echo of
her name was the only answer. A kern coming up put an end to the search,
by telling that he had seen his young mistress walking down to the
waters edge about an hour before, but that, as she had been in the habit
of doing so by night for some time past, he had thought but little of it. The odious truth was now revealed, and, trembling with the sudden gust of
fury, the old chief with difficulty rushed to the lake, and, filling a
couple of boats with his men, told them to pull for the honour of their
name and for the head of the ORourkes first-born. During this stormy prelude to a bloody drama, the doomed but unconscious
Connor was sitting secure within the dilapidated chapel by the side
of her whom he had won. Her quickened ear first caught the dip of an
oar, and she told her lover; but he said it was the moaning of the
night-breeze through the willows, or the ripple of the water among the
stones, and went on with his gentle dalliance. A few minutes, however,
and the shock of the keels upon the ground, the tread of many feet, and
the no longer suppressed cries of the MDiarmods, warned him to stand on
his defence; and as he sprang from his seat to meet the call, the soft
illumination of love was changed with fearful suddenness into the baleful
fire of fierce hostility. My Norah, leave me; you may by chance be rudely handled in the scuffle.

The terrified but faithful girl fell upon his breast. Connor, your fate is mine; hasten to your boat, if it be not yet too
late.

An iron-shod hunting pole was his only weapon; and using it with his
right arm, while Norah hung upon his left, he sprang without further
parley through an aperture in the wall, and made for the water. But his
assailants were upon him, the MDiarmod himself with upraised battle-axe
at their head. Spare my father, faltered Norah; and Connor, with a mercifully
directed stroke, only dashed the weapon from the old mans hand, and
then, clearing a passage with a vigorous sweep, accompanied with the
well-known charging cry, before which they had so often quailed, bounded
through it to the waters brink. An instant, and with her who was now
more than his second self, he was once more in his little boat; but,
alas! it was aground, and so quickly fell the blows against him, that he
dare not adventure to shove it off. Letting Norah slip from his hold,
she sank backwards to the bottom of the boat; and then, with both arms
free, he redoubled his efforts, and after a short but furious struggle
succeeded in getting the little skiff afloat. Maddened at the sight, the
old chief rushed breast-deep into the water; but his right arm had been
disabled by a casual blow, and his disheartened followers feared, under
the circumstances, to come within range of that well-wielded club. But
a crafty one among them had already seized on a safer and surer plan. He had clambered up an adjacent tree, armed with a heavy stone, and now
stood on one of the branches above the devoted boat, and summoned him to
yield, if he would not perish. The young chiefs renewed exertions were
his only answer. Let him escape, and your head shall pay for it, shouted the infuriated
father. My young mistress?

There are enough here to save her, if I will it. Down with the stone, or
by the blood----

He needed not to finish the sentence, for down at the word it came,
striking helpless the youths right arm, and shivering the frail timber
of the boat, which filled at once, and all went down. For an instant
an arm re-appeared, feebly beating the water in vain--it was the young
chiefs broken one: the other held his Norah in its embrace, as was seen
by her white dress flaunting for a few moments on and above the troubled
surface. The lake at this point was deep, and though there was a rush of
the MDiarmods towards it, yet in their confusion they were but awkward
aids, and the fluttering ensign that marked the fatal spot had sunk
before they reached it. The strength of Connor, disabled as he was by
his broken limb, and trammelled by her from whom even the final struggle
could not dissever him, had failed; and with her he loved locked in his
last embrace, they were after a time recovered from the water, and laid
side by side upon the bank, in all their touching, though, alas, lifeless
beauty! Remorse reached the rugged hearts even of those who had so
ruthlessly dealt by them; and as they looked on their goodly forms, thus
cold and senseless by a common fate, the rudest felt that it would be
an impious and unpardonable deed to do violence to their memory, by the
separation of that union which death itself had sanctified. Thus were
they laid in one grave; and, strange as it may appear, their fathers,
crushed and subdued, exhausted even of resentment by the overwhelming
stroke--for nothing can quell the stubborn spirit like the extremity of
sorrow--crossed their arms in amity over their remains, and grief wrought
the reconciliation which even centuries of time, that great pacificator,
had failed to do. The westering sun now warning me that the day was on the wane, I gave but
another look to the time-worn tombstone, another sigh to the early doom
of those whom it enclosed, and then, with a feeling of regret, again left
the little island to its still, unshared, and pensive loneliness. ANCIENT IRISH LITERATURE--No. The composition which we have selected as our fourth specimen of the
ancient literature of Ireland, is a poem, more remarkable, perhaps,
for its antiquity and historical interest, than for its poetic merits,
though we do not think it altogether deficient in those. It is ascribed,
apparently with truth, to the celebrated poet Mac Liag, the secretary of
the renowned monarch Brian Boru, who, as our readers are aware, fell at
the battle of Clontarf in 1014; and the subject of it is a lamentation
for the fallen condition of Kincora, the palace of that monarch,
consequent on his death. The decease of Mac Liag, whose proper name was Muircheartach, is thus
recorded in the Annals of the Four Masters, at the year 1015:--

Mac Liag, i. e. Muirkeartach, son of Conkeartach, at this time laureate
of Ireland, died.

A great number of his productions are still in existence; but none of
them have obtained a popularity so widely extended as the poem before us. Of the palace of Kincora, which was situated on the banks of the Shannon,
near Killaloe, there are at present no vestiges. LAMENTATION OF MAC LIAG FOR KINCORA. A Chinn-copath carthi Brian? And where is the beauty that once was thine? Oh, where are the princes and nobles that sate
    At the feast in thy halls, and drank the red wine? Oh, where are the Dalcassians of the Golden Swords? [1]
    And where are the warriors that Brian led on? And where is Morogh, the descendant of kings--
    The defeater of a hundred--the daringly brave--
    Who set but slight store by jewels and rings--
    Who swam down the torrent and laughed at its wave? And where is Donogh, King Brians worthy son? And where is Conaing, the Beautiful Chief? they are gone--
    They have left me this night alone with my grief! And where are the chiefs with whom Brian went forth,
    The never-vanquished son of Evin the Brave,
    The great King of Onaght, renowned for his worth,
    And the hosts of Baskinn, from the western wave? Oh, where is Duvlann of the Swiftfooted Steeds? And where is Kian, who was son of Molloy? And where is King Lonergan, the fame of whose deeds
    In the red battle-field no time can destroy? And where is that youth of majestic height,
    The faith-keeping Prince of the Scots?--Even he,
    As wide as his fame was, as great as was his might,
    Was tributary, oh, Kincora, to me! They are gone, those heroes of royal birth,
    Who plundered no churches, and broke no trust,
    Tis weary for me to be living on the earth
    When they, oh, Kincora, lie low in the dust! Oh, never again will Princes appear,
    To rival the Dalcassians of the Cleaving Swords! I can never dream of meeting afar or anear,
    In the east or the west, such heroes and lords! Oh, dear are the images my memory calls up
    Of Brian Boru!--how he never would miss
    To give me at the banquet the first bright cup! why did he heap on me honour like this? I am Mac Liag, and my home is on the Lake:
    Thither often, to that palace whose beauty is fled,
    Came Brian to ask me, and I went for his sake. that I should live, and Brian be dead! [1] _Coolg n-or_, of the swords _of gold_, i. e. of the _gold-hilted_
swords. Biography of a mouse! cries the reader; well, what shall we have
next?--what can the writer mean by offering such nonsense for our
perusal? There is no creature, reader, however insignificant and
unimportant in the great scale of creation it may appear to us,
short-sighted mortals that we are, which is forgotten in the care of
our own common Creator; not a sparrow falls to the ground unknown and
unpermitted by Him; and whether or not you may derive interest from the
biography even of a mouse, you will be able to form a better judgment,
after, than before, having read my paper. The mouse belongs to the class _Mammalia_, or the animals which rear
their young by suckling them; to the order _Rodentia_, or animals whose
teeth are adapted for _gnawing_; to the genus _Mus_, or Rat kind, and the
family of _Mus musculus_, or domestic mouse. The mouse is a singularly
beautiful little animal, as no one who examines it attentively, and
without prejudice, can fail to discover. Its little body is plump and
sleek; its neck short; its head tapering and graceful; and its eyes
large, prominent, and sparkling. Its manners are lively and interesting,
its agility surprising, and its habits extremely cleanly. There are
several varieties of this little creature, amongst which the best known
is the common brown mouse of our granaries and store-rooms; the Albino,
or white mouse, with red eyes; and the black and white mouse, which is
more rare and very delicate. I mention these as _varieties_, for I think
we may safely regard them as such, from the fact of their propagating
unchanged, preserving their difference of hue to the fiftieth generation,
and never accidentally occurring amongst the offspring of differently
 parents. It is of the white mouse that I am now about to treat, and it is an
account of a tame individual of that extremely pretty variety that is
designed to form the subject of my present paper. When I was a boy of about sixteen, I got possession of a white mouse; the
little creature was very wild and unsocial at first, but by dint of care
and discipline I succeeded in rendering it familiar. The principal agent
I employed towards effecting its domestication was a singular one, and
which, though I can assure the reader its effects are speedy and certain,
still remains to me inexplicable: this was, ducking in cold water; and by
resorting to this simple expedient, I have since succeeded in rendering
even the rat as tame and as playful as a kitten. It is out of my power to
explain the manner in which _ducking_ operates on the animal subjected to
it, but I wish that some physiologist more experienced than I am would
give his attention to the subject, and favour the public with the result
of his reflections. At the time that I obtained possession of this mouse, I was residing at
Olney, in Buckinghamshire, a village which I presume my readers will
recollect as connected with the names of Newton and Cowper; but shortly
after having succeeded in rendering it pretty tame, circumstances
required my removal to Gloucester, whither I carried my little favourite
with me. During the journey I kept the mouse confined in a small wire
cage; but while resting at the inn where I passed the night, I adopted
the precaution of enveloping the cage in a handkerchief, lest by some
untoward circumstance its active little inmate might make its escape. Having thus, as I thought, made all safe, I retired to rest. The moment
I awoke in the morning, I sprang from my bed, and went to examine the
cage, when, to my infinite consternation, I found it empty! I searched
the bed, the room, raised the carpet, examined every nook and corner, but
all to no purpose. I dressed myself as hastily as I could, and summoning
one of the waiters, an intelligent, good-natured man, I informed
him of my loss, and got him to search every room in the house. His
investigations, however, proved equally unavailing, and I gave my poor
little pet completely up, inwardly hoping, despite of its ingratitude
in leaving me, that it might meet with some agreeable mate amongst its
brown congeners, and might lead a long and happy life, unchequered by
the terrors of the prowling cat, and unendangered by the more insidious
artifices of the fatal trap. With these reflections I was just getting
into the coach which was to convey me upon my road, when a waiter came
running to the door, out of breath, exclaiming, Mr R., Mr R., I declare
your little mouse is in the kitchen. Begging the coachman to wait an
instant, I followed the man to the kitchen, and there, on the hob,
seated contentedly in a pudding dish, and devouring its contents with
considerable _gout_, was my truant proteg. Once more secured within
its cage, and the latter carefully enveloped in a sheet of strong brown
paper, upon my knee, I reached Gloucester. I was here soon subjected to a similar alarm, for one morning the cage
was again empty, and my efforts to discover the retreat of the wanderer
unavailing as before. This time I had lost him for a week, when one
night, in getting into bed, I heard a scrambling in the curtains, and on
relighting my candle found the noise to have been occasioned by my mouse,
who seemed equally pleased with myself at our reunion. After having thus
lost and found my little friend a number of times, I gave up the idea
of confining him; and, accordingly, leaving the door of his cage open,
I placed it in a corner of my bedroom, and allowed him to go in and out
as he pleased. Of this permission he gladly availed himself, but would
regularly return to me at intervals of a week or a fortnight, and at such
periods of return he was usually much thinner than ordinary; and it was
pretty clear that during his visits to his brown acquaintances he fared
by no means so well as he did at home. Sometimes, when he happened to return, as he often did, in the
night-time, on which occasions his general custom was to come into bed to
me, I used, in order to induce him to remain with me until morning, to
immerse him in a basin of water, and then let him lie in my bosom, the
warmth of which, after his cold bath, commonly ensured his stay. Frequently, while absent on one of his excursions, I would hear an
unusual noise in the wainscot, as I lay in bed, of dozens of mice
running backwards and forwards in all directions, and squeaking in much
apparent glee. For some time I was puzzled to know whether this unusual
disturbance was the result of merriment or quarrelling, and I often
trembled for the safety of my pet, alone and unaided, among so many
strangers. But a very interesting circumstance occurred one morning,
which perfectly reassured me. It was a bright summer morning, about four
oclock, and I was lying awake, reflecting as to the propriety of turning
on my pillow to take another sleep, or at once rising, and going forth to
enjoy the beauties of awakening nature. While thus meditating, I heard a
slight scratching in the wainscot, and looking towards the spot whence
the noise proceeded, perceived the head of a mouse peering from a hole. It was instantly withdrawn, but a second was thrust forth. This latter I
at once recognised as my own white friend, but so begrimed by soot and
dirt that it required an experienced eye to distinguish him from his
darker-coated entertainers. He emerged from the hole, and running over
to his cage, entered it, and remained for a couple of seconds within
it; he then returned to the wainscot, and, re-entering the hole, some
scrambling and squeaking took place. A second time he came forth, and on
this occasion was followed closely, to my no small astonishment, by a
brown mouse, who followed him, with much apparent timidity and caution,
to his box, and entered it along with him. More astonished at this
singular proceeding than I can well express, I lay fixed in mute and
breathless attention, to see what would follow next. In about a minute
the two mice came forth from the cage, each bearing in its mouth a large
piece of bread, which they dragged towards the hole they had previously
left. On arriving at it, they entered, but speedily re-appeared, having
deposited their burden; and repairing once more to the cage, again loaded
themselves with provision, and conveyed it away. This second time they
remained within the hole for a much longer period than the first time;
and when they again made their appearance, they were attended by three
other mice, who, following their leaders to the cage, loaded themselves
with bread as did they, and carried away their burdens to the hole. After
this I saw them no more that morning, and on rising I discovered that
they had carried away every particle of food that the cage contained. Nor
was this an isolated instance of their white guest leading them forth to
where he knew they should find provender. Day after day, whatever bread
or grain I left in the cage was regularly removed, and the duration of my
pets absence was proportionately long. Wishing to learn whether hunger
was the actual cause of his return, I no longer left food in his box; and
in about a week afterwards, on awaking one morning, I found him sleeping
upon the pillow, close to my face, having partly wormed his way under my
cheek. There was a cat in the house, an excellent mouser, and I dreaded lest she
should one day meet with and destroy my poor mouse, and I accordingly
used all my exertions with those in whose power it was, to obtain her
dismissal. She was, however, regarded by those persons as infinitely
better entitled to protection and patronage than a mouse, so I was
compelled to put up with her presence. People are fond of imputing to
cats a supernatural degree of sagacity: they will sometimes go so far
as to pronounce them to be genuine _witches_; and really I am scarcely
surprised at it, nor perhaps will the reader be, when I tell him the
following anecdote. I was one day entering my apartment, when I was filled with horror at
perceiving my mouse picking up some crumbs upon the carpet, beneath
the table, and the terrible cat seated upon a chair watching him with
what appeared to me to be an expression of sensual anticipation and
concentrated desire. Before I had time to interfere, Puss sprang from
her chair, and bounded towards the mouse, who, however, far from being
terrified at the approach of his natural enemy, scarcely so much as
favoured her with a single look. Puss raised her paw and dealt him a
gentle tap, when, judge of my astonishment if you can, the little mouse,
far from running away, or betraying any marks of fear, raised himself
on his legs, cocked his tail, and with a shrill and angry squeak, with
which any that have kept tame mice are well acquainted, sprang at and
positively _bit_ the paw which had struck him. I could
not jump forward to the rescue. I was, as it were, petrified where I
stood. But, stranger than all, the cat, instead of appearing irritated,
or seeming to design mischief, merely stretched out her nose and smelt
at her diminutive assailant, and then resuming her place upon the chair,
purred herself to sleep. I need not say that I immediately secured the
mouse within his cage. Whether the cat on this occasion knew the little
animal to be a pet, and as such feared to meddle with it, or whether its
boldness had disarmed her, I cannot pretend to explain: I merely state
the fact; and I think the reader will allow that it is sufficiently
extraordinary. In order to guard against such a dangerous encounter for the future,
I got a more secure cage made, of which the bars were so close as to
preclude the possibility of egress; and singularly enough, many a morning
was I amused by beholding brown mice coming from their holes in the
wainscot, and approaching the cage in which their friend was kept, as if
in order to condole with him on the subject of his unwonted captivity. Secure, however, as I conceived this new cage to be, my industrious pet
contrived to make his escape from it, and in doing so met his death. In
my room was a large bureau, with deep, old-fashioned, capacious drawers. Being obliged to go from home for a day, I put the cage containing my
little friend into one of these drawers, lest any one should attempt to
meddle with it during my absence. On returning, I opened the drawer,
and just as I did so, heard a faint squeak, and at the same instant my
poor little pet fell from the back of the drawer--lifeless. I took up
his body, and, placing it in my bosom, did my best to restore it to
animation. His little body had been crushed
in the crevice at the back part of the drawer, through which he had been
endeavouring to escape, and he was really and irrecoverably gone. *       *       *       *       *

NOTE ON THE FEEDING, &C., OF WHITE MICE.--Such of my juvenile readers
as may be disposed to make a pet of one of these interesting little
animals, would do well to observe the following rules:--Clean the cage
out daily, and keep it dry; do not keep it in too cold a place; in
winter it should be kept in a room in which there is a fire. Feed the
mice on bread steeped in milk, having first squeezed the milk out, as
too moist food is bad for them. Never give them cheese, as it is apt to
produce fatal disorders, though the more hardy brown mice eat it with
impunity. If you want to give them a treat, give them grains of wheat
or barley, or if these are not to be procured, oats or rice. A little
tin box of water should be constantly left in their cage, but securely
fixed, so that they cannot overturn it. Let the wires be not too slight,
or too long, otherwise the little animals will easily squeeze themselves
between them, and let them be of iron, never of copper, as the animals
are fond of nibbling at them, and the rust of the latter, or _verdigris_,
would quickly poison them. White mice are to be procured at most of the
bird-shops in Patricks Close, Dublin; of the wire-workers and bird-cage
makers in Edinburgh; and from all the animal fanciers in London,
whose residences are to be found chiefly on the New Road and about
Knightsbridge. Their prices vary from one shilling to two-and-sixpence
per pair, according to their age and beauty. H. D. R.




THE PROFESSIONS. If what are called the liberal professions could speak, they would
all utter the one cry, we are overstocked; and echo would reply
overstocked. This has long been a subject of complaint, and yet nobody
seems inclined to mend the matter by making any sacrifice on his own
part--just as in a crowd, to use a familiar illustration, the man who is
loudest in exclaiming dear me, what pressing and jostling people do keep
here! never thinks of lightening the pressure by withdrawing his own
person from the mass. There is, however, an advantage to be derived from
the utterance and reiteration of the complaint, if not by those already
in the press, at least by those who are still happily clear of it. There are many vanities and vexations of spirit under the sun, but this
evil of professional redundancy seems to be one of very great magnitude. It involves not merely an outlay of much precious time and substance to
no purpose, but in most cases unfits those who constitute the excess
from applying themselves afterwards to other pursuits. Such persons are
the primary sufferers; but the community at large participates in the
loss. It cannot but be interesting to inquire to what this tendency may be
owing, and what remedy it might be useful to apply to the evil. Now, it
strikes me that the great cause is the exclusive attention which people
pay to the great prizes, and their total inconsideration of the number of
blanks which accompany them. Life itself has been compared to a lottery;
but in some departments the scheme may be so particularly bad, that it is
nothing short of absolute gambling to purchase a share in it. A few arrive at great eminence, and these few excite the
envy and admiration of all beholders; but they are only a few compared
with the number of those who linger in the shade, and, however anxious to
enjoy the sport, never once get a rap at the ball. Again, parents are apt to look upon the mere name of a profession as a
provision for their children. They calculate all the expenses of general
education, professional education, and then of admission to liberty to
practise; and finding all these items amount to a tolerably large sum,
they conceive they have bestowed an ample portion on the son who has cost
them thus much monies. But unfortunately they soon learn by experience
that the elevation of a profession, great as it is, does not always
possess that homely recommendation of causing the pot to boil, and that
the individual for whom this costly provision has been made, cannot be so
soon left to shift for himself. Here then is another cause of this evil,
namely, that people do not adequately and fairly calculate the whole cost. Of our liberal professions, the army is the only one that yields a
certain income as the produce of the purchase money, But in these piping
times of peace, a private soldier in the ranks might as well attempt to
verify the old song, and

    Spend half a crown out of sixpence a-day,

as an ensign to pay mess-money and band-money, and all other regulation
monies, keep himself in dress coat and epaulettes, and all the other et
ceteras, upon his mere pay. To live in any
comfort in the army, a subaltern should have an income from some other
source, equal at least in amount to that which he receives through the
hands of the paymaster. The army is, in fact, an expensive profession,
and of all others the least agreeable to one who is prevented, by
circumscribed means, from doing as his brother officers do. Yet the
mistake of venturing to meet all these difficulties is not unfrequently
admitted, with what vain expectation it is needless to inquire. The usual
result is such as one would anticipate, namely, that the rash adventurer,
after incurring debts, or putting his friends to unlooked-for charges, is
obliged after a short time to sell out, and bid farewell for ever to the
unprofitable profession of arms. It would be painful to dwell upon the situation of those who enter other
professions without being duly prepared to wait their turn of employment. It is recognised as a poignantly applicable truth in the profession of
the bar, that many are called but few are chosen; but with very few and
rare exceptions indeed, the necessity of _biding_ the time is certain. In the legal and medical professions there is no fixed income, however
small, insured to the adventurer; and unless his circle of friends and
connections be very wide and serviceable indeed, he should make up his
mind for a procrastinated return and a late harvest. But how many from
day to day, and from year to year, do launch their bark upon the ocean,
without any such prudent foresight! The result therefore is, that vast
proportion of disastrous voyages and shipwrecks of which we hear so
constantly. Such is the admitted evil--it is granted on all sides. The question
is, what is to be done?--what is the remedy? Now, the remedy for an
overstocked profession very evidently is, that people should forbear to
enter it. I am no Malthusian on the subject of population: I desire no
unnatural checks upon the increase and multiplication of her Majestys
subjects; but I should like to drain off a surplus from certain
situations, and turn off the in-flowing stream into more profitable
channels. I would advise parents, then, to leave the choice of a liberal
profession to those who are able to live without one. Such parties can
afford to wait for advancement, however long it may be in coming, or to
bear up against disappointment, if such should be their lot. With such
it is a safe speculation, and they may be left to indulge in it, if they
think proper. But it will be asked, what is to
be done with the multitudes who would be diverted from the professions,
if this advice were acted upon? I answer, that the money unprofitably
spent upon their education, and in fees of admission to these expensive
pursuits, would insure them a good location and a certain provision
for life in Canada, or some of the colonies; and that any honourable
occupation which would yield a competency ought to be preferred to
professions which, however liberal, hold out to the many but a very
doubtful prospect of that result. It is much to be regretted that there is a prevalent notion among
certain of my countrymen that trade is not a genteel thing, and
that it must be eschewed by those who have any pretensions to fashion. This unfortunate, and I must say unsound state of opinion, contributes
also, I fear, in no small degree, to that professional redundancy of
which we have been speaking. The supposed absolute necessity of a high
classical education is a natural concomitant of this opinion. All our
schools therefore are eminently classical. The University follows, as a
matter of course, and then the University leads to a liberal profession,
as surely as one step of a ladder conducts to another. Thus the evil is
nourished at the very root. Now, I would take the liberty of advising
those parents who may concur with me in the main point of over-supply in
the professions, to begin at the beginning, and in the education of their
children, to exchange this superabundance of Greek and Latin for the less
elegant but more useful accomplishment of ciphering. I am disposed to
concur with that facetious but shrewd fellow, Mr Samuel Slick, upon the
inestimable advantages of that too much neglected art--neglected, I mean,
in our country here, Ireland. He has demonstrated that they do every
thing by it in the States, and that without it they could do nothing. With the most profound respect to my countrymen, then, I would earnestly
recommend them to cultivate it. But it may perhaps be said that there is
no encouragement to mercantile pursuits in Ireland, and that if there
were, there would be no necessity for me to recommend ciphering and
its virtues to the people. To this I answer, that merchandize offers
its prizes to the ingenious and venturous much rather than to those who
wait for a highway to be made for them. If people were resolved to
live by trade, I think they would contrive to do so--many more, at least,
than at present operate successfully in that department. If more of
education, and more of mind, were turned in that direction, new sources
of profitable industry, at present unthought of, would probably discover
themselves. Much might be said on this subject, but I shall not enter
further into the speculation, quite satisfied if I have thrown out a hint
which may be found capable of improvement by others. The rearing of geese might be more an object of attention to our small
farmers and labourers in the vicinity of bogs and mountain tracts than it
is. The general season for the consumption of fat geese is from Michaelmas to
Christmas, and the high prices paid for them in the English markets--to
which they can be so rapidly conveyed from many parts of Ireland--appear
to offer sufficient temptation to the speculator who has the capital and
accommodation necessary for fattening them. A well-organized system of feeding this hardy and nutritious species of
poultry, in favourable localities, would give a considerable impulse to
the rearing of them, and consequently promote the comforts of many poor
Irish families, who under existing circumstances do not find it worth
while to rear them except in very small numbers. I am led to offer a few suggestions on this subject from having
ascertained that in the Fens of Lincolnshire, notwithstanding a great
decrease there in the breeding of geese from extensive drainage, one
individual, Mr Clarke of Boston, fattens every year, between Michaelmas
and Christmas, the prodigious number of seven thousand geese, and that
another dealer at Spalding prepares for the poultry butcher nearly as
many: these they purchase in lots from the farmers wives. Perhaps a few details of the Lincolnshire practice may be acceptable to
some of the readers of this Journal:--

The farmers in the Fens keep breeding stocks proportioned to the extent
of suitable land which they can command; and in order to insure the
fertility of the eggs, they allow one gander to three geese, which is a
higher proportion of males than is deemed necessary elsewhere. The number
of goslings in each brood averages about ten, which, allowing for all
casualties, is a considerable produce. There have been extraordinary instances of individual fecundity, on
which, however, it would be as absurd for any goose-breeder to calculate,
as it is proverbially unwise to reckon chickens before they are hatched;
and this fruitfulness is only attainable by constant feeding with
stimulating food through the preceding winter. A goose has been known to lay seventy eggs within twelve months,
twenty-six in the spring, before the time of incubation, and (after
bringing out seventeen goslings) the remainder by the end of the year. The white variety is preferred to the grey or party-, as the
birds of this colour feed more kindly, and their feathers are worth three
shillings a stone more than the others: the quality of the land, however,
on which the breeding stock is to be maintained, decides this matter,
generally strong land being necessary for the support of the white or
larger kind. Under all circumstances a white gander is preferred, in
order to have a large progeny. It has been remarked, but I know not if
with reason, that ganders are more frequently white than the females. To state all the particulars of hatching and rearing would be
superfluous, and mere repetition of what is contained in the various
works on poultry. I shall merely state some of the peculiarities of the
practice in the county of Lincoln. When the young geese are brought up at different periods by the great
dealers, they are put into pens together, according to their age, size,
and condition, and fed on steamed potatoes and ground oats, in the ratio
of one measure of oats to three of potatoes. By unremitting care as to
cleanliness, pure water, and constant feeding, these geese are fattened
in about three weeks, at an average cost of one penny per day each. The _cramming_ system, either by the fingers or the forcing pump,
described by French writers, with the accompanying barbarities of
blinding, nailing the feet to the floor, or confinement in perforated
casks or earthen pots (as is said to be the case sometimes in Poland),
are happily unknown in Lincolnshire, and I may add throughout England,
with one exception--the nailing of the feet to boards. The unequivocal
proofs of this may occasionally, but very rarely, be seen in the geese
brought into the London markets: these, however, may possibly be imported
ones, though I fear they are not so. The Lincolnshire dealers do not give any of those rich greasy pellets
of barley meal and hot liquor, which always spoil the flavour, to their
geese, as they well know that oats is the best feeding for them; barley,
besides being more expensive, renders the flesh loose and insipid, and
rather _chickeny_ in flavour. Every point of economy on this subject is matter of great moment, on the
vast scale pursued by Mr Clarke, who pays seven hundred pounds a-year
for the mere conveyance of his birds to the London market; a fact which
gives a tolerable notion of the great extent of capital employed in this
business, the extent of which is scarcely conceivable by my agricultural
countrymen. Little cost, however, is incurred by those who breed the geese, as the
stock are left to provide for themselves, except in the laying season,
and in feeding the goslings until they are old enough to eat grass or
feed on the stubbles. I have no doubt, however, that the cramp would be
less frequently experienced, if solid food were added to the grass, when
the geese are turned out to graze, although Mr Clarke attributes the
cramp, as well as gout and fever, to too close confinement alone. This
opinion does not correspond with my far more limited observation, which
leads me to believe that the cramp attacks goslings most frequently when
they are at large, and left to shift for themselves on green food alone,
and that of the poorest kind. I should think it good economy to give
them, and the old stagers too, all spare garden vegetables, for loss of
condition is prejudicial to them as well as to other animals. Mr Cobbett
used to fatten his young geese, from June to October, on Swedish turnips,
carrots, white cabbages, or lettuces, with some corn. Swedish turnips no doubt will answer very well, but not so well as
farinaceous potatoes, when immediate profit is the object. The experience
of such an extensive dealer as Mr Clarke is worth volumes of theory
and conjecture as to the mode of feeding, and he decides in favour of
potatoes and oats. The treatment for cramp and fever in Lincolnshire is bleeding--I know not
if it be hazarded in gout--but as it is not successful in the cases of
cramp in one instance out of twenty, it may be pronounced inefficacious. I have had occasion lately to remark in this Journal on the general
disinclination in England to the barbarous custom of plucking geese
alive. In Lincolnshire, however, they do so with the breeding stock three
times in the year, beginning at midsummer, and repeating the operation
twice afterwards, at intervals of six weeks between the operations. The practice is defended on the plea, that if the feathers be matured,
the geese are better for it, while it is of course admitted that the
birds must be injured more or less--according to the handling by the
pluckers--if the feathers be not ripe. But as birds do not moult three
times in the year, I do not understand how it should be correctly said
that the feathers _can_ be ripe on these three occasions. How does nature
suggest the propriety of stripping the feathers so often? Where great
numbers are kept, the loss by allowing the feathers to drop on the ground
would be serious, and on this account alone can even one stripping be
justified. In proof of the general opinion that the goose is extremely long-lived,
we have many recorded facts; among them the following:--In 1824 there
was a goose living in the possession of Mr Hewson of Glenham, near
Market Rasen, Lincolnshire, which was then upwards of a century old. It
had been throughout that term in the constant possession of Mr Hewsons
forefathers and himself, and on quitting his farm he would not suffer
it to be sold with his other stock, but made a present of it to the
in-coming tenant, that the venerable fowl might terminate its career on
the spot where its useful life had been spent such a length of days.

The taste which has long prevailed among gourmands for the liver of a
goose, and has led to the enormous cruelties exercised in order to cause
its enlargement by rendering the bird diseased in that organ through high
and forced feeding in a warm temperature and close confinement, is well
known; but I doubt if many are aware of the influence of _charcoal_ in
producing an unnatural state of the liver. I had read of charcoal being put into a trough of water to sweeten it for
geese when cooped up; but from a passage in a recent work by Liebig it
would appear that the charcoal acts not as a sweetener of the water, but
in another way on the constitution of the goose. I am tempted to give the extract from its novelty:--The production of
flesh and fat may be artificially increased: all domestic animals, for
example, contain much fat. We give food to animals which increases the
activity of certain organs, and is itself capable of being transformed
into fat. We add to the quantity of food, or we lessen the progress
of respiration and perspiration by preventing motion. The conditions
necessary to effect this purpose in birds are different from those in
quadrupeds; and it is well known that charcoal powder produces such an
excessive growth in the liver of a goose as at length causes the death of
the animal.

We are much inferior to the English in the art of preparing poultry for
the market; and this is the more to be regretted in the instance of
geese, especially as we can supply potatoes--which I have shown to be
the chief material of their fattening food--at half their cost in many
parts of England. This advantage alone ought to render the friends of our
agricultural poor earnest in promoting the rearing and fattening of geese
in localities favourable for the purpose. The encouragement of our native manufactures is now a general topic of
conversation and interest, and we hope the present excitement of the
public mind on this subject will be productive of permanent good. We also
hope that the encouragement proposed to be given to articles of Irish
manufacture will be extended to the productions of the head as well as to
those of the hands; that the manufacturer of Irish wit and humour will be
deemed worthy of support as well as those of silks, woollens, or felts;
and, that Irishmen shall venture to estimate the value of Irish produce
for themselves, without waiting as heretofore till they get the London
stamp upon them, as our play-going people of old times used to do in the
case of the eminent Irish actors. We are indeed greatly inclined to believe that our Irish manufactures
are rising in estimation in England, from the fact which has come to
our knowledge that many thousands of our Belfast hams are sold annually
at the other side of the water as genuine Yorkshire, and also that many
of those Belfast hams with the Yorkshire stamp find their way back into
Ould Ireland, and are bought as English by those who would despise
them as Irish. Now, we should like our countrymen not to be gulled in
this way, but depend upon their own judgment in the matter of hams, and
in like manner in the matter of articles of Irish literary manufacture,
without waiting for the London stamp to be put on them. The necessity
for such discrimination and confidence in their own judgment exists
equally in hams and literature. Thus certain English editors approve so
highly of our articles in the Irish Penny Journal, that they copy them
by wholesale, not only without acknowledgment, but actually do us the
favour to father them as their own! As an example of this patronage, we
may refer to a recent number of the Court Gazette, in which its editor
has been entertaining his aristocratic readers with a little piece of
_badinage_ from our Journal, expressly written for us, and entitled A
short chapter on Bustles, but which he gives as written for the said
Court Gazette! Now, this is really very considerate and complimentary,
and we of course feel grateful. But, better again, we find our able and
kind friend the editor of the _Monitor_ and _Irishman_, presenting, no
doubt inadvertently, this very article to his Irish readers a few weeks
ago--not even as an Irish article that had got the London stamp upon it,
but as actually one of true British manufacture--the produce of the Court
Gazette. Now, in perfect good humour, we ask our friend, as such we have reason to
consider him, could he not as well have copied this article from our own
Journal, and given us the credit of it--and would it not be worthy of the
consistency and patriotism of the _Irishman_, who writes so ably in the
cause of Irish manufactures, to extend his support, as far as might be
compatible with truth and honesty, to the native literature of Ireland? *       *       *       *       *

    Printed and published every Saturday by GUNN and CAMERON, at
    the Office of the General Advertiser, No. 6, Church Lane,
    College Green, Dublin.--Sold by all Booksellers. End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Irish Penny Journal, Vol. Can the conduct
of infinite wisdom, power and love ever change? Is the infinite capable
of any improvement whatever? According to the theologians, God prepared this globe expressly for the
habitation of his loved children, and yet he filled the forests with
ferocious beasts; placed serpents in every path; stuffed the world
with earthquakes, and adorned its surface with mountains of flame. Notwithstanding all this, we are told that the world is perfect; that
it was created by a perfect being, and is therefore necessarily perfect. The next moment, these same persons will tell us that the world was
cursed; covered with brambles, thistles and thorns, and that man was
doomed to disease and death, simply because our poor, dear mother ate an
apple contrary to the command of an arbitrary God. The Devils better than the Gods

Our ancestors not only had their God-factories, but they made devils
as well. These devils were generally disgraced and fallen gods. These
devils generally sympathized with man. In nearly all the theologies,
mythologies and religions, the devils have been much more humane and
merciful than the gods. No devil ever gave one of his generals an order
to kill children and to rip open the bodies of pregnant women. Such
barbarities were always ordered by the good gods! The pestilences were
sent by the most merciful gods! The frightful famine, during which the
dying child with pallid lips sucked the withered bosom of a dead
mother, was sent by the loving gods. No devil was ever charged with such
fiendish brutality. Is it possible that an infinite God created this world simply to be the
dwelling-place of slaves and serfs? simply for the purpose of raising
orthodox Christians? That he did a few miracles to astonish them; that
all the evils of life are simply his punishments, and that he is finally
going to turn heaven into a kind of religious museum filled with Baptist
barnacles, petrified Presbyterians and Methodist mummies? I want no
heaven for which I must give my reason; no happiness in exchange for
my liberty, and no immortality that demands the surrender of my
individuality. Better rot in the windowless tomb, to which there is no
door but the red mouth of the pallid worm, than wear the jeweled collar
even of a god. It is impossible to conceive of a more thoroughly despicable, hateful,
and arrogant being, than the Jewish god. In the mythology of the world he has no parallel. He, only, is
never touched by agony and tears. He cares neither for love nor music,
beauty nor joy. A false friend, an unjust judge, a braggart, hypocrite,
and tyrant. Compared with Jehovah, Pharaoh was a benefactor, and the
tyranny of Egypt was freedom to those who suffered the liberty of God. HEAVEN AND HELL




302. Hope of a Future Life

For my part I know nothing of any other state of existence, either
before or after this, and I have never become personally acquainted with
anybody who did. There may be another life, and if there is the best
way to prepare for it is by making somebody happy in this. God certainly
cannot afford to put a man in hell who has made a little heaven in this
world. I would like to see how things come
out in this world when I am dead. There are some people I should like to
see again, but if there is no other life I shall never know it. I am Immortal

So far as I am concerned I am immortal; that is to say, I can't
recollect when I did not exist, and there never will be a time when I
will remember that I do not exist. I would like to have several millions
of dollars, and I may say I have a lively hope that some day I may be
rich; but to tell you the truth I have very little evidence of it. Our
hope of immortality does not come from any religions, but nearly all
religions come from that hope. The Old Testament, instead of telling
us that we are immortal, tells us how we lost immortality. You will
recollect that if Adam and Eve could have gotten to the tree of life,
they would have eaten of its fruit and would have lived forever; but for
the purpose of preventing immortality God turned them out of the Garden
of Eden, and put certain angels with swords or sabres at the gate to
keep them from getting back. The Old Testament proves, if it proves
anything, which I do not think it does, that there is no life after
this; and the New Testament is not very specific on the subject. There
were a great many opportunities for the Savior and his apostles to
tell us about another world, but they didn't improve them to any great
extent; and the only evidence so far as I know about another life is,
first, that we have no evidence; and, secondly, that we are rather sorry
that we have not, and wish we had. And suppose, after all, that death does end all. Next to eternal joy,
next to being forever with those we love and those who have loved us,
next to that is to be wrapped in the dreamless drapery of eternal peace. Upon the shadowy shore of death
the sea of trouble casts no wave. Eyes that have been curtained by the
everlasting dark will never know again the touch of tears. Lips that
have been touched by the eternal silence will never utter another word
of grief. And I had
rather think of those I have loved, and those I have lost, as having
returned to earth, as having become a part of the elemental wealth of
the the world. I would rather think of them as unconscious dust. I would
rather think of them as gurgling in the stream, floating in the cloud,
bursting into light upon the shores of worlds. I would rather think
of them thus than to have even a suspicion that their souls had been
clutched by an orthodox God. The Old World Ignorant of Destiny

Moses differed from most of the makers of sacred books by his failure
to say anything of a future life, by failing to promise heaven, and to
threaten hell. Upon the subject of a future state, there is not one
word in the Pentateuch. Probably at that early day God did not deem
it important to make a revelation as to the eternal destiny of man. He seems to have thought that he could control the Jews, at least, by
rewards and punishments in this world, and so he kept the frightful
realities of eternal joy and torment a profound secret from the people
of his choice. He thought it far more important to tell the Jews their
origin than to enlighten them as to their destiny. Where the Doctrine of Hell was born

I honestly believe that the doctrine of hell was born in the glittering
eyes of snakes that run in frightful coils watching for their prey. I
believe it was born in the yelping and howling and growling and snarling
of wild beasts. I believe it was born in the grin of hyenas and in the
malicious clatter of depraved apes. I despise it, I defy it, and I hate
it; and when the great ship freighted with the world goes down in
the night of death, chaos and disaster, I will not be guilty of the
ineffable meanness of pushing from my breast my wife and children and
paddling off in some orthodox canoe. I will go down with those I love
and with those who love me. I will go down with the ship and with my
race. Nothing can make me believe that there is any being that is going to
burn and torment and damn his children forever. The Grand Companionships of Hell

Since hanging has got to be a means of grace, I would prefer hell. I had
a thousand times rather associate with the pagan philosophers than with
the inquisitors of the middle ages. I certainly should prefer the worst
man in Greek or Roman history to John Calvin, and I can imagine no man
in the world that I would not rather sit on the same bench with than the
puritan fathers and the founders of orthodox churches. I would trade off
my harp any minute for a seat in the other country. All the poets will
be in perdition, and the greatest thinkers, and, I should think, most
of the women whose society would tend to increase the happiness of
man, nearly all the painters, nearly all the sculptors, nearly all
the writers of plays, nearly all the great actors, most of the best
musicians, and nearly all the good fellows--the persons who know good
stories, who can sing songs, or who will loan a friend a dollar. They will mostly all be in that country, and if I did not live there
permanently, I certainly would want it so I could spend my winter months
there. Let me put one case and I will be through with this branch of the
subject. The husband is a good
fellow and the wife a splendid woman. They live and love each other and
all at once he is taken sick, and they watch day after day and night
after night around his bedside until their property is wasted and
finally she has to go to work, and she works through eyes blinded with
tears, and the sentinel of love watches at the bedside of her prince,
and at the least breath or the least motion she is awake; and she
attends him night after night and day after day for years, and finally
he dies, and she has him in her arms and covers his wasted face with the
tears of agony and love. He dies, and
she buries him and puts flowers above his grave, and she goes there in
the twilight of evening and she takes her children, and tells her little
boys and girls through her tears how brave and how true and how tender
their father was, and finally she dies and goes to hell, because she was
not a believer; and he goes to the battlements of heaven and looks over
and sees the woman who loved him with all the wealth of her love, and
whose tears made his dead face holy and sacred, and he looks upon her
in the agonies of hell without having his happiness diminished in the
least. With all due respect to everybody I say, damn any such doctrine
as that. The Drama of Damnation

When you come to die, as you look back upon the record of your life, no
matter how many men you have wrecked and ruined, and no matter how many
women you have deceived and deserted--all that may be forgiven you;
but if you recollect that you have laughed at God's book you will see
through the shadows of death, the leering looks of fiends and the forked
tongues of devils. For instance, it
is the day of judgment. When the man is called up by the recording
secretary, or whoever does the cross-examining, he says to his soul:
"Where are you from?" "Well, I don't like to talk about myself." "Well, I was a good fellow; I loved
my wife; I loved my children. My home was my heaven; my fireside was my
paradise, and to sit there and see the lights and shadows falling on the
faces of those I love, that to me was a perpetual joy. I never gave one
of them a solitary moment of pain. I don't owe a dollar in the world,
and I left enough to pay my funeral expenses and keep the wolf of want
from the door of the house I loved. That is the kind of a man I am." They were always expecting to be happy simply because somebody else was
to be damned." "Well, did you believe that rib story?" To tell you the
God's truth, that was a little more than I could swallow." "Yes, sir, and to the Young Men's Christian
Association." "Did you
ever run off with any of the money?" "I don't like to tell, sir." "What kind of a bank did you have?" "How much did you
run off with?" "Did you take anything
else along with you?" "Did you have a wife and children of your own?" "Oh, yes; but such was my confidence in God that I
believed he would take care of them." I believed all of it, sir; I often used to be sorry that there were
not harder stories yet in the Bible, so that I could show what my faith
could do." Annihilation rather than be a God

No God has a right to make a man he intends to drown. Eternal wisdom has
no right to make a poor investment, no right to engage in a speculation
that will not finally pay a dividend. No God has a right to make
a failure, and surely a man who is to be damned forever is not a
conspicuous success. Yet upon love's breast, the Church has placed that
asp; around the child of immortality the Church has coiled the worm that
never dies. For my part I want no heaven, if there is to be a hell. I
would rather be annihilated than be a god and know that one human soul
would have to suffer eternal agony. "All that have Red Hair shall be Damned." I admit that most Christians are honest--always have admitted it. I
admit that most ministers are honest, and that they are doing the best
they can in their way for the good of mankind; but their doctrines are
hurtful; they do harm in the world; and I am going to do what I can
against their doctrines. They preach this infamy: "He that believes
shall be saved, and he that believeth not shall be damned." Every word
of that text has been an instrument of torture; every letter in that
text has been a sword thrust into the bleeding and quivering heart of
man; every letter has been a dungeon; every line has been a chain; and
that infamous sentence has covered this world with blood. I deny that
"whoso believes shall be saved, and he that believeth not shall be
damned." No man can control his belief; you might as well say, "All that
have red hair shall be damned." The Conscience of a Hyena

But, after all, what I really want to do is to destroy the idea of
eternal punishment. That
doctrine fills hell with honest men, and heaven with intellectual and
moral paupers. That doctrine allows people to sin on a credit. That
doctrine allows the basest to be eternally happy and the most honorable
to suffer eternal pain. I think of all doctrines it is the most
infinitely infamous, and would disgrace the lowest savage, and any man
who believes it, and has imagination enough to understand it, has the
heart of a serpent and the conscience of a hyena. I Leave the Dead

But for me I leave the dead where nature leaves them, and whatever
flower of hope springs up in my heart I will cherish. But I cannot
believe that there is any being in this universe who has created a
soul for eternal pain, and I would rather that every God would destroy
himself, I would rather that we all should go back to the eternal chaos,
to the black and starless night, than that just one soul should suffer
eternal agony. Swedenborg did one thing for which I feel almost grateful. He gave an
account of having met John Calvin in hell. Nothing connected with the
supernatural could be more natural than this. The only thing detracting
from the value of this report is, that if there is a hell, we know
without visiting the place that John Calvin must be there. GOVERNING GREAT MEN




315. Jesus Christ

And let me say here once for all, that for the man Christ I have
infinite respect. Let me say once for all that the place where man has
died for man is holy ground. Let me say once for all, to that great and
serene man I gladly pay--I _gladly_ pay the tribute of my admiration and
my tears. He was an infidel in his
time. He was regarded as a blasphemer, and his life was destroyed by
hypocrites who have in all ages done what they could to trample freedom
out of the human mind. Had I lived at that time I would have been his
friend. And should he come again he will not find a better friend than
I will be. For the theological creation I have
a different feeling. If he was in fact God, he knew there was no such
thing as death; he knew that what we call death was but the eternal
opening of the golden gates of everlasting joy. And it took no heroism
to face a death that was simply eternal life. The Emperor Constantine, who lifted Christianity into power, murdered
his wife Fausta and his eldest son Crispus the same year that he
convened the council of Nice to decide whether Jesus Christ was a man or
the son of God. The council decided that Christ was substantial with
the Father. We are thus indebted to a wife
murderer for settling the vexed question of the divinity of the Savior. Theodosius called a council at Constantinople in 381, and this council
decided that the Holy Ghost proceeded from the Father. Theodosius,
the younger, assembled another council at Ephesus to ascertain who the
Virgin Mary really was, and it was solemnly decided in the year 431 that
she was the mother of God. In 451 it was decided by a council held at
Chalcedon, called together by the Emperor Marcian, that Christ had two
natures--the human and divine. In 680, in another general council, held
at Constantinople, convened by order of Pognatius, it was also decided
that Christ had two wills, and in the year 1274 it was decided at the
council of Lyons that the Holy Ghost proceeded not only from the Father,
but from the Son as well. Had it not been for these councils we might
have been without a trinity even unto this day. When we take into
consideration the fact that a belief in the trinity is absolutely
essential to salvation, how unfortunate it was for the world that this
doctrine was not established until the year 1274. Think of the millions
that dropped into hell while these questions were being discussed. The church never has pretended that Jefferson or Franklin died in fear. Franklin wrote no books against the fables of the ancient Jews. He
thought it useless to cast the pearls of thought before the swine of
ignorance and fear. He was the father of a
great party. He gave his views in letters and to trusted friends. He
was a Virginian, author of the Declaration of Independence, founder of a
university, father of a political party, President of the United States,
a statesman and philosopher. He was too powerful for the churches of
his day. Paine was a foreigner, a citizen of the world. He had done these things openly, and what
he had said could not be answered. His arguments were so good that his
character was bad. The Emperor, stained with every crime, is supposed to have died like a
Christian. We hear nothing of fiends leering at him in the shadows of
death. He does not see the forms of his murdered wife and son covered
with the blood he shed. From his white and shriveled lips issued no
shrieks of terror. He does not cover his glazed eyes with thin and
trembling hands to shut out the visions of hell. His chamber is filled
with the rustle of wings waiting to bear his soul to the thrilling
realms of joy. Against the Emperor Constantine the church has hurled no
anathema. She has accepted the story of his vision in the clouds, and
his holy memory has been guarded by priest and pope. Diderot

Diderot was born in 1713. His parents were in what may be called the
humbler walks of life. Like Voltaire, he was educated by the Jesuits. He
had in him something of the vagabond, and was for several years almost a
beggar in Paris. He was endeavoring to live by his pen. In that day and
generation a man without a patron, endeavoring to live by literature,
was necessarily almost a beggar. He nearly starved--frequently going
for days without food. Afterward, when he had something himself, he was
generous as the air. No man ever was more willing to give, and no man
less willing to receive, than Diderot. His motto was, "Incredulity
is the first step toward philosophy." He had the vices of most
Christians--was nearly as immoral as the majority of priests. His vices
he shared in common--his virtues were his own--All who knew him united
in saying that he had the pity of a woman, the generosity of a prince,
the self-denial of an anchorite, the courage of Caesar, an insatiate
thirst foi knowledge, and the enthusiasm of a poet. He attacked with
every power of his mind the superstition of his day. He was in favor of universal
education--the church despised it. He wished to put the knowledge of
the whole world within reach of the poorest. He wished to drive from
the gate of the Garden of Eden the cherubim of superstition, so that
the child of Adam might return to eat once more the fruit of the tree
of knowledge. His poor little desk was
ransacked by the police, searching for manuscripts in which something
might be found that would justify the imprisonment of such a dangerous
man. Whoever, in 1750, wished to increase the knowledge of mankind was
regarded as the enemy of social order. Benedict Spinoza

One of the greatest thinkers of the world was Benedict Spinoza--a Jew,
born at Amsterdam in 1638. He asked the rabbis so many questions, and insisted to such a degree on
what he called reason, that his room was preferred to his company. His Jewish brethren excommunicated him from the synagogue. Under the
terrible curse of their religion he was made an outcast from every
Jewish home. His own father could not give him shelter, and his mother,
after the curse had been pronounced, could not give him bread, could not
even speak to him, without becoming an outcast herself. All the cruelty
of Jehovah was in this curse. Spinoza was but twenty-four years old
when he found himself without friends and without kindred. He earned his bread with willing hands, and cheerfully
divided his poor crust with those below. He tried to solve the problem
of existence. According to him the universe did not commence to
be. It is; from eternity it was; and to eternity it will be. He insisted
that God is inside, not outside, of what we call substance. Thomas Paine

Poverty was his mother--Necessity his master. He had more brains than
books; more sense than education; more courage than politeness;
more strength than polish. He had no veneration for old mistakes--no
admiration for ancient lies. He loved the truth for the truth's
sake, and for man's sake. He saw oppression on every hand; injustice
everywhere; hypocrisy at the altar, venality on the bench, tyranny on
the throne; and with a splendid courage he espoused the cause of the
weak against the strong--of the enslaved many against the titled few. The Greatest of all Political Writers

In my judgment, Thomas Paine was the best political writer that ever
lived. "What he wrote was pure nature, and his soul and his pen ever
went together." Ceremony, pageantry, and all the paraphernalia of
power, had no effect upon him. He examined into the why and wherefore of
things. He was perfectly radical in his mode of thought. Nothing short
of the bed-rock satisfied him. His enthusiasm for what he believed to
be right knew no bounds. During all the dark scenes of the Revolution,
never for one moment did he despair. Year after year his brave words
were ringing through the land, and by the bivouac fires the weary
soldiers read the inspiring words of "Common Sense," filled with ideas
sharper than their swords, and consecrated themselves anew to the cause
of Freedom. The Writings of Paine

The writings of Paine are gemmed with compact statements that carry
conviction to the dullest. Day and night he labored for America, until
there was a government of the people and for the people. At the close
of the Revolution no one stood higher than Thomas Paine. Had he been
willing to live a hypocrite, he would have been respectable, he at least
could have died surrounded by other hypocrites, and at his death there
would have been an imposing funeral, with miles of carriages, filled
with hypocrites, and above his hypocritical dust there would have been a
hypocritical monument covered with lies. The truth is, he died as he had lived. Some ministers were impolite
enough to visit him against his will. Several of them he ordered
from his room. A couple of Catholic priests, in all the meekness of
hypocrisy, called that they might enjoy the agonies of a dying friend
of man. Thomas Paine, rising in his bed, the few embers of expiring life
blown into flame by the breath of indignation, had the goodness to curse
them both. His physician, who seems to have been a meddling fool, just
as the cold hand of death was touching the patriot's heart, whispered
in the dull ear of the dying man: "Do you believe, or do you wish to
believe, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God?" And the reply was: "I
have no wish to believe on that subject." These were the last remembered
words of Thomas Paine. He died as serenely as ever Christian passed
away. He died in the full possession of his mind, and on the very brink
and edge of death proclaimed the doctrines of his life. Paine Believed in God

Thomas Paine was a champion in both hemispheres of human liberty; one of
the founders and fathers of the Republic; one of the foremost men of his
age. He never wrote a word in favor of injustice. He was a despiser of
slavery. He wast in the widest and
best sense, a friend of all his race. His head was as clear as his heart
was good, and he had the courage to speak his honest thought. He was
the first man to write these words: "The United States of America." He furnished every thought
that now glitters in the Declaration of Independence. He believed in one
God and no more. He was a believer even in special providence, and he
hoped for immortality. The Intellectual Hera

Thomas Paine was one of the intellectual heroes--one of the men to whom
we are indebted. His name is associated forever with the Great Republic. As long as free government exists he will be remembered, admired and
honored. He lived a long, laborious and useful life. The world is better
for his having lived. For the sake of truth he accepted hatred and
reproach for his portion. His friends
were untrue to him because he was true to himself, and true to them. He
lost the respect of what is called society, but kept his own. His life
is what the world calls failure and what history calls success. If to
love your fellow-men more than self is goodness, Thomas Paine was good. If to be in advance of your time--to be a pioneer in the direction of
right--is greatness. If to avow your principles and discharge your
duty in the presence of death is heroic, Thomas Paine was a hero. At the
age of seventy-three, death touched his tired heart. He died in the land
his genius defended--under the flag he gave to the skies. Slander cannot
touch him now--hatred cannot reach him more. He sleeps in the sanctuary
of the tomb, beneath the quiet of the stars. Paine, Franklin, Jefferson

In our country there were three infidels--Paine, Franklin and Jefferson. The colonies were full of superstition, the Puritans with the spirit
of persecution. Laws savage, ignorant, and malignant had been passed in
every colony for the purpose of destroying intellectual liberty. The toleration acts of
Maryland tolerated only Christians--not infidels, not thinkers, not
investigators. The charity of Roger Williams was not extended to those
who denied the Bible, or suspected the divinity of Christ. It was not
based upon the rights of man, but upon the rights of believers, who
differed in non-essential points. David Hume

On the 26th of April, 1711, David Hume was born. David Hume was one of
the few Scotchmen of his day who were not owned by the church. He had
the manliness to examine historical and religious questions for himself,
and the courage to give his conclusions to the world. He was singularly
capable of governing himself. He was a philosopher, and lived a calm
and cheerful life, unstained by an unjust act, free from all excess,
and devoted in a reasonable degree to benefiting his fellow-men. After
examining the Bible he became convinced that it was not true. For
failing to suppress his real opinion, for failing to tell a deliberate
falsehood, he brought upon him the hatred of the church. Voltaire

Voltaire was the intellectual autocrat of his time. From his throne at
the foot of the Alps he pointed the finger of scorn at every hypocrite
in Europe. He left the quiver of ridicule without an arrow. He was the
pioneer of his century. Through the
shadows of faith and fable, through the darkness of myth and miracle,
through the midnight of Christianity, through the blackness of bigotry,
past cathedral and dungeon, past rack and stake, past altar and throne,
he carried, with brave and chivalric hands, the torch of reason. John Calvin

Calvin was of a pallid, bloodless complexion, thin, sickly, irritable,
gloomy, impatient, egotistic, tyrannical, heartless, and infamous. He
was a strange compound of revengeful morality, malicious forgiveness,
ferocious charity, egotistic humility, and a kind of hellish justice. In other words, he was as near like the God of the Old Testament as his
health permitted. Calvin's Five Fetters

This man forged five fetters for the brain. That is to say, predestination, particular redemption, total
depravity, irresistible grace, and the perseverance of the saints. About
the neck of each follower he put a collar bristling with these five iron
points. The presence of all these points on the collar is still the test
of orthodoxy in the church he founded. This man, when in the flush of
youth, was elected to the office of preacher in Geneva. He at once,
in union with Farel, drew up a condensed statement of the Presbyterian
doctrine, and all the citizens of Geneva, on pain of banishment, were
compelled to take an oath that they believed this statement. Of this
proceeding Calvin very innocently remarked that it produced great
satisfaction. A man named Caroli had the audacity to dispute with
Calvin. Humboldt

Humboldt breathed the atmosphere of investigation. Old ideas were
abandoned; old creeds, hallowed by centuries, were thrown aside; thought
became courageous; the athlete, Reason, challenged to mortal combat the
monsters of superstition. Humbolt's Travels

Europe becoming too small for his genius, he visited the tropics. He
sailed along the gigantic Amazon--the mysterious Orinoco--traversed the
Pampas--climbed the Andes until he stood upon the crags of Chimborazo,
more than eighteen thousand feet above the level of the sea, and climbed
on until blood flowed from his eyes and lips. For nearly five years he
pursued his investigations in the new world, accompanied by the intrepid
Bonplandi. He was the best intellectual
organ of these new revelations of science. He was calm, reflective and
eloquent; filled with a sense of the beautiful, and the love of truth. His collections were immense, and valuable beyond calculation to every
science. He endured innumerable hardships, braved countless dangers in
unknown and savage lands, and exhausted his fortune for the advancement
of true learning. Humboldt's Illustrious Companions

Humboldt was the friend and companion of the greatest poets, historians,
philologists, artists, statesmen, critics, and logicians of his time. He was the companion of Schiller, who believed that man would be
regenerated through the influence of the Beautiful of Goethe, the grand
patriarch of German literature; of Weiland, who has been called
the Voltaire of Germany; of Herder, who wrote the outlines of a
philosophical history of man; of Kotzebue, who lived in the world of
romance; of Schleiermacher, the pantheist; of Schlegel, who gave to
his countrymen the enchanted realm of Shakespeare; of the sublime Kant,
author of the first work published in Germany on Pure Reason; of Fichte,
the infinite idealist; of Schopenhauer, the European Buddhist who
followed the great Gautama to the painless and dreamless Nirwana, and
of hundreds of others, whose names are familiar to and honored by the
scientific world. Humboldt the Apostle of Science

Upon his return to Europe he was hailed as the second Columbus; as the
scientific discover of America; as the revealer of a new world; as the
great demonstrator of the sublime truth, that the universe is governed
by law. I have seen a picture of the old man, sitting upon a mountain
side--above him the eternal snow--below, the smiling valley of the
tropics, filled with vine and palm; his chin upon his breast, his
eyes deep, thoughtful and calm his forehead majestic--grander than the
mountain upon which he sat--crowned with the snow of his whitened hair,
he looked the intellectual autocrat of this world. Not satisfied with
his discoveries in America, he crossed the steppes of Asia, the wastes
of

Siberia, the great Ural range adding to the knowledge of mankind at
every step. H is energy acknowledged no obstacle, his life knew no
leisure; every day was filled with labor and with thought. He was one
of the apostles of science, and he served his divine master with
a self-sacrificing zeal that knew no abatement; with an ardor that
constantly increased, and with a devotion unwavering and constant as the
polar star. Ingersoll Muses by Napoleon's Tomb

A little while ago I stood by the grave of the old Napoleon--a
magnificent tomb of gilt and gold, fit almost for a dead deity--and
gazed upon the sarcophagus of black Egyptian marble, where rest at last
the ashes of the restless man. I leaned over the balustrade and thought
about the career of the greatest soldier of the modern world. I saw him
walking upon the banks of the Seine, contemplating suicide--I saw him
at Toulon--I saw him putting down the mob in the streets of Paris--I saw
him at the head of the army of Italy--I saw him crossing the bridge of
Lodi with the tri-color in his hand--I saw him in Egypt in the shadows
of the pyramids--I saw him conquer the Alps and mingle the eagles of
France with the eagles of the crags. I saw him at Marengo--at Ulm and
Austerlitz. I saw him in Russia, where the infantry of the snow and the
cavalry of the wild blast scattered his legions like Winter's withered
leaves. I saw him at Leipsic in defeat and disaster--driven by a million
bayonets back upon Paris--clutched like a wild beast--banished to Elba. I saw him escape and retake an empire by the force of his genius. I saw
him upon the frightful field of Waterloo, where chance and fate combined
to wreck the fortunes of their former king. Helena,
with his hands crossed behind him, gazing out upon the sad and solemn
sea. I thought of the orphans and widows he had made--of the tears that
had been shed for his glory, and of the only woman who ever loved him,
pushed from his heart by the cold hand of ambition. And I said I would
rather have been a French peasant, and worn wooden shoes. I would rather
have lived in a hut with a vine growing over the door, and the grapes
growing purple in the kisses of the Autumn sun. I would rather have been
that poor peasant with my loving wife by my side, knitting as the day
died out of the sky--with my children upon my knees and their arms about
me; I would rather have been that man and gone down to the tongueless
silence of the dreamless dust, than to have been that imperial
impersonation of force and murder known as Napoleon the Great. And so I
would, ten thousand times. Eulogy on J. G. Blaine

This is a grand year--a year filled with recollections of the
Revolution; filled with the proud and tender memories of the past; with
the sacred legends of liberty; a year in which the sons of freedom will
drink from the fountains of enthusiasm; a year in which the people call
for a man who has preserved in Congress what our soldiers won upon
the field; a year in which they call for the man who has torn from the
throat of treason the tongue of slander--for the man who has snatched
the mask of Democracy from the hideous face of rebellion; for this man
who, like an intellectual athlete, has stood in the arena of debate and
challenged all comers, and who is still a total stranger to defeat. Like
an armed warrior, like a plumed knight, James G. Blaine marched down the
halls of the American Congress and threw his shining lance full and
fair against the brazen foreheads of the defamers of his country and the
maligners of her honor. For the Republican party to desert this gallant
leader now is as though an army should desert their General upon the
field of battle. James G. Blaine is now and has been for years the
bearer of the sacred standard of the Republican party. A Model Leader

The Republicans of the United States want a man who knows that this
Government should protect every citizen, at home and abroad; who knows
that any Government that will not defend its defenders and protect its
protectors is a disgrace to the map of the world. They demand a man who
believes in the eternal separation and divorcement of church and school. They demand a man whose political reputation is as spotless as a star;
but they do not demand that their candidate shall have a certificate of
moral character signed by a Confederate Congress. The man who has, in
full, heaped and rounded measure, all these splendid qualifications is
the present grand and gallant leader of the Republican party--James G.
Blaine. Our country, crowned with the vast and marvelous achievements
of its first century, asks for a man worthy of the past and prophetic
of her future; asks for a man who has the audacity of genius; asks for
a man who is the grandest combination of heart, conscience and brain
beneath her flag. Such a man is James G. Blaine. Abraham Lincoln

This world has not been fit to live in fifty years. There is no liberty
in it--very little. Why, it is only a few years ago that all the
Christian nations were engaged in the slave trade. It was not until 1808
that England abolished the slave trade, and up to that time her priests
in her churches and her judges on her benches owned stock in slave
ships, and luxuriated on the profits of piracy and murder; and when a
man stood up and denounced it they mobbed him as though he had been a
common burglar or a horse thief. It was not until the 28th
day of August, 1833, that England abolished slavery in her colonies; and
it was not until the 1st day of January, 1862, that Abraham Lincoln, by
direction of the entire North, wiped that infamy out of this country;
and I never speak of Abraham Lincoln but I want to say that he was, in
my judgment, in many respects the grandest man ever President of the
United States. I say that upon his tomb there ought to be this line--and
I know of no other man deserving it so well as he: "Here lies one who
having been clothed with almost absolute power never abused it except on
the side of mercy." Swedenborg

Swedenborg was a man of great intellect, of vast acquirements, and of
honest intentions; and I think it equally clear that upon one subject,
at least, his mind was touched, shattered and shaken. Misled by
analogies, imposed upon by the bishop, deceived by the woman, borne to
other worlds upon the wings of dreams, living in the twilight of reason
and the dawn of insanity, he regarded every fact as a patched and ragged
garment with a lining of the costliest silk, and insisted that the wrong
side, even of the silk, was far more beautiful than the right. Jeremy Bentham

The glory of Bentham is, that he gave the true basis of morals, and
furnished the statesmen with the star and compass of this sentence: "The
greatest happiness of the greatest number." Charles Fourier

Fourier sustained about the same relation to this world that Swedenborg
did to the other. There must be something wrong about the brain of one
who solemnly asserts that "the elephant, the ox and the diamond were
created by the Sun; the horse, the lily, and the ruby, by Saturn; the
cow, the jonquil and the topaz, by Jupiter; and the dog, the violet
and the opal stones by the earth itself." And yet, forgetting these
aberrations of the mind, this lunacy of a great and loving soul, for
one, that's in tender-est regard the memory of Charles Fourier, one of
the best and noblest of our race. Auguste Comte

There was in the brain of the great Frenchman--Auguste Comte--the dawn
of that happy day in which humanity will be the only religion, good the
only God, happiness the only object, restitution the only atonement,
mistake the only sin, and affection guided by intelligence, the only
savior of mankind. This dawn enriched his poverty, illuminated the
darkness of his life, peopled his loneliness with the happy millions yet
to be, and filled his eyes with proud and tender tears. When everything
connected with Napoleon, except his crimes, shall be forgotten, Auguste
Comte will be lovingly remembered as a benefactor of the human race. Herbert Spencer

Herbert Spencer relies upon evidence, upon demonstration, upon
experience; and occupies himself with one world at a time. He perceives
that there is a mental horizon that we cannot pierce, and that beyond
that is the unknown, possibly the unknowable. He endeavors to examine
only that which is capable of being examined, and considers the
theological method as not only useless, but hurtful. After all God is
but a guess, throned and established by arrogance and assertion. Turning his attention to those things that have in some way affected
the condition of mankind, Spencer leaves the unknowable to priests and
believers. Robert Collyer

I have the honor of a slight acquaintance with Robert Collyer. I have
read with pleasure some of his exquisite productions. He has a brain
full of the dawn, the head of a philosopher, the imagination of a poet
and the sincere heart of a child. Had such men as Robert Collyer and
John Stuart Mill been present at the burning of Servetus, they would
have extinguished the flames with their tears. Had the presbytery of
Chicago been there, they would have quietly turned their backs, solemnly
divided their coat tails, and warmed themselves. John Milton

England was filled with Puritan gloom and Episcopal ceremony. All
religious conceptions were of the grossest nature. The ideas of crazy
fanatics and extravagant poets were taken as sober facts. Milton had
clothed Christianity in the soiled and faded finery of the gods--had
added to the story of Christ the fables of Mythology, He gave to the
Protestant Church the most outrageously material ideas of the Deity. He turned all the angels into soldiers--made heaven a battlefield, put
Christ in uniform, and described God as a militia general. His works
were considered by the Protestants nearly as sacred as the Bible
itself, and the imagination of the people was thoroughly polluted by the
horrible imagery, the sublime absurdity of the blind Milton. Ernst Haeckel

Amongst the bravest, side by side with the greatest of the world in
Germany, the land of science--stands Ernst Haeckel, who may be said
not only to have demonstrated the theories of Darwin, but the monistic
conception of the world. He has endeavored--and I think with complete
success--to show that there is not, and never was, and never can be,
the creator of anything. Haeckel is one of the bitterest enemies of the
church, and is, therefore, one of the bravest friends of man. Professor Swing, a Dove amongst Vultures

Professor Swing was too good a man to stay in the Presbyterian Church. He was a rose amongst thistles; he was a dove amongst vultures; and they
hunted him out, and I am glad he came out. I have the greatest respect
for Professor Swing, but I want him to tell whether the 109th Psalm is
inspired. Queen Victoria and George Eliot

Compare George Eliot with Queen Victoria. The Queen is clad in garments
given her by blind fortune and unreasoning chance, while George Eliot
wears robes of glory woven in the loom of her own genius. The time is coming when men will be rated at their real
worth; when we shall care nothing for an officer if he does not fill his
place. Bough on Rabbi Bien

I will not answer Rabbi Bien, and I will tell you why. Because he has
taken himself outside of all the limits of a gentleman; because he has
taken upon himself to traduce American women in language the beastliest
I ever read; and any man who says that the American women are not just
as good women as any God can make, and pick his mind to-day, is an
unappreciative barbarian. I will let him alone because he denounced all
the men in this country, all the members of Congress, all the members
of the Senate, all the Judges on the bench, as thieves and robbers. I
pronounce him a vulgar falsifier, and let him alone. General Garfield

No man has been nominated for the office since I was born, by either
party, who had more brains and more heart than James A. Garfield. He
was a soldier, he is a statesman. In time of peace he preferred the
avocations of peace; when the bugle of war blew in his ears he withdrew
from his work and fought for the flag, and then he went back to the
avocation of peace. And I say to-day that a man who, in a time of
profound peace, makes up his mind that he would like to kill folks for
a living is no better, to say the least of it, than the man who loves
peace in the time of peace, and who, when his country is attacked,
rushes to the rescue of her flag. "Wealthy in Integrity; In Brain a Millionaire." James A. Garfield is to-day a poor man, and you know that there is not
money enough in this magnificent street to buy the honor and manhood of
James A. Garfield. Money cannot make such a man, and I will swear to you
that money cannot buy him. James A. Garfield to-day wears the glorious
robe of honest poverty. He is a poor man; but I like to say it here in
Wall street; I like to say it surrounded by the millions of America; I
like to say it in the midst of banks, and bonds, and stocks; I love to
say it where gold is piled--that, although a poor man, he is rich in
honor, in integrity he is wealthy, and in brain he is a millionaire. Garfield a Certificate of the Splendor of the American Constitution

Garfield is a certificate of the splendor of our Government, that says
to every poor boy: "All the avenues of honor are open to you." He is a scholar; he is a statesman; he was a
soldier; he is a patriot; and above all he is a magnificent man, and if
every man in New York knew him as well as I do, Garfield would not lose
a hundred votes in this city. W. Hiram Thomas

The best thing that has come from the other side is from Dr. I
regard him as by far the grandest intellect in the Methodist Church. He
is intellectually a wide and tender man. I cannot conceive of an article
being written in a better spirit. He finds a little fault with me for
not being exactly fair. Thomas
the probability is I never should have laid myself liable to criticism. There is some human nature in me, and I find it exceedingly difficult
to preserve at all times perfect serenity. I have the greatest possible
respect for Dr. Thomas, and must heartily thank him for his perfect
fairness. MISCELLANEOUS




355. Heresy and Orthodoxy

It has always been the man ahead that has been called the heretic. Heresy is the last and best thought always! Heresy extends the
hospitality of the brain to a new idea; that is what the rotting says to
flax growing; that is what the dweller in the swamp says to the man on
the sun-lit hill; that is what the man in the darkness cries out to the
grand man upon whose forehead is shining the dawn of a grander day; that
is what the coffin says to the cradle. Orthodoxy is a kind of shroud,
and heresy is a banner--Orthodoxy is a fog and Heresy a star shining
forever upon the cradle of truth. I do not mean simply in religion, I
mean in everything and the idea I wish to impress upon you is that you
should keep your minds open to all the influences of nature, you should
keep your minds open to reason; hear what a man has to say, and do not
let the turtle-shell of bigotry grow above your brain. Give everybody a
chance and an opportunity; that is all. We used to worship the golden calf, and the worst you can say of us now,
is, we worship the gold of the calf, and even the calves are beginning
to see this distinction. We used to go down on our knees to every man
that held office, now he must fill it if he wishes any respect. We care
nothing for the rich, except what will they do with their money? How does he fill it?--that is the question. And there is rapidly growing
up in the world an aristocracy of heart and brain--the only aristocracy
that has a right to exist. Truth will Bear the Test

If a man has a diamond that has been examined by the lapidaries of the
world, and some ignorant stonecutter told him that it is nothing but
an ordinary rock, he laughs at him; but if it has not been examined
by lapidaries, and he is a little suspicious himself that it is not
genuine, it makes him mad. Any doctrine that will not bear investigation
is not a fit tenant for the mind of an honest man. Any man who is afraid
to have his doctrine investigated is not only a coward but a hypocrite. Paring Nails

Why should we in this age of the world be dominated by the dead? Why
should barbarian Jews who went down to death and dust three thousand
years ago, control the living world? Why should we care for the
superstition of men who began the sabbath by paring their nails,
"beginning at the fourth finger, then going to the second, then to the
fifth, then to the third, and ending with the thumb?" How pleasing to
God this must have been. There may be a God

There may be for aught I know, somewhere in the unknown shoreless vast,
some being whose dreams are constellations and within whose thought the
infinite exists. About this being, if such an one exists, I have nothing
to say. He has written no books, inspired no barbarians, required no
worship, and has prepared no hell in which to burn the honest seeker
after truth. The People are Beginning to Think

The people are beginning to think, to reason and to investigate. Slowly,
painfully, but surely, the gods are being driven from the earth. Only
upon rare occasions are they, even by the most religious, supposed to
interfere in the affairs of men. In most matters we are at last supposed
to be free. Since the invention of steamships and railways, so that the
products of all countries can be easily interchanged, the gods have quit
the business of producing famine. Unchained Thought

For the vagaries of the clouds the infidels propose to substitute the
realities of earth; for superstition, the splendid demonstrations and
achievements of science; and for theological tyranny, the chainless
liberty of thought. Man the Victor of the Future

If abuses are destroyed, man must destroy them. If slaves are freed, man
must free them. If new truths are discovered, man must discover them. If the naked are clothed; if the hungry are fed; if justice is done;
if labor is rewarded; if superstition is driven from the mind; if the
defenseless are protected, and if the right finally triumphs, all must
be the work of man. The grand victories of the future must be won by
man, and by man alone. The Sacred Sabbath

Of all the superstitious of mankind, this insanity about the "sacred
Sabbath" is the most absurd. The idea of feeling it a duty to be solemn
and sad one-seventh of the time! To think that we can please an infinite
being by staying in some dark and sombre room, instead of walking in the
perfumed fields! Why should God hate to see a man happy? Why should it
excite his wrath to see a family in the woods, by some babbling stream,
talking, laughing and loving? Nature works on that "sacred" day. The
earth turns, the rivers run, the trees grow, buds burst into flower, and
birds fill the air with song. Why should we look sad, and think about
death, and hear about-hell? Why should that day be filled with gloom
instead of joy? Make the Sabbath Merry

Freethinkers should make the Sabbath a day of mirth and music; a day to
spend with wife and child--a day of games, and books, and dreams--a day
to put fresh flowers above our sleeping dead--a day of memory and hope,
of love and rest. Away to the Hills and the Sea

A poor mechanic, working all the week in dust and noise, needs a day of
rest and joy, a day to visit stream and wood--a day to live with wife
and child; a day in which to laugh at care, and gather hope and strength
for toils to come. And his weary wife needs a breath of sunny air, away
from street and wall, amid the hills or by the margin of the sea, where
she can sit and prattle with her babe, and fill with happy dreams the
long, glad day. Melancholy Sundays

When I was a little fellow most everybody thought that some days were
too sacred for the young ones to enjoy themselves in. Sunday used to commence Saturday night at sundown, under
the old text, "The evening and the morning were the first day." They
commenced then, I think, to get a good ready. When the sun went down
Saturday night, darkness ten thousand times deeper than ordinary night
fell upon that house. The boy that looked the sickest was regarded as
the most pious. You could not crack hickory nuts that night, and if you
were caught chewing gum it was another evidence of the total depravity
of the human heart. We would sometimes
sing, "Another day has passed." Everybody looked as though they had the
dyspesia--you know lots of people think they are pious, just because
they are bilious, as Mr. It was a solemn night, and the next
morning the solemnity had increased. Then we went to church, and the
minister was in a pulpit about twenty feet high. If it was in the winter
there was no fire; it was not thought proper to be comfortable while you
were thanking the Lord. The minister commenced at firstly and ran up to
about twenty-fourthly, and then he divided it up again; and then he
made some concluding remarks, and then he said lastly, and when he said
lastly he was about half through. Moses took Egyptian Law for his Model

It has been contended for many years that the ten commandments are the
foundation of all ideas of justice and of law. Eminent jurists have
bowed to popular prejudice, and deformed their works by statements to
the effect that the Mosaic laws are the fountains from which sprang all
ideas of right and wrong. Nothing can be more stupidly false than such
assertions. Thousands of years before Moses was born, the Egyptians
had a code of laws. They had laws against blasphemy, murder, adultery,
larceny, perjury, laws for the collection of debts, and the enforcement
of contracts. A False Standard of Success

It is not necessary to be rich, nor powerful, nor great, to be a
success; and neither is it necessary to have your name between the
putrid lips of rumor to be great. We have had a false standard of
success. In the years when I was a little boy we read in our books that
no fellow was a success that did not make a fortune or get a big office,
and he generally was a man that slept about three hours a night. They
never put down in the books the gentlemen who succeeded in life and yet
slept all they wanted to. Toilers and Idlers

You can divide mankind into two classes: the laborers and the idlers,
the supporters and the supported, the honest and the dishonest. Every
man is dishonest who lives upon the unpaid labor of others, no matter
if he occupies a throne. The laborers
should have equal-rights before the world and before the law. And I want
every farmer to consider every man who labors either with hand or brain
as his brother. Until genius and labor formed a partnership there was
no such thing as prosperity among men. Every reaper and mower, every
agricultural implement, has elevated the work of the farmer, and his
vocation grows grander with every invention. In the olden time the
agriculturist was ignorant; he knew nothing of machinery, he was the
slave of superstition. The Sad Wilderness History

While reading the Pentateuch, I am filled with indignation, pity and
horror. Nothing can be sadder than the history of the starved and
frightened wretches who wandered over the desolate crags and sands of
wilderness and desert, the prey of famine, sword and plague. Ignorant
and superstitious to the last degree, governed by falsehood, plundered
by hypocrisy, they were the sport of priests, and the food of fear. God
was their greatest enemy, and death their only friend. Law Much Older than Sinai

Laws spring from the instinct of self-preservation. Industry objected
to supporting idleness, and laws were made against theft. Laws were made
against murder, because a very large majority of the people have always
objected to being murdered. All fundamental laws were born simply of the
instinct of self-defence. Long before the Jewish savages assembled at
the foot of Sinai, laws had been made and enforced, not only in Egypt
and India, but by every tribe that ever existed. God raised the black flag, and
commanded his soldiers to kill even the smiling infant in its mother's
arms. Who is the blasphemer; the man who denies the existence of God, or
he who covers the robes of the infinite with innocent blood? Standing Tip for God

We are told in the Pentateuch that God, the father of us all, gave
thousands of maidens, after having killed their fathers, their mothers,
and their brothers, to satisfy the brutal lusts of savage men. If there
be a God, I pray him to write in his book, opposite my name, that I
denied this lie for him. Matter and Force

The statement in the beginning God created the heaven and the earth, I
cannot accept. It is contrary to my reason, and I cannot believe it. It
appears reasonable for me that force has existed from eternity. Force
cannot, as it appears to me, exist apart from matter. Force, in its
nature, is forever active, and without matter it could not act; and so
I think matter must have existed forever. To conceive of matter without
force, or of force without matter, or of a time when neither existed,
or of a being who existed for an eternity without either, and who out of
nothing created both, is to me utterly impossible. It may be that I am led to these conclusions by "total depravity," or
that I lack the necessary humility of spirit to satisfactorily harmonize
Haeckel and Moses; or that I am carried away by pride, blinded by
reason, given over to hardness of heart that I might be damned, but I
never can believe that the earth was covered with leaves, and buds, and
flowers, and fruits, before the sun with glittering spear had driven
back the hosts of night. We are told that God made man; and the question naturally arises, how
was this done? Was it by a process of "evolution," "development;" the
"transmission of acquired habits;" the "survival of the fittest," or was
the necessary amount of clay kneaded to the proper consistency, and then
by the hands of God moulded into form? Modern science tells that man has
been evolved, through countless epochs, from the lower forms; that he
is the result of almost an infinite number of actions, reactions,
experiences, states, forms, wants and adaptations. General Joshua

My own opinion is that General Joshua knew no more about the motions of
the earth than he did mercy and justice. If he had known that the earth
turned upon its axis at the rate of a thousand miles an hour, and swept
in its course about the sun at the rate of sixty-eight thousand miles
an hour, he would have doubled the hailstones, spoken of in the same
chapter, that the Lord cast down from heaven, and allowed the sun and
moon to rise and set in the usual way. This getting up so early in the morning is a relic of barbarism. It has
made hundreds of thousands of young men curse business. There is no need
of getting up at three or four o'clock in the winter morning. The farmer
who persists in dragging his wife and children from their beds ought to
be visited by a missionary. It is time enough to rise after the sun has
set the example. Why
not feed them more the night before? In the old
times they used to get up about three o'clock in the morning, and go to
work long before the sun had risen with "healing upon his wings," and as
a just punishment they all had the ague; and they ought to have it now. Sleep is the best medicine
in the world. There is no such thing as health, without plenty of sleep. When you work, work;
and when you get through take a good, long and refreshing sleep. Never Rise at Four O'Clock

The man who cannot get a living upon Illinois soil without rising before
daylight ought to starve. Eight hours a day is enough for any farmer to
work except in harvest time. When you rise at four and work till dark
what is life worth? Of what use are all the improvements in farming? Of what use is all the improved machinery unless it tends to give the
farmer a little more leisure? What is harvesting now, compared with what
it was in the old time? Think of the days of reaping, of cradling, of
raking and binding and mowing. Think of threshing with the flail and
winnowing with the wind. And now think of the reapers and mowers, the
binders and threshing machines, the plows and cultivators, upon which
the farmer rides protected from the sun. If, with all these advantages,
you cannot get a living without rising in the middle of the night, go
into some other business. The Hermit is Mad

A hermit is a mad man. Without friends and wife and child, there is
nothing left worth living for. They
are filled with egotism and envy, with vanity and hatred. People who
live much alone become narrow and suspicious. They are apt to be the
property of one idea. They begin to think there is no use in anything. They look upon the happiness of others as a kind of folly. They hate
joyous folks, because, way down in their hearts, they envy them. Duke Orang-Outang

I think we came from the lower animals. I am not dead sure of it, but
think so. When I first read about it I didn't like it. My heart was
filled with sympathy for those people who leave nothing to be proud of
except ancestors. I thought how terrible this will be upon the nobility
of the old world. Think of their being forced to trace their ancestry
back to the Duke Orang-Outang or to the Princess Chimpanzee. After
thinking it all over I came to the conclusion that I liked that
doctrine. I read about
rudimentary bones and muscles. I was told that everybody had rudimentary
muscles extending from the ear into the cheek. I was told: "They are the remains of muscles; they became rudimentary
from the lack of use." They are the muscles
with which your ancestors used to flap their ears. Well, at first I was
greatly astonished, and afterward I was more astonished to find they had
become rudimentary. Self-Made Men

It is often said of this or that man that he is a self-made man--that
he was born of the poorest and humblest parents, and that with every
obstacle to overcome he became great. Most of the intellectual giants of the world
have been nursed at the sad but loving breast of poverty. Most of those
who have climbed highest on the shining ladder of fame commenced at the
lowest round. They were reared in the straw thatched cottages of Europe;
in the log houses of America; in the factories of the great cities; in
the midst of toil; in the smoke and din of labor. The One Window in the Ark

A cubit is twenty-two inches; so that the ark was five hundred and fifty
feet long, ninety-one feet and eight inches wide, and fifty-five feet
high. The ark was divided into three stories, and had on top, one window
twenty-two inches square. Ventillation must have been one of Jehovah's
hobbies. Think of a ship larger than the Great Eastern with only one
window, and that but twenty-two inches square! No Ante-Diluvian Camp-Meetings! It is a little curious that when God wished to reform the ante-diluvian
world he said nothing about hell; that he had no revivals, no
camp-meetings, no tracts, no out-pourings of the Holy Ghost, no
baptisms, no noon prayer meetings, and never mentioned the great
doctrine of salvation by faith. If the orthodox creeds of the world are
true, all those people went to hell without ever having heard that such
a place existed. If eternal torment is a fact, surely these miserable
wretches ought to have been warned. They were threatened only with water
when they were in fact doomed to eternal fire! Hard Work in the Ark

Eight persons did all the work. They attended to the wants of 175,000
birds, 3,616 beasts, 1,300 reptiles, and 2,000,000 insects, saying
nothing of countless animalculae. Can we believe that the inspired writer had any idea of the size of the
sun? Draw a circle five inches in diameter, and by its side thrust a pin
through the paper. The hole made by the pin will sustain about the same
relation to the circle that the earth does to the sun. Did he know that
the sun was eight hundred and sixty thousand miles in diameter; that it
was enveloped in an ocean of fire thousands of miles in depth, hotter
even than the Christian's hell? Did he know that the volume of the Earth
is less than one-millionth of that of the sun? Did he know of the one
hundred and four planets belonging to our solar system, all children of
the sun? Did he know of Jupiter eighty-five thousand miles in diameter,
hundreds of times as large as our earth, turning on his axis at the rate
of twenty-five thousand miles an hour accompanied by four moons making
the tour of his orbit once only in fifty years? Something for Nothing

It is impossible for me to conceive of something being created for
nothing. Nothing, regarded in the light of raw material, is a decided
failure. Neither is it
possible to think of force disconnected with matter. You cannot imagine
matter going back to absolute nothing. Neither can you imagine nothing
being changed into something. You may be eternally damned if you do not
say that you can conceive these things, but you cannot conceive them. Polygamy

Polygamy is just as pure in Utah as it could have been in the promised
land. Love and virtue are the same the whole world around, and justice
is the same in every star. All the languages of the world are not
sufficient to express the filth of polygamy. It makes of man a beast,
of woman a trembling slave. It destroys the fireside, makes virtue an
outcast, takes from human speech its sweetest words, and leaves the
heart a den, where crawl and hiss the slimy serpents of most loathsome
lust. The good family is the unit
of good government. The virtues grow about the holy hearth of home--they
cluster, bloom, and shed their perfume round the fireside where the
one man loves the one woman. Lover--husband--wife--mother--father--child--home!--without these sacred
words the world is but a lair, and men and women merely beasts. The Colonel in the Kitchen--How to Cook a Beefsteak

There ought to be a law making it a crime, punishable by imprisonment,
to fry a beefsteak. Broil it; it is just as easy, and when broiled it
is delicious. Fried beefsteak is not fit for a wild beast. You can broil
even on a stove. Shut the front damper--open the back one, and then take
off a griddle. There will then be a draft down through this opening. Put
on your steak, using a wire broiler, and not a particle of smoke will
touch it, for the reason that the smoke goes down. If you try to broil
it with the front damper open the smoke will rise. For broiling, coal,
even soft coal, makes a better fire than wood. Do not huddle together in a little room
around a red-hot stove, with every window fastened down. Do not live in
this poisoned atmosphere, and then, when one of your children dies, put
a piece in the papers commencing with, "Whereas, it has pleased divine
Providence to remove from our midst--." Have plenty of air, and plenty
of warmth. Do not imagine anything is unhealthy
simply because it is pleasant. Cooking a Fine Art

Cooking is one of the fine arts. Give your wives and daughters things to
cook, and things to cook with, and they will soon become most excellent
cooks. The man whose arteries
and veins are filled with rich blood made of good and well cooked food,
has pluck, courage, endurance and noble impulses. Remember that your
wife should have things to cook with. Scathing Impeachment of Intemperance

Intemperance cuts down youth in its vigor, manhood in its strength, and
age in its weakness. It breaks the father's heart, bereaves the doting
mother, extinguishes natural affections, erases conjugal loves, blots
out filial attachments, blights parental hope, and brings down mourning
age in sorrow to the grave. It produces weakness, not strength;
sickness, not health; death, not life. It makes wives widows; children
orphans; fathers fiends, and all of them paupers and beggars. It feeds
rheumatism, nurses gout, welcomes epidemics, invites cholera, imports
pestilence and embraces consumption. It covers the land with idleness,
misery and crime. It fills your jails, supplies your almshouses and
demands your asylums. It engenders controversies, fosters quarrels, and
cherishes riots. It crowds your penitentiaries and furnishes victims to
your scaffolds. It is the life blood of the gambler, the element of
the burglar, the prop of the highwayman and the support of the midnight
incendiary. It countenances the liar, respects the thief, esteems
the blasphemer. It violates obligations, reverences fraud, and honors
infamy. It defames benevolence, hates love, scorns virtue and slanders
innocence. It incites the father to butcher his helpless offspring,
helps the husband to massacre his wife, and the child to grind the
parricidal ax. It burns up men, consumes women, detests life, curses God,
and despises heaven. It suborns witnesses, nurses perjury, defiles
the jury box, and stains the judicial ermine. It degrades the citizen,
debases the legislator, dishonors statesmen, and disarms the patriot. It
brings shame, not honor; terror, not safety; despair, not hope; misery,
not happiness; and with the malevolence of a fiend, it calmly surveys
its frightful desolation, and unsatisfied with its havoc, it poisons
felicity, kills peace, ruins morals, blights confidence, slays
reputation, and wipes out national honors, then curses the world and
laughs at its ruin. Liberty Defined

The French convention gave the best definition of liberty I have ever
read: "The liberty of one citizen ceases only where the liberty of
another citizen commences." I ask you
to-day to make a declaration of individual independence. And if you are
independent, be just. Allow everybody else to make his declaration of
individual independence. Allow your wife, allow your husband, allow
your children to make theirs. It is a grand thing to be the owner of
yourself. It is a grand thing to protect the rights of others. It is a
sublime thing to be free and just. Free, Honest Thought

I am going to say what little I can to make the American people brave
enough and generous enough and kind enough to give everybody else the
rights they have themselves. Can there ever be any progress in this
world to amount to anything until we have liberty? The thoughts of a man
who is not free are not worth much--not much. A man who thinks with the
club of a creed above his head--a man who thinks casting his eye askance
at the flames of hell, is not apt to have very good thoughts. And for
my part, I would not care to have any status or social position even in
heaven if I had to admit that I never would have been there only I got
scared. When we are frightened we do not think very well. If you want to
get at the honest thoughts of a man he must free. If he is not free you
will not get his honest thought. Ingersoll Prefers Shoemakers to Princes

The other day there came shoemakers, potters, workers in wood and iron,
from Europe, and they were received in the city of New York as though
they had been princes. They had been sent by the great republic of
France to examine into the arts and manufactures of the great republic
of America. They looked a thousand times better to me than the Edward
Alberts and Albert Edwards--the royal vermin, that live on the body
politic. And I would think much more of our government if it would fete
and feast them, instead of wining and dining the imbeciles of a royal
line. I never saw a dignified man that was not after all an
old idiot Dignity is a mask; a dignified man is afraid that you will
know he does not know everything. A man of sense and argument is always
willing to admit what he don't know--why?--because there is so much
that he does know; and that is the first step towards learning
anything--willingness to admit what you don't know, and when you don't
understand a thing, ask--no matter how small and silly it may look to
other people--ask, and after that you know. A man never is in a state of
mind that he can learn until he gets that dignified nonsense out of him. The time is coming when a man will be rated at his real worth, and that
by his brain and heart. We care nothing now about an officer unless he
fills his place. The time will come when no matter how much money a man
has he will not be respected unless he is using it for the benefit of
his fellow-men. Three millions have increased to fifty--thirteen
States to thirty-eight. We have better homes, and more of the
conveniences of life than any other people upon the face of the globe. The farmers of our country live better than did the kings and princes
two hundred years ago--and they have twice as much sense and heart. Remember that the man who acts best his part--who loves
his friends the best--is most willing to help others--truest to the
obligation--who has the best heart--the most feeling--the deepest
sympathies--and who freely gives to others the rights that he claims for
himself, is the true nobleman. We have disfranchised the aristocrats of
the air and have given one country to mankind. Wanted!--More Manliness

I had a thousand times rather have a farm and be independent, than to be
President of the United States, without independence, filled with
doubt and trembling, feeling of the popular pulse, resorting to art and
artifice, inquiring about the wind of opinion, and succeeding at last in
losing my self-respect without gaining the respect of others. Man needs
more manliness, more real independence. This we can do by labor, and in this way we can preserve our
independence. We should try and choose that business or profession the
pursuit of which will give us the most happiness. We can be happy without being rich--without holding office--without
being famous. I am not sure that we can be happy with wealth, with
office, or with fame. Education of Nature

It has been a favorite idea with me that our forefathers were educated
by nature; that they grew grand as the continent upon which they landed;
that the great rivers--the wide plains--the splendid lakes--the lonely
forests--the sublime mountains--that all these things stole into and
became a part of their being, and they grew great as the country in
which they lived. They began to hate the narrow, contracted views of
Europe. The Worker Wearing the Purple

I want to see a workingman have a good house, painted white, grass in
the front yard, carpets on the floor and pictures on the wall. I want to
see him a man feeling that he is a king by the divine right of living in
the Republic. And every man here is just a little bit a king, you know. Every man here is a part of the sovereign power. Every man wears a
little of purple; every man has a little of crown and a little of
sceptre; and every man that will sell his vote for money or be ruled by
prejudice is unfit to be an American citizen. Flowers

Beautify your grounds with plants and flowers and vines. Remember that everything of beauty tends to the elevation of
man. Every little morning-glory whose purple bosom is thrilled with the
amorous kisses of the sun tends to put a blossom in your heart. Do not
judge of the value of everything by the market reports. Every flower
about a house certifies to the refinement of somebody. Every vine,
climbing and blossoming, tells of love and joy. The grave is not a throne, and a corpse is not a king. The living have
a right to control this world. I think a good deal more of to day than
I do of yesterday, and I think more of to-morrow than I do of this day;
because it is nearly gone--that is the way I feel. The time to be happy
is now; the way to be happy is to make somebody else happy and the place
to be happy is here. The School House a Fort

Education is the most radical thing in the world. To teach the alphabet is to inaugurate a revolution. To build a school
house is to construct a fort. We are Getting Free

We are getting free. We are
investigating with the microscope and the telescope. We are digging
into the earth and finding souvenirs of all the ages. We are finding out
something about the laws of health and disease. We are adding years to
the span of human life and we are making the world fit to live in. That is what we are doing, and every man that has an honest thought and
expresses it helps, and every man that tries to keep honest thought from
being expressed is an obstruction and a hindrance. The Solid Rock

I have made up my mind that if there is a God He will be merciful to the
merciful. That He will forgive the forgiving;
upon that rock I stand. That every man should be true to himself, and
that there is no world, no star, in which honesty is a crime; and upon
that rock I stand. An honest man, a good, kind, sweet woman, or a happy
child, has nothing to fear, neither in this world nor the world to come;
and upon that rock I stand. INGERSOLL'S FIVE GOSPELS




408. The Gospel of Cheerfulness

I believe in the gospel of cheerfulness; the gospel of good nature; in
the gospel of good health. Let us pay some attention to our bodies; take
care of our bodies, and our souls will take care of themselves. I believe the time will come when the public thought will be so
great and grand that it will be looked upon as infamous to perpetuate
disease. I believe the time will come when men will not fill the future
with consumption and with insanity. I believe the time will come when
with studying ourselves and understanding the laws of health, we will
say we are under obligations to put the flags of health in the cheeks of
our children. Even if I got to Heaven, and had a harp, I would hate to
look back upon my children and see them diseased, deformed, crazed, all
suffering the penalty of crimes that I had committed. The Gospel of Liberty

And I believe, too, in the gospel of liberty,---of giving to others what
we claim. And I believe there is room everywhere for thought, and
the more liberty you give away the more you will have. In liberty
extravagance is economy. Let us be just, let us be generous to each
other. The Gospel of 'Good Living

I believe in the gospel of good living. You cannot make any God happy by
fasting. Let us have good food, and let us have it well cooked; it is
a thousand times better to know how to cook it than it is to understand
any theology in the world. I
believe in the gospel of good houses; in the gospel of water and soap. The Gospel of Intelligence

I believe in the gospel of intelligence. That is the only lever capable
of raising mankind. I believe in the gospel of intelligence; in the
gospel of education. The school-house is my cathedral; the universe
is my Bible. And no God can put a man into hell in another world who has
made a little heaven in this. God cannot make miserable a man who has
made somebody else happy. God can not hate anybody who is capable of
loving his neighbor. So I believe in this great gospel of generosity. Ah, but they say it won't do. My gospel
of health will prolong life; my gospel of intelligence, my gospel of
loving, my gospel of good-fellowship will cover the world with happy
homes. My doctrine will put carpets upon your floors, pictures upon your
walls. My doctrine will put books upon your shelves, ideas in your mind. My doctrine will relieve the world of the abnormal monsters born of the
ignorance of superstition. My doctrine will give us health, wealth, and
happiness. The Gospel of Justice

I believe in the gospel of justice,--that we must reap what we sow. Smith, and God forgive me,
how does that help Smith? If I by slander cover some poor girl with
the leprosy of some imputed crime, and she withers away like a blighted
flower, and afterwards I get forgiveness, how does that help her? If
there is another world, we have got to settle; no bankruptcy court
there. Among the ancient Jews if you committed a crime you
had to kill a sheep; now they say, "Charge it. For every crime you commit you must answer to yourself and
to the one you injure. And if you have ever clothed another with
unhappiness as with a garment cf pain, you will never be quite as
happy as though you hadn't done that thing. No forgiveness, eternal,
inexorable, everlasting justice--that is what I believe in. And if it goes hard with me, I will stand it. And I will stick to my
logic, and I will bear it like a man. GEMS FROM THE CONTROVERSIAL GASKET

     Latest Utterances of Colonel Robert G. Ingersoll,
     in a Controversy with Judge Jere 8. Black,
     on "The Christian Religion"




413. The Origin of the Controversy

Several months ago, _The North American Review_ asked me to write an
article, saying that it would be published if some one would furnish a
reply. I wrote the article that appeared in the August number, and by
me it was entitled "Is All of the Bible Inspired?" Not until the
article was written did I know who was expected to answer. I make this
explanation for the purpose of dissipating the impression that Mr. To have struck his shield with my lance might
have given birth to the impression that I was somewhat doubtful as to
the correctness of my position. I naturally expected an answer from some
professional theologian, and was surprised to find that a reply had been
written by a "policeman," who imagined that he had answered my arguments
by simply telling me that my statements were false. It is somewhat
unfortunate that in a discussion like this any one should resort to the
slightest personal detraction. The theme is great enough to engage the
highest faculties of the human mind, and in the investigation of such a
subject vituperation is singularly and vulgarly out of place. Arguments
cannot be answered with insults. It is unfortunate that the intellectual
arena should be entered by a "policeman," who has more confidence in
concussion than discussion. Good nature is often
mistaken for virtue, and good health sometimes passes for genius. In the examination of a great and
important question, every one should be serene, slow-pulsed, and calm. Black's reply, feeling that so
grand a subject should not be blown and tainted with malicious words, I
proceed to answer as best I may the arguments he has urged. Of course it is still claimed that we are a Christian people, indebted
to something we call Christianity, for all the progress we have made. There is still a vast difference of opinion as to what Christianity
really is, although many wavering sects have been discussing that
question, with fire and sword through centuries of creed and crime. Every new sect has been denounced at its birth as illegitimate, as
something born out of orthodox wedlock, and that should have been
allowed to perish on the steps where it was found. Summary of Evangelical Belief

Among the evangelical churches there is a substantial agreement
upon what they consider the fundamental truths of the gospel. These
fundamental truths, as I understand them, are:--That there is a personal
God, the creator of the material universe; that he made man of the dust,
and woman from part of the man; that the man and woman were tempted by
the devil; that they were turned out of the garden of Eden; that, about
fifteen hundred years afterward, God's patience having been exhausted by
the wickedness of mankind, He drowned His children, with the exception
of eight persons; that afterward He selected from their descendants
Abraham, and through him the Jewish people; that He gave laws to these
people, and tried to govern them in all things; that He made known His
will in many ways; that He wrought a vast number of miracles; that
He inspired men to write the Bible; that, in the fullness of time, it
having been found impossible to reform mankind, this God came upon earth
as a child born of the Virgin Mary; that He lived in Palestine; that He
preached for about three years, going from place to place, occasionally
raising the dead, curing the blind and the halt; that He was
crucified--for the crime of blasphemy, as the Jews supposed, but, that
as a matter of fact, He was offered as a sacrifice for the sins of
all who might have faith in Him; that He was raised from the dead and
ascended into heaven, where He now is, making intercession for His
followers; that He will forgive the sins of all who believe on Him,
and that those who do not believe will be consigned to the dungeons of
eternal pain. These--(it may be with the addition of the sacraments of
Baptism and the Last Supper)--constitute what is generally known as the
Christian religion. A Profound Change in the World of Thought

A profound change has taken place in the world of thought. The pews are
trying to set themselves somewhat above the pulpit. The layman discusses
theology with the minister, and smiles. Christians excuse themselves
for belonging to the church by denying a part of the creed. The idea
is abroad that they who know the most of nature believe the least about
theology. The sciences are regarded as infidels, and facts as scoffers. Thousands of most excellent people avoid churches, and, with few
exceptions, only those attend prayer meetings who wish to be alone. The
pulpit is losing because the people are rising. The Believer in the Inspiration of the Bible has too Much to Believe

But the believer in the inspiration of the Bible is compelled to declare
that there was a time when slavery was right--when men could buy and
women sell their babes. He is compelled to insist that there was a time
when polygamy was the highest form of virtue; when wars of extermination
were waged with the sword of mercy; when religious toleration was a
crime, and when death was the just penalty for having expressed an
honest thought. He must maintain that Jehovah is just as bad now as he
was four thousand years ago, or that he was just as good then as he is
now, but that human conditions have so changed that slavery, polygamy,
religious persecutions and wars of conquest are now perfectly devilish. Once they were right--once they were commanded by God himself; now, they
are prohibited. There has been such a change in the conditions of man
that, at the present time, the devil is in favor of slavery, polygamy,
religious persecution and wars of conquest. That is to say, the devil
entertains the same opinion to-day that Jehovah held four thousand
years ago, but in the meantime Jehovah has remained exactly the
same--changeless and incapable of change. A Frank Admission

It is most cheerfully admitted that a vast number of people not only
believe these things, but hold them in exceeding reverence, and imagine
them to be of the utmost importance to mankind. They regard the Bible as
the only light that God has given for the guidance of His children; that
it is the one star in nature's sky--the foundation of all morality, of
all law, of all order, and of all individual and national progress. They
regard it as the only means we have for ascertaining the will of God,
the origin of man, and the destiny of the soul. The mistake has hindered in countless ways the civilization of
man. The Bible Should be Better than any other Book

In all ages of which any record has been preserved, there have been
those who gave their ideas of justice, charity, liberty, love, and
law. Now, if the Bible is really the work of God, it should contain the
grandest and sublimest truths. It should, in all respects, excel the
works of man. Within that book should be found the best and loftiest
definitions of justice; the truest conceptions of human liberty; the
clearest outlines of duty; the tenderest, the highest, and the noblest
thoughts,--not that the human mind has produced, but that the human mind
is capable of receiving. Upon every page should be found the luminous
evidence of its divine origin. Unless it contains grander and more
wonderful things than man has written, we are not only justified in
saying, but we are compelled to say, that it was written by no being
superior to man. A Serious Charge

The Bible has been the fortress and the defense of nearly every crime. No civilized country could re-enact its laws. And in many respects its
moral code is abhorrent to every good and tender man. It is admitted,
however, that many of its precepts are pure, that many of its laws are
wise and just, and that many of its statements are absolutely true. If the Bible is Not Verbally Inspired, What Then? It may be said that it is unfair to call attention to certain bad things
in the Bible, while the good are not so much as mentioned. To this it
may be replied that a divine being would not put bad things in a book. Certainly a being of infinite intelligence, power, and goodness could
never fall below the ideal of "depraved and barbarous" man. It will not
do, after we find that the Bible upholds what we now call crimes, to say
that it is not verbally inspired. If the words are not inspired, what
is? It may be said that the thoughts are inspired. But this would
include only the thoughts expressed without words. If the ideas are
inspired, they must be contained in and expressed only by inspired
words; that is to say, the arrangement of the words, with relation to
each other, must have been inspired. A Hindu Example

Suppose that we should now discover a Hindu book of equal antiquity with
the Old Testament, containing a defense of slavery, polygamy, wars of
extermination, and religious persecution, would we regard it as evidence
that the writers were inspired by an infinitely wise and merciful God? A Test Fairly Applied

Suppose we knew that after "inspired" men had finished the Bible, the
devil had got possession of it and wrote a few passages, what part of
the sacred Scriptures would Christians now pick out as being probably
his work? Which of the following passages would naturally be selected
as having been written by the devil--"Love thy neighbor as thyself," or
"Kill all the males among the little ones, and kill every woman; but all
the women children keep alive for yourselves?" It will hardly be claimed at this day, that the passages in the
Bible upholding slavery, polygamy, war, and religious persecution are
evidences of the inspiration of that book. Suppose that there had been
nothing in the Old Testament upholding these crimes would any modern
Christian suspect that it was not inspired on account of that omission? Suppose that there had been nothing in the Old Testament but laws in
favor of these crimes, would any intelligent Christian now contend that
it was the work of the true God? Proofs of Civilization

We know that there was a time in the history of almost every nation when
slavery, polygamy, and wars of extermination were regarded as divine
institutions; when women were looked upon as beasts of burden, and when,
among some people, it was considered the duty of the husband to murder
the wife for differing with him on the subject of religion. Nations that
entertain these views to-day are regarded as savage, and, probably, with
the exception of the South Sea islanders, the Feejees, some citizens
of Delaware, and a few tribes in Central Africa, no human beings can be
found degraded enough to agree upon these subjects with the Jehovah of
the ancient Jews. The only evidence we have, or can have, that a
nation has ceased to be savage is the fact that it has abandoned these
doctrines. To every one, except the theologian, it is perfectly easy to
account for the mistakes, atrocities, and crimes of the past, by
saying that civilization is a slow and painful growth; that the moral
perceptions are cultivated through ages of tyranny, of want, of crime,
and of heroism; that it requires centuries for man to put out the eyes
of self and hold in lofty and in equal poise the scales of justice;
that conscience is born of suffering; that mercy is the child of the
imagination--of the power to put oneself in the sufferers place, and
that man advances only as he becomes acquainted with his surroundings,
with the mutual obligations of life, and learns to take advantage of the
forces of nature. A Persian Gospel

Do not misunderstand me. My position is that the cruel passages in
the Old Testament are not inspired; that slavery, polygamy, wars of
extermination, and religious persecution always have been, are, and
forever will be, abhorred and cursed by the honest, virtuous, and the
loving; that the innocent cannot justly suffer for the guilty, and that
vicarious vice and vicarious virtue are equally absurd; that eternal
punishment is eternal revenge; that only the natural can happen; that
miracles prove the dishonesty of the few and the credulity of the many;
and that, according to Matthew, Mark, and Luke, salvation does not
depend upon belief, nor the atonement, nor a "second birth," but that
these gospels are in exact harmony with the declaration of the great
Persian: "Taking the first footstep with the good thought, the second
with the good word, and the third with the good deed, I entered
paradise." The dogmas of the past no longer reach the level of the
highest thought, nor satisfy the hunger of the heart. While dusty
faiths, embalmed and sepulchered in ancient texts, remain the same,
the sympathies of men enlarge; the brain no longer kills its young; the
happy lips give liberty to honest thoughts; the mental firmament expands
and lifts; the broken clouds drift by; the hideous dreams, the foul,
misshapen children of the monstrous night, dissolve and fade. Man the Author of all Books

So far as we know, man is the author of all books. If a book had been
found on the earth by the first man, he might have regarded it as the
work of God; but as men were here a good while before any books were
found, and as man has produced a great many books, the probability is
that the Bible is no exception. God and Brahma

Can we believe that God ever said of any: "Let his children be
fatherless and his wife a widow; let his children be continually
vagabonds, and beg; let them seek their bread also out of their desolate
places; let the extortioner catch all that he hath and let the stranger
spoil his labor, let there be none to extend mercy unto him, neither let
there be any to favor his fatherless children." If he ever said these
words, surely he had never heard this line, this strain of music, from
the Hindu: "Sweet is the lute to those who have not heard the prattle of
their own children." Jehovah, "from the clouds and darkness of Sinai,"
said to the Jews: "Thou shalt have no other gods before me.... Thou
shalt not bow down thyself to them nor serve them; for I, the Lord thy
God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquities of the fathers upon the
children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me." Contrast this with the words put by the Hindu in the mouth of Brahma:
"I am the same to all mankind. They who honestly serve other gods,
involuntarily worship me. I am he who partaketh of all worship, and I
am the reward of all worshipers." The first, a
dungeon where crawl the things begot of jealous slime; the other, great
as the domed firmament inlaid with suns. Matthew, Mark, and Luke

And I here take occasion to say, that with most of the teachings of the
gospels of Matthew, Mark, and Luke I most heartily agree. The miraculous
parts must, of course, be thrown aside. I admit that the necessity of
belief, the atonement, and the scheme of salvation are all set forth
in the Gospel of John,--a gospel, in my opinion, not written until long
after the others. Christianity Takes no Step in Advance

All the languages of the world have not words of horror enough to
paint the agonies of man when the church had power. Tiberius, Caligula,
Claudius, Nero, Domitian, and Commodus were not as cruel, false,
and base as many of the Christian Popes. Opposite the names of these
imperial criminals write John the XII., Leo the VIII., Boniface the VII.,
Benedict the IX., Innocent the III., and Alexander the VI. Was it under
these pontiffs that the "church penetrated the moral darkness like a
new sun," and covered the globe with institutions of mercy? Rome was far
better when Pagan than when Catholic. It was better to allow gladiators
and criminals to fight than to burn honest men. The greatest of Romans
denounced the cruelties of the arena. Seneca condemned the combats even
of wild beasts. He was tender enough to say that "we should have a bond
of sympathy for all sentiment beings, knowing that only the depraved
and base take pleasure in the sight of blood and suffering." Aurelius
compelled the gladiators to fight with blunted swords. Roman lawyers
declared that all men are by nature free and equal. Woman, under Pagan
rule in Rome, become as free as man. Zeno, long before the birth of
Christ, taught that virtue alone establishes a difference between men. We know that the Civil Law is the foundation of our codes. We know that
fragments of Greek and Roman art--a few manuscripts saved from Christian
destruction, some inventions and discoveries of the Moors--were the
seeds of modern civilization. Christianity, for a thousand years,
taught memory to forget and reason to believe. Not one step was taken in
advance. Over the manuscripts of philosophers and poets, priests, with
their ignorant tongues thrust out, devoutly scrawled the forgeries of
faith. Christianity a Mixture of Good and Evil

Mr. Black attributes to me the following expression: "Christianity is
pernicious in its moral effect, darkens the mind, narrows the soul,
arrests the progress of human society, and hinders civilization." Strange, that he is only able to answer what I did
not say. I endeavored to show that the passages in the Old Testament
upholding slavery, polygamy, wars of extermination, and religious
intolerance had filled the world with blood and crime. I admitted
that there are many wise and good things in the Old Testament. I also
insisted that the doctrine of the atonement--that is to say, of moral
bankruptcy--the idea that a certain belief is necessary to salvation,
and the frightful dogma of eternal pain, had narrowed the soul, had
darkened the mind, and had arrested the progress of human society. Like
other religions, Christianity is a mixture of good and evil. The church
has made more orphans than it has fed. It has never built asylums enough
to hold the insane of its own making. Jehovah, Epictetus and Cicero

If the Bible is really inspired, Jehovah commanded the Jewish people to
buy the children of the strangers that sojourned among them, and ordered
that the children thus bought should be an inheritance for the children
of the Jews, and that they should be bondmen and bondwomen forever. Yet
Epictetus, a man to whom no revelation was ever made, a man whose soul
followed only the light of nature, and who had never heard of the Jewish
God, was great enough to say: "Will you not remember that your servants
are by nature your brothers, the children of God? In saying that you
have bought them, you look down on the earth and into the pit, on the
wretched law of men long since dead,--but you see not the laws of the
Gods." We find that Jehovah, speaking to his chosen people, assured them
that their bondmen and bondmaids must be "of the heathen that were
round about them." "Of them," said Jehovah, "shall ye buy bondmen
and bondmaids." And yet Cicero, a pagan, Cicero, who had never been
enlightened by reading the Old Testament, had the moral grandeur to
declare: "They who say that we should love our fellow-citizens, but not
foreigners, destroy the universal brotherhood of mankind, with which
benevolence and justice would perish forever." The Atonement

In countless ways the Christian world has endeavored, for nearly two
thousand years, to explain the atonement, and every effort has ended in
an an mission that it cannot be understood, and a declaration that it
must be believed. Is it not immoral to teach that man can sin, that he
can harden his heart and pollute his soul, and that, by repenting
and believing something that he does not comprehend, he can avoid the
consequences of his crimes? Has the promise and hope of forgiveness ever
prevented the commission of a sin? Should men be taught that sin gives
happiness here; that they ought to bear the evils of a virtuous life in
this world for the sake of joy in the next; that they can repent between
the last sin and the last breath; that after repentance every stain
of the soul is washed away by the innocent blood of another; that the
serpent of regret will not hiss in the ear of memory; that the saved
will not even pity the victims of their own crimes; that the goodness
of another can be transferred to them; and that sins forgiven cease to
affect the unhappy wretches sinned against? Sin as a Debt

The Church says that the sinner is in debt to God, and that the
obligation is discharged by the Saviour. The best that can possibly be
said of such a transaction is, that the debt is transferred, not paid. The truth is, that a sinner is in debt to the person he has injured. If a man injures his neighbor, it is not enough for him to get the
forgiveness of God, but he must have the forgiveness of his neighbor. If a man puts his hand in the fire and God forgives him, his hand will
smart exactly the same. You must, after all, reap what you sow. No god
can give you wheat when you sow tares, and no devil can give you tares
when you sow wheat. The Logic of the Coffin

As to the doctrine of the atonement, Mr. Black has nothing to offer
except the barren statement that it is believed by the wisest and the
best. A Mohammedan, speaking in Constantinople, will say the same of the
Koran. A Brahman, in a Hindu temple, will make the same remark, and so
will the American Indian, when he endeavors to enforce something upon
the young of his tribe. He will say: "The best, the greatest of our
tribe have believed in this." This is the argument of the cemetery, the
philosophy of epitaphs, the logic of the coffin. We are the greatest and
wisest and most virtuous of mankind? This statement, that it has been
believed by the best, is made in connection with an admission that it
cannot be fathomed by the wisest. It is not claimed that a thing is
necessarily false because it is not understood, but I do claim that
it is not necessarily true because it cannot be comprehended. I still
insist that "the plan of redemption," as usually preached, is absurd,
unjust, and immoral. Judas Iscariot

For nearly two thousand years Judas Iscariot has been execrated by
mankind; and yet, if the doctrine of the atonement is true, upon his
treachery hung the plan of salvation. Suppose Judas had known of this
plan--known that he was selected by Christ for that very purpose, that
Christ was depending on him. And suppose that he also knew that only
by betraying Christ could he save either himself or others; what ought
Judas to have done? Are you willing to rely upon an argument that
justifies the treachery of that wretch? The Standard of Right

According to Mr. Black, the man who does not believe in a supreme being
acknowledges no standard of right and wrong in this world, and therefore
can have no theory of rewards and punishments in the next. Is it
possible that only those who believe in the God who persecuted for
opinion's sake have any standard of right and wrong? Were the greatest
men of all antiquity without this standard? In the eyes of intelligent
men of Greece and Rome, were all deeds, whether good or evil, morally
alike? Is it necessary to believe in the existence of an infinite
intelligence before you can have any standard of right and wrong? Is it
possible that a being cannot be just or virtuous unless he believes in
some being infinitely superior to himself? If this doctrine be true, how
can God be just or virtuous? Does He believe in some being superior to
himself? If man were incapable of suffering, if man could not
feel pain, the word "conscience" never would have passed his lips. The
man who puts himself in the place of another, whose imagination has been
cultivated to the point of feeling the agonies suffered by another, is
the man of conscience. Black says, "We have neither jurisdiction or capacity to rejudge
the justice of God." In other words, we have no right to think upon
this subject, no right to examine the questions most vitally affecting
human-kind. We are simply to accept the ignorant statements of barbarian
dead. This question cannot be settled by saying that "it would be a
mere waste of time and space to enumerate the proofs which show that the
universe was created by a pre-existent and self-conscious being." The
time and space should have been "wasted," and the proofs should have
been enumerated. These "proofs" are what the wisest and greatest are
trying to find. It cares nothing
for the opinions of the "great," nothing for the prejudices of the many,
and least of all, for the superstitions of the dead. In the world of
science--a fact is a legal tender. Assertions and miracles are base and
spurious coins. We have the right to rejudge the justice even of a god. No one should throw away his reason--the fruit of all experience. It is
the intellectual capital of the soul, the only light, the only guide,
and without it the brain becomes the palace of an idiot king, attended
by a retinue of thieves and hypocrites. The Liberty of the Bible

This is the religious liberty of the Bible. If you had lived in
Palestine, and if the wife of your bosom, dearer to you than your
own soul, had said: "I like the religion of India better than that of
Palestine," it would have been your duty to kill her. "Your eye must not
pity her, your hand must be first upon her, and afterwards the hand of
all the people." If she had said: "Let us worship the sun--the sun that
clothes the earth in garments of green--the sun, the great fireside of
the world--the sun that covers the hills and valleys with flowers--that
gave me your face, and made it possible for me to look into the eyes
of my babe,--let us worship the sun," it was your duty to kill her. You
must throw the first stone, and when against her bosom--a bosom filled
with love for you--you had thrown the jagged and cruel rock, and had
seen the red stream of her life oozing from the dumb lips of death,
you could then look up and receive the congratulations of the God whose
commandment you had obeyed. Is it possible that a being of infinite
mercy ordered a husband to kill his wife for the crime of having
expressed, an opinion on the subject of religion? Has there been found
upon the records of the savage world anything more perfectly fiendish
than this commandment of Jehovah? This is justified on the ground that
"blasphemy was a breach of political allegiance, and idolatry an act of
overt treason." We can understand how a human king stands in need of the
service of his people. We can understand how the desertion of any of
his soldiers weakens his army; but were the king infinite in power,
his strength would still remain the same, and under no conceivable
circumstances could the enemy triumph. Slavery in Heaven

According to Mr. Black, there will be slavery in Heaven, and fast by
the throne of God will be the auction-block, and the streets of the New
Jerusalem will be adorned with the whipping-post, while the music of
the harp will be supplemented by the crack of the driver's whip. Black, "incorporate him into his family,
tame him, teach him to think, and give him a knowledge of the true
principles of human liberty and government, he would confer upon him a
most beneficent boon." Black is too late with his protest against
the freedom of his fellow-men. Russia has emancipated her serfs; the slave trade is prosecuted only
by thieves and pirates; Spain feels upon her cheek the burning blush
of shame; Brazil, with proud and happy eyes, is looking for the dawn of
freedom's day; the people of the South rejoice that slavery is no more,
and every good and honest man (excepting Mr. Black) of every land and
clime hopes that the limbs of men will never feel again the weary weight
of chains. Jehovah Breaking His Own Laws

A very curious thing about these Commandments is that their supposed
author violated nearly every one. From Sinai, according to the account,
He said: "Thou shalt not kill," and yet He ordered the murder of
millions; "Thou shalt not commit adultery," and He gave captured maidens
to gratify the lust of captors; "Thou shalt not steal," and yet He gave
to Jewish marauders the flocks and herds of others; "Thou shalt not
covet thy neighbor's house, nor his wife," and yet He allowed His chosen
people to destroy the homes of neighbors and to steal their wives;
"Honor thy father and mother," and yet this same God had thousands of
fathers butchered, and with the sword of war killed children yet unborn;
"Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor," and yet
He sent abroad "lying spirits" to deceive His own prophets, and in a
hundred ways paid tribute to deceit. So far as we know, Jehovah kept
only one of these Commandments--He worshiped no other god. I know as little as anyone else about the "pla" of the universe; and as
to the "design," I know just as little. It will not do to say that the
universe was designed, and therefore there must be a designer. There
must first be proof that it was "designed." It will not do to say that
the universe has a "plan," and then assert that there must have been an
infinite maker. The idea that a design must have a beginning, and that a
designer need not, is a simple expression of human ignorance. We find
a watch, and we say: "So curious and wonderful a thing must have had a
maker." We find the watchmaker, and we say: "So curious and wonderful a
thing as man must have had a maker." We find God and we then say: "He is
so wonderful that he must _not_ have had a maker." In other words, all
things a little wonderful must have been created, but it is possible for
something to be so wonderful that it always existed. One would suppose
that just as the wonder increased the necessity for a creator increased,
because it is the wonder of the thing that suggests the idea of
creation. Is it possible that a designer exists from all eternity
without design? Was there no design in having an infinite designer? For
me, it is hard to see the plan or design in earthquakes and pestilences. It is somewhat difficult to discern the design or the benevolence in so
making the world that billions of animals live only on the agonies of
others. The justice of God is not visible to me in the history of this
world. When I think of the suffering and death, of the poverty and
crime, of the cruelty and malice, of the heartlessness of this "design"
and "plan," where beak and claw and tooth tear and rend the quivering
flesh of weakness and despair, I cannot convince myself that it is the
result of infinite wisdom, benevolence, and justice. What we Know of the Infinite

Of course, upon a question like this, nothing can be absolutely known. We live on an atom called Earth, and what we know of the infinite is
almost infinitely limited; but, little as we know, all have an equal
right to give their honest thought. Life is a shadowy, strange,
and winding road on which we travel for a little way--a few short
steps--just from the cradle, with its lullaby of love, to the low and
quiet wayside inn, where all at last must sleep, and where the only
salutation is--Good-night. The Universe Self-Existent

The universe, according to my idea, is, always was, and forever will
be. It did not "come into being;" it is the one eternal being--the only
thing that ever did, does, or can exist. We know nothing of what we call the laws of Nature except as we gather
the idea of law from the uniformity of phenomena springing from like
conditions. To make myself clear: Water always runs down hill. The
theist says that this happens because there is behind the phenomenon an
active law. As a matter of fact law is this side of the phenomenon. Law
does not cause the phenomenon, but the phenomenon causes the idea of law
in our minds, and this idea is produced from the fact that under like
circumstances the same phenomena always happens. Black probably
thinks that the difference in the weight of rocks and clouds was created
by law; that parallel lines fail to imite only because it is illegal;
that diameter and circumference could have been so made that it would
be a greater distance across than around a circle, that a straight line
could inclose a triangle if not prevented by law, and that a little
legislation could make it possible for two bodies to occupy the same
space at the same time. It seems to me that law can not be the cause of
phenomena, but it is an effect produced in our minds by their succession
and resemblance. To put a God back of the universe compels us to admit
that there was a time when nothing existed except this God; that this
God had lived from eternity in an infinite vacuum and in an absolute
idleness. The mind of every thoughtful man is forced to one of these two
conclusions, either that the universe is self-existent or that it
was created by a self-existent being. To my mied there are far more
difficulties in the second hypothesis than in the first. Jehovah's Promise Broken

If Jehovah was in fact God, He knew the end from the beginning. He knew
that his Bible would be a breastwork behind which tyranny and hypocrisy
would crouch; that it would be quoted by tyrants; that it would be the
defense of robbers called kings and of hypocrites called priests. He
knew that He had taught the Jewish people but little of importance. He
knew that He found them free and left them captives. He knew that He
had never fulfilled the promises made to them. He knew that while other
nations had advanced in art and science his chosen people were savage
still. He promised them the world, and gave them a desert. He promised
them liberty, and He made them slaves. He promised them victory, and He
gave them defeat. He said they should be kings, and He made them
serfs. He promised them universal empire, and gave them exile. When one
finishes the Old Testament, he is compelled to say: Nothing can add to
the misery of a nation whose King is Jehovah! Character Bather than Creed

For a thousand years the torch of progress was extinguished in the blood
of Christ, and His disciples, moved by ignorant zeal, by insane, cruel
creeds, destroyed with flame and sword a hundred millions of their
fellow-men. But if cathedrals had been
universities--if dungeons of the Inquisition had been laboratories--if
Christians had believed in character instead of creed--if they had taken
from the Bible all the good and thrown away the wicked and absurd--if
domes of temples had been observatories--if priests had been
philosophers--if missionaries had taught the useful arts--if astrology
had been astronomy--if the black art had been chemistry--if superstition
had been science--if religion had been humanity--it would have been a
heaven filled with love, with liberty, and joy. Mohammed the Prophet of God

Mohammed was a poor man, a driver of camels. He was without education,
without influence, and without wealth, and yet in a few years he
consolidated thousands of tribes, and millions of men confess that there
is "one God, and Mohammed is his prophet." His success was a thousand
times greater during his life than that of Christ. He was not crucified;
he was a conqueror. "Of all men, he exercised the greatest influence
upon the human race." Never in the world's history did a religion
spread with the rapidity of his. It burst like a storm over the fairest
portions of the globe. Black is right in his position that
rapidity is secured only by the direct aid of the Divine Being,
then Mohammed was most certainly the prophet of God. As to wars of
extermination and slavery, Mohammed agreed with Mr. Black, and upon
polygamy with Jehovah. As to religious toleration, he was great enough
to say that "men holding to any form of faith might be saved, provided
they were virtuous." In this he was far in advance both of Jehovah and
Mr. Wanted!--A Little More Legislation

We are informed by Mr. Black that "polygamy is neither commanded or
prohibited in the Old Testament--that it is only discouraged." It seems
to me that a little legislation on that subject might have tended to its
"discouragement." Black assures us "consists of certain immutable rules to govern the
conduct of all men at all times and at all places in their private and
personal relations with others," not one word is found on the subject of
polygamy. There is nothing "discouraging" in the Ten Commandments, nor
in the records of any conversation Jehovah is claimed to have had with
Moses upon Sinai. The life of Abraham, the story of Jacob and Laban,
the duty of a brother to be the husband of the widow of his deceased
brother, the life of David, taken in connection with the practice of
one who is claimed to have been the wisest of men--all these things are
probably relied on to show that polygamy was at least "discouraged." Certainly Jehovah had time to instruct Moses as to the infamy of
polygamy. He could have spared a few moments from a description of
patterns of tongs and basins for a subject so important as this. A
few-words in favor of the one wife and one husband--in favor of the
virtuous and loving home--might have taken the place of instructions
as to cutting the garments of priests and fashioning candlesticks and
ounces of gold. If he had left out simply the order that rams' skins
should be dyed red, and in its place had said, "A man shall have but one
wife, and the wife but one husband," how much better it would have been. Again, it is urged that "the acceptance of Christianity by a large
portion of the generation contemporary with its Founder and His
Apostles, was under the circumstances, an adjudication as solemn and
authoritative as mortal intelligence could pronounce." If this is true,
then "the acceptance of Buddhism by a large portion of the generation
contemporary with its Founder was an adjudication as solemn and
authoritative as mortal intelligence could pronounce." The same could
be said of Mohammedanism, and, in fact, of every religion that has
ever benefited or cursed this world. This argument, when reduced to its
simplest form, is this: All that succeeds is inspired. The Morality in Christianity

The morality in Christianity has never opposed the freedom of thought. It has never put, nor tended to put, a chain on a human mind, nor a
manacle on a human limb; but the doctrines distinctively Christian--the
necessity of believing a certain thing; the idea that eternal punishment
awaited him who failed to believe; the idea that the innocent can suffer
for the guilty--these things have |opposed, and for a thousand years
substantially destroyed the freedom of the human mind. All religions
have, with ceremony, magic, and mystery, deformed, darkened, and
corrupted, the soul. Around the sturdy oaks of morality have grown and
clung the parasitic, poisonous vines of the miraculous and monstrous. Irenaeus assures us that all Christians possessed the power of
working miracles; that they prophesied, cast out devils, healed the
sick, and even raised the dead. Epiphanius asserts that some rivers
and fountains were annually transmuted into wine, in attestation of the
miracle of Cana, adding that he himself had drunk of these fountains. Augustine declares that one was told in a dream where the bones of
St. Stephen were buried and the bones were thus discovered and brought
to Hippo, and that they raised five dead persons to life, and that in
two years seventy miracles were performed with these relics. Justin
Martyr states that God once sent some angels to guard the human race,
that these angels fell in love with the daughters of men, and became the
fathers of innumerable devils. For hundreds of years miracles were
about the only things that happened. They were wrought by thousands of
Christians, and testified to by millions. The saints and martyrs, the
best and greatest, were the witnesses and workers of wonders. Even
heretics, with the assistance of the devil, could suspend the "laws
of nature." Must we believe these wonderful accounts because they were
written by "good men," by Christians," who made their statements in the
presence and expectation of death"? The truth is that these "good men"
were mistaken. They fed their minds on prodigies, and their imaginations
feasted on effects without causes. Doubts were regarded as "rude disturbers of the congregation." Credulity
and sanctity walked hand in hand. As the philosophy of the ancients was rendered almost worthless by the
credulity of the common people, so the proverbs of Christ, his religion
of forgiveness, his creed of kindness, were lost in the mist of miracle
and the darkness of superstition. The Honor Due to Christ

For the man Christ--for the reformer who loved his fellow-men--for the
man who believed in an Infinite Father, who would shield the innocent
and protect the just--for the martyr who expected to be rescued from the
cruel cross, and who at last, finding that his rope was dust, cried out
in the gathering gloom of death; "My God! --for that great and suffering man, mistaken though he was, I have
the highest admiration and respect. That man did not, as I believe,
claim a miraculous origin; he did not pretend to heal the sick nor raise
the dead. He claimed simply to be a man, and taught his fellow-men
that love is stronger far than hate. His life was written by reverent
ignorance. Loving credulity belittled his career with feats of jugglery
and magic art, and priests wishing to persecute and slay, put in his
mouth the words of hatred and revenge. The theological Christ is the
impossible union of the human and divine--man with the attributes of
God, and God with the limitations and weakness of man. Christianity has no Monopoly in Morals

The morality of the world is not distinctively Christian. Zoroaster,
Gautama, Mohammed, Confucius, Christ, and, in fact, all founders of
religions, have said to their disciples: You must not steal; You must
not murder; You must not bear false witness; You must discharge your
obligations. Christianity is the ordinary moral code, _plus_ the
miraculous origin of Jesus Christ, his crucifixion, his resurrection,
his ascension, the inspiration of the Bible, the doctrine of the
atonement, and the necessity of belief. Buddhism is the ordinary moral
code, _plus_ the miraculous illumination of Buddha, the performance of
certain ceremonies, a belief in the transmigration of the soul, and
in the final absorption of the human by the infinite. The religion of
Mohammed is the ordinary moral code, _plus_ the belief that Mohammed
was the prophet of God, total abstinence from the use of intoxicating
drinks, a harem for the faithful here and hereafter, ablutions, prayers,
alms, pilgrimages, and fasts. Old Age in Superstition's Lap

And here I take occasion to thank Mr. Black for having admitted that
Jehovah gave no commandment against the practice of polygamy, that he
established slavery, waged wars of extermination, and persecuted for
opinions' sake even unto death, Most theologians endeavor to putty,
patch, and paint the wretched record of inspired crime, but Mr. Black
has been bold enough and honest enough to admit the truth. In this age
of fact and demonstration it is refreshing to find a man who believes
so thoroughly in the monstrous and miraculous, the impossible and
immoral--who still clings lovingly to the legends of the bib and
rattle--who through the bitter experiences of a wicked world has kept
the credulity of the cradle, and finds comfort and joy in thinking about
the Garden of Eden, the subtile serpent, the flood, and Babel's tower,
stopped by the jargon of a thousand tongues--who reads with happy eyes
the story of the burning brimstone storm that fell upon the cities
of the plain, and smilingly explains the transformation of the
retrospective Mrs. Lot--who laughs at Egypt's plagues and Pharaoh's
whelmed and drowning hosts--eats manna with the wandering Jews, warms
himself at the burning bush, sees Korah's company by the hungry earth
devoured, claps his wrinkled hands with glee above the heathens'
butchered babes, and longingly looks back to the patriarchal days of
concubines and slaves. How touching when the learned and wise crawl back
in cribs and ask to hear the rhymes and fables once again! How charming
in these hard and scientific times to see old age in Superstition's lap,
with eager lips upon her withered breast! Ararat in Chicago

A little while ago, in the city of Chicago, a gentleman addressed a
number of Sunday-school children. In his address he stated that some
people were wicked enough to deny the story of the deluge; that he was
a traveler; that he had been to the top of Mount Ararat, and had brought
with him a stone from that sacred locality. The children were then
invited to form in procession and walk by the pulpit, for the purpose of
seeing this wonderful stone. After they had looked at it, the lecturer
said: "Now, children, if you ever hear anybody deny the story of the
deluge, or say that the ark did not rest on Mount Ararat, you can tell
them that you know better, because you have seen with your own eyes a
stone from that very mountain." How Gods and Devils are Made

It was supposed that God demanded worship; that he loved to be
flattered; that he delighted in sacrifice; that nothing made him happier
than to see ignorant faith upon its knees; that above all things he
hated and despised doubters and heretics, and regarded investigation as
rebellion. Each community felt it a duty to see that the enemies of God
were converted or killed. To allow a heretic to live in peace was
to invite the wrath of God. Every public evil--every misfortune--was
accounted for by something the community had permitted or done. When
epidemics appeared, brought by ignorance and welcomed by filth, the
heretic was brought out and sacrificed to appease the anger of God. By putting intention behind what man called good, God was produced. By
putting intention behind what man called bad, the Devil was created. Leave this "intention" out, and gods and devils fade away. If not a
human being existed, the sun would continue to shine, and tempest now
and then would devastate the earth; the rain would fall in pleasant
showers; violets would spread their velvet bosoms to the sun, the
earthquake would devour, birds would sing, and daisies bloom, and
roses blush, and volcanoes fill the heavens with their lurid glare; the
procession of the seasons would not be broken, and the stars would shine
as serenely as though the world were filled with loving hearts and happy
homes. The Romance of Figures

How long, according to the universal benevolence of the New Testament,
can a man be reasonably punished in the next world for failing to
believe something unreasonable in this? Can it be possible that any
punishment can endure forever? Suppose that every flake of snow that
ever fell was a figure nine, and that the first flake was multiplied by
the second, and that product by the third, and so on to the last flake. And then suppose that this total should be multiplied by every drop of
rain that ever fell, calling each drop a figure nine; and that total by
each blade of grass that ever helped to weave a carpet for the earth,
calling each blade a figure nine; and that again by every grain of sand
on every shore, so that the grand total would make a line of nines so
long that it would require millions upon millions of years for light,
traveling at the rate of one hundred and eighty-five thousand miles per
second, to reach the end. And suppose, further, that each unit in this
almost infinite total, stood for billions of ages--still that vast and
almost endless time, measured by all the years beyond, is as one flake,
one drop, one leaf, one blade, one grain, compared with all the flakes,
and drops, and leaves, and blades and grains. Upon love's breast the
Church has placed the eternal asp. And yet, in the same book in which is
taught this most infamous of doctrines, we are assured that "The Lord is
good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his works." God and Zeno

If the Bible is inspired, Jehovah, God of all worlds, actually said:
"And if a man smite his servant or his maid with a rod, and he die under
his hand, he shall be surely punished; notwithstanding, if he continue
a day or two, he shall not be punished, for he is his money." And yet
Zeno, founder of the Stoics, centuries before Christ was born, insisted
that no man could be the owner of another, and that the title was bad,
whether the slave had become so by conquest, or by purchase. Jehovah,
ordered a Jewish general to make war, and gave, among others, this
command: "When the Lord thy God shall drive them before thee, thou shalt
smite them and utterly destroy them." And yet Epictetus, whom we have
already quoted, gave this marvelous rule for the guidance of human
conduct: "Live with thy inferiors as thou wouldst have thy superiors
live with thee." If Christ was in fact God, he knew all the future. Before him, like a
panorama, moved the history yet to be. He knew exactly how his words
would be interpreted. He knew what crimes, what horrors, what infamies,
would be committed in his name. He knew that the fires of persecution
would climb around the limbs of countless martyrs. He knew that brave
men would languish in dungeons, in darkness, filled with pain; that the
church would use instruments of torture, that his followers would appeal
to whip and chain. He must have seen the horizon of the future red with
the flames of the _auto da fe_. He knew all the creeds that would spring
like poison fungi from every text. He saw the sects waging war against
each other. He saw thousands of men, under the orders of priests,
building dungeons for their fellow-men. He heard the groans, saw the faces white with agony, the tears,
the blood--heard the shrieks and sobs of all the moaning, martyred
multitudes. He knew that commentaries would be written on his words with
swords, to be read by the light of fagots. He knew that the Inquisition
would be born of teachings attributed to him. He saw all the
interpolations and falsehoods that hypocrisy would write and tell. He
knew that above these fields of death, these dungeons, these burnings,
for a thousand years would float the dripping banner of the cross. He
knew that in his name his followers would trade in human flesh, that
cradles would be robbed and women's breasts unbabed for gold;--and yet
he died with voiceless lips. Why did he not
tell his disciples, and through them the world, that man should not
persecute, for opinion's sake, his fellow-man? Why did he not cry, You
shall not persecute in my name; you shall not burn and torment those who
differ from you in creed? Why did he not plainly say, I am the Son of
God? Why did he not explain the doctrine of the trinity? Why did he not
tell the manner of baptism that was pleasing to him? Why did he not say
something positive, definite, and satisfactory about another world? Why
did he not turn the tear-stained hope of heaven to the glad knowledge
of another life? Why did he go dumbly to his death, leaving the world to
misery and to doubt? The Philosophy of Action

Consequences determine the quality of an action. If consequences are
good, so is the action. If actions had no consequences, they would be
neither good nor bad. Man did not get his knowledge of the consequences
of actions from God, but from experience and reason. If man can, by
actual experiment, discover the right and wrong of actions, is it not
utterly illogical to declare that they who do not believe in God can
have no standard of right and wrong? Consequences are the standard by
which actions are judged. They are the children that testify as to the
real character of their parents. God or no God, larceny is the enemy of
industry--industry is the mother of prosperity--prosperity is a good,
and therefore larceny is an evil. God or no God, murder is a crime. There has always been a law against larceny, because the laborer wishes
to enjoy the fruit of his toil. As long as men object to being killed,
murder will be illegal. I have insisted, and I still insist, that it is still impossible for
a finite man to commit a crime deserving infinite punishment; and upon
this subject Mr. Black admits that "no revelation has lifted the veil
between time and eternity;" and, consequently, neither the priest nor
the "policeman" knows anything with certainty regarding another world. He simply insists that "in shadowy figures we are warned that a very
marked distinction will be made between the good and bad in the next
world." There is "a very marked distinction" in this; but there is this
rainbow in the darkest human cloud: The worst have hope of reform. All I
insist is, if there is another life, the basest soul that finds its way
to that dark or radiant shore will have the everlasting chance of
doing right. Nothing but the most cruel ignorance, the most heartless
superstition, the most ignorant theology, ever imagined that the
few days of human life spent here, surrounded by mists and clouds of
darkness, blown over life's sea by storms and tempests of passion, fixed
for all eternity the condition of the human race. If this doctrine be
true, this life is but a net, in which Jehovah catches souls for hell. We are told that "there is no good reason to doubt that the statements
of the Evangelists, as we have them now, are genuine." The fact is, no
one knows who made the "statements of the Evangelists." There are three
important manuscripts upon which the Christian world relies. "The first
appeared in the catalogue of the Vatican, in 1475. Of the New, it contains the four gospels,--the Acts, the
seven Catholic Epistles, nine of the Pauline Epistles, and the
Epistle to the Hebrews, so far as the fourteenth verse of the ninth
chapter,"--and nothing more. "The
second, the Alexandrine, was presented to King Charles the First, in
1628. It contains the Old and New Testaments, with some exceptions;
passages are wanting in Matthew, in John, and in II. It
also contains the Epistle of Clemens Romanus, a letter of Athanasius,
and the treatise of Eusebius on the Psalms." The last is the Sinaitic
Codex, discovered about 1850, at the Convent of St. "It contains the Old and New Testaments, and in addition
the entire Epistle of Barnabas, and a portion of the Shepherd of
Hennas--two books which, up to the beginning of the fourth century, were
looked upon by many as Scripture." In this manuscript, or codex, the
gospel of St. Mark concludes with the eighth verse of the sixteenth
chapter, leaving out the frightful passage: "Go ye into all the world,
and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is
baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned." In
matters of the utmost importance these manuscripts disagree, but even if
they all agreed it would not furnish the slightest evidence of their
truth. It will not do to call the statements made in the gospels
"depositions," until it is absolutely established who made them, and the
circumstances under which they were made. Neither can we say that "they
were made in the immediate prospect of death," until we know who made
them. It is absurd to say that "the witnesses could not have been
mistaken, because the nature of the facts precluded the possibility of
any delusion about them." Can it be pretended that the witnesses could
not have been mistaken about the relation the Holy Ghost is alleged to
have sustained to Jesus Christ? Is there no possibility of delusion
about a circumstance of that kind? Did the writers of the four gospels
have "the sensible and true avouch of their own eyes and ears" in that
behalf? How was it possible for any one of the four Evangelists to know
that Christ was the Son of God, or that he was God? Matthew says that an angel of the Lord told
Joseph in a dream, but Joseph never wrote an account of this wonderful
vision. Luke tells us that the angel had a conversation with Mary, and
that Mary told Elizabeth, but Elizabeth never wrote a word. There is no
account of Mary, or Joseph, or Elizabeth, or the angel, having had any
conversation with Matthew, Mark, Luke, or John, in which one word was
said about the miraculous origin of Jesus Christ. The persons who knew
did not write, so that the account is nothing but hearsay. Black pretend that such statements would be admitted as evidence in any
court? But how do we know that the disciples of Christ wrote a word of
the gospels? How do we know
that the writers of the gospels "were men of unimpeachable character?" Black's Admission

For the purpose of defending the character of his infallible God, Mr. Black is forced to defend religious intolerance, wars of extermination,
human slavery, and almost polygamy. He admits that God established
slavery; that he commanded his chosen people to buy the children of the
heathen; that heathen fathers and mothers did right to sell their girls
and boys; that God ordered the Jews to wage wars of extermination and
conquest; that it was right to kill the old and young; that God forged
manacles for the human brain; that he commanded husbands to murder their
wives for suggesting the worship of the sun or moon; and that every
cruel, savage passage in the Old Testament was inspired by him. Such is
a "policeman's" view of God. The Stars Upon the Door of France

Mr. Black justifies all the crimes and horrors, excuses all the tortures
of all the Christian years, by denouncing the cruelties of the French
Revolution. Thinking people will not hasten to admit that an infinitely
good being authorized slavery in Judea, because of the atrocities of the
French Revolution. They will remember the sufferings of the Huguenots. They will not forget
the countless cruelties of priest and king. They will not forget the
dungeons of the Bastile. They will know that the Revolution was an
effect, and that liberty was not the cause--that atheism was not the
cause. Behind the Revolution they will see altar and throne--sword and
fagot--palace and cathedral--king and priest--master and slave--tyrant
and hypocrite. They will see that the excesses, the cruelties, and
crimes were but the natural fruit of seeds the church had sown. Upon that cloud of war, black with
the myriad miseries of a thousand years, dabbled with blood of king and
queen, of patriot and priest, there was this bow: "Beneath the flag of
France all men are free." In spite of all the blood and crime, in spite
of deeds that seem insanely base, the People placed upon a Nation's brow
these stars:--Liberty, Fraternity, Equality--grander words than ever
issued from Jehovah's lips. A KIND WORD FOR JOHN CHINAMAN

On the 27th day of March, 1880, Messrs. Wright, Dickey, O'Conner, and
Murch, of the Select Committee appointed by Congress to "Consider
the causes of the present depression of labor," presented the majority
special report on Chinese Immigration. The following quotations are
excerpts from Col. R. G. Ingersoll's caustic review of that report. The Select Committee Afraid

These gentlemen are in great fear for the future of our most holy and
perfectly authenticated religion, and have, like faithful watchmen,
from the walls and towers of Zion, hastened to give the alarm. They have
informed Congress that "Joss has his temple of worship in the Chinese
quarters, in San Francisco. Within the walls of a dilapidated structure
is exposed to the view of the faithful the God of the Chinaman, and here
are his altars of worship, Here he tears up his pieces of paper; here he
offers up his prayers; here he receives his religious consolations,
and here is his road to the celestial land." That "Joss is located in a
long, narrow room, in a building in a back alley, upon a kind of altar;"
that "he is a wooden image, looking as much like an alligator as like a
human being;" that the Chinese "think there is such a place as heaven;"
that "all classes of Chinamen worship idols;" that "the temple is open
every day at all hours;" that "the Chinese have no Sunday;" that this
heathen god has "huge jaws, a big red tongue, large white teeth, a half
dozen arms, and big, fiery, eyeballs. About him are placed offerings of
meat, and other eatables--a sacrificial offering." The Gods of the Joss-House and Patmos

No wonder that these members of the committee were shocked at such a
god, knowing as they did, that the only true God was correctly described
by the inspired lunatic of Patmos in the following words: "And there sat
in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks one like unto the Son of
Man, clothed with a garment down to the foot, and girt about the paps
with a golden girdle. His head and his hairs were white like wool, as
white as snow; and his eyes were as a flame of fire; and his feet like
unto fine brass as if they burned in a furnace; and his voice as the
sound of many waters. And he had in his right hand seven stars; and out
of his mouth went a sharp, two-edged sword; and his countenance was as
the sun shining in his strength." Certainly, a large mouth, filled
with white teeth, is preferable to one used as the scabbard of a sharp,
two-edged sword. Why should these gentlemen object to a god with big
fiery eyeballs, when their own Deity has eyes like a flame of fire? A Little Too Late

Is it not a little late in the day to object to people because they
sacrifice meat and other eatables to their god? We all know, that for
thousands of years the "real" God was exceedingly fond of roasted meat;
that He loved the savor of burning flesh, and delighted in the perfume
of fresh warm blood. Christianity has a Fair Show in San Francisco

The world is also informed by these gentlemen that "the idolatry of
the Chinese produces a demoralizing effect upon our American youth by
bringing sacred things into disrespect and making religion a theme of
disgust and contempt." In San Francisco there are some three hundred
thousand people. Is it possible that a few Chinese can bring "our holy
religion" into disgust and contempt? In that city there are fifty times
as many churches as joss-houses. Scores of sermons are uttered every
week; religious books and papers are plentiful as leaves in autumn, and
somewhat dryer; thousands of bibles are within the reach of all. An Arrow from the Quiver of Satire

And there, too, is the example of a Christian city. Why should we send
missionaries to China, if we cannot convert the heathen when they come
here? When missionaries go to a foreign land the poor benighted people
have to take their word for the blessings showered upon a Christian
people; but when the heathen come here, they can see for themselves. What was simply a story becomes a demonstrated fact. They come in
contact with people who love their enemies. They see that in a Christian
land men tell the truth; that they will not take advantage of strangers;
that they are just and patient; kind and tender; and have no prejudice
on account of color, race or religion; that they look upon mankind as
brethren; that they speak of God as a Universal Father, and are
willing to work and even to suffer, for the good, not only of their own
countrymen, but of the heathen as well. All this the Chinese see and
know, and why they still cling to the religion of their country is, to
me, a matter of amazement. We Have no Religious System

I take this, the earliest opportunity, to inform these gentlemen
composing a majority of the committee, that we have in the United States
no "religious system;" that this is a secular government. That it has
no religious creed; that it does not believe nor disbelieve in a future
state of reward or punishment; that it neither affirms nor denies the
existence of a "living" God. Congress Nothing to Do with Religion

Congress has nothing to do with the religion of the people. Its members
are not responsible to God for the opinions of their constituents, and
it may tend to the happiness of the constituents for me to state that
they are in no way responsible for the religion of the members. Religion
is an individual, not a national matter. And where the nation interferes
with the right of conscience, the liberties of the people are devoured
by the monster Superstition. But I am astonished that four Christian statesmen, four members of
Congress in the last quarter of the nineteenth century, who seriously
object to people on account of their religious convictions, should
still assert that the very religion in which they believe--and the only
religion established by the living god-head of the American system--is
not adapted to the spiritual needs of one-third of the human race. It is
amazing that these four gentlemen have, in the defense of the Christian
religion, announced the discovery that it is wholly inadequate for
the civilization of mankind; that the light of the cross can never
penetrate the darkness of China; "that all the labors of the missionary,
the example of the good, the exalted character of our civilization, make
no impression upon the pagan life of the Chinese;" and that even
the report of this committee will not tend to elevate, refine and
Christianize the yellow heathen of the Pacific coast. In the name
of religion these gentlemen have denied its power and mocked at the
enthusiasm of its founder. Worse than this, they have predicted for the
Chinese a future of ignorance and idolatry in this world, and, if the
"American system" of religion is true, hell-fire in the next. Do not Trample on John Chinaman

Do not trample upon these people because they have a different
conception of things about which even this committee knows nothing. Give them the same privilege you enjoy of making a God after their own
fashion. Would you be willing
to have them remain, if one of their race, thousands of years ago, had
pretended to have seen God, and had written of him as follows: "There
went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth; coals
were kindled by it, * * * and he rode upon a cherub and did fly." Why
should you object to these people on account of their religion? Your
objection has in it the spirit of hate and intolerance. That spirit lighted the fagot, made the
thumb-screw, put chains upon the limbs, and lashes upon the backs of
men. The same spirit bought and sold, captured and kidnapped human
beings; sold babes, and justified all the horrors of slavery. Be Honest with the Chinese

If you wish to drive out the Chinese, do not make a pretext of religion. Do not pretend that you are trying to do God a favor. Injustice in his
name is doubly detestable. The assassin cannot sanctify his dagger by
falling on his knees, and it does not help a falsehood if it be uttered
as a prayer. Religion, used, to intensify the hatred of men toward men,
under the pretense of pleasing God, has cursed this world. An Honest Merchant the Best Missionary

I am almost sure that I have read somewhere that "Christ died for _all_
men," and that "God is no respecter of persons." It was once taught
that it was the duty of Christians to tell to all people the "tidings of
great joy." I have never believed these things myself, but have always
contended that an honest merchant was the best missionary. Commerce
makes friends, religion makes enemies; the one enriches, and the other
impoverishes; the one thrives best where the truth is told, the other
where falsehoods are believed. For myself, I have but little confidence
in any business, or enterprise, or investment, that promises dividends
only after the death of the stockholders. Good Words from Confucius

For the benefit of these four philosophers and prophets, I will give a
few extracts from the writings of Confucius that will, in my judgment,
compare favorably with the best passages of their report:

"My doctrine is that man must be true to the principles of his nature,
and the benevolent exercises of them toward others." "With coarse rice to eat, with water to drink, and with my bended arm
for a pillow, I still have joy." "Riches and honor acquired by injustice are to me but floating clouds." "The man who, in view of gain, thinks of righteousness; who, in view of
danger, forgets life; and who remembers an old agreement, however far
back it extends, such a man may be reckoned a complete man." "Recompense injury with justice, and kindness with kindness." There is one word which may serve as a rule of practice for all one's
life: Reciprocity is that word. The Ancient Chinese

When the ancestors of the four Christian Congressmen were barbarians,
when they lived in caves, gnawed bones, and worshiped dry snakes; the
infamous Chinese were reading these sublime sentences of Confucius. When
the forefathers of these Christian statesmen were hunting toads to
get the jewels out of their heads to be used as charms, the wretched
Chinamen were calculating eclipses, and measuring the circumference
of the earth. When the progenitors of these representatives of the
"American system of religion" were burning women charged with nursing
devils, these people "incapable of being influenced by the exalted
character of our civilization," were building asylums for the insane. The Chinese and Civil Service Reform

Neither should it be forgotten that, for thousands of years, the Chinese
have honestly practised the great principle known as civil service
reform--a something that even the administration of Mr. Hayes has
reached only through the proxy of promise. Invading China in the Name of Opium and Christ

The English battered down the door of China in the names of Opium and
Christ. This infamy was regarded as another triumph of the gospel. At last in self-defense the Chinese allowed Christians to touch their
shores. Their wise men, their philosophers, protested, and prophesied
that time would show that Christians could not be trusted. This re port
proves that the wise men were not only philosophers but prophets. Don't be Dishonest in the Name of God

Treat China as you would England. Change it if you will, according to the laws of nations, but on no
account excuse a breach of national faith by pretending that we are
dishonest for God's sake. CONCERNING CREEDS AND THE TYRANNY OF SECTS




482. Diversity of Opinion Abolished by Henry VIII

In the reign of Henry VIII--that pious and moral founder of the
apostolic Episcopal Church,--there was passed by the parliament
of England an act entitled, "An act for abolishing of diversity of
opinion." And in this act was set forth what a good Christian was
obliged to believe:

First, That in the sacrament was the real body and blood of Jesus
Christ. Second, That the body and blood of Jesus Christ was in the bread, and
the blood and body of Jesus Christ was in the wine. Fourth, That vows of chastity were of perpetual obligation. Fifth, That private masses ought to be continued; and,

Sixth, That auricular confession to a priest must be maintained. This creed was made by law, in order that all men might know just what
to believe by simply reading the statute. The Church hated to see the
people wearing out their brains in thinking upon these subjects. Spencer and Darwin Damned

According to the philosophy of theology, man has continued to degenerate
for six thousand years. To teach that there is that in nature which
impels to higher forms and grander ends, is heresy, of course. The
Deity will damn Spencer and his "Evolution," Darwin and his "Origin
of Species," Bastian and his "Spontaneous Generation," Huxley and his
"Protoplasm," Tyndall and his "Prayer Gauge," and will save those, and
those only, who declare that the universe has been cursed, from the
smallest atom to the grandest star; that everything tends to evil and to
that only, and that the only perfect thing in nature is the Presbyterian
Confession of Faith. The Dead do Not Persecute

Imagine a vine that grows at one end and decays at the other. The
end that grows is heresy, the end that rots is orthodox. The dead are
orthodox, and your cemetery is the most perfect type of a well regulated
church. No thought, no progress, no heresy there. Slowly and silently,
side by side, the satisfied members peacefully decay. There is only this
difference--the dead do not persecute. The Atheist a Legal Outcast in Illinois

The supreme court of Illinois decided, in the year of grace 1856, that
an unbeliever in the existence of an intelligent First Cause could not
be allowed to testify in any court. His wife and children might have
been murdered before his very face, and yet in the absence of other
witnesses, the murderer could not have even been indicted. To him, Justice was not only blind, but deaf. He
was liable, like other men, to support the government, and was forced to
contribute his share towards paying the salaries of the very judges
who decided that under no circumstances could his voice be heard in any
court. This was the law of Illinois, and so remained until the adoption
of the new Constitution By such infamous means has the Church endeavored
to chain the human mind, and protect the majesty of her God. How the Owls Hoot

Now and then somebody examines, and in spite of all keeps his manhood,
and has the courage to follow where his reason leads. Then the pious
get together and repeat wise saws, and exchange knowing nods and most
prophetic winks. The stupidly wise sit owl-like on the dead limbs of the
tree of knowledge, and solemnly hoot. The Fate of Theological Students

Thousands of young men are being educated at this moment by the various
Churches. In order that they may be prepared to investigate
the phenomena by which we are surrounded? The object, and the only
object, is that they may be prepared to defend a creed; that they may
learn the arguments of their respective churches, and repeat them in
the dull ears of a thoughtless congregation. If one, after being thus
trained at the expense of the Methodists, turns Presbyterian or Baptist,
he is denounced as an ungrateful wretch. Honest investigation is utterly
impossible within the pale of any Church, for the reason, that if you
think the Church is right you will not investigate, and if you think it
wrong, the Church will investigate you. The consequence of this is,
that most of the theological literature is the result of suppression, of
fear, tyranny and hypocrisy. Trials for Heresy

A trial for heresy means that the spirit of persecution still lingers in
the Church; that it still denies the right of private judgment; that it
still thinks more of creed than truth, and that it is still determined
to prevent the intellectual growth of man. It means the churches are
shambles in which are bought and sold the souls of men. It means that
the Church is still guilty of the barbarity of opposing thought with
force. It means that if it had the power, the mental horizon would be
bound by a creed; that it would bring again the whips and chains and
dungeon keys, the rack and fagot of the past. Presbyterianism Softening

Fortunately for us, civilization has had a softening effect even upon
the Presbyterian Church. To the ennobling influence of the arts and
sciences the savage spirit of Calvinism has, in some slight degree,
succumbed. True, the old creed remains substantially as it was written,
but by a kind of tacit understanding it has come to be regarded as a
relic of the past. The cry of "heresy" has been growing fainter and
fainter, and, as a consequence, the ministers of that denomination
have ventured, now and then, to express doubts as to the damnation of
infants, and the doctrine of total depravity. The Methodist "Hoist with his own Petard." A few years ago a Methodist clergyman took it upon himself to give me a
piece of friendly advice. "Although you may disbelieve the bible," said
he, "you ought not to say so. "Do
you believe the bible," said I. He replied, "Most assuredly." To which
I retorted, "Your answer conveys no information to me. You may be
following your own advice. Of
course a man who will advise others to dissimulate will not always be
particular about telling the truth himself." The Precious Doctrine of Total Depravity

What a precious doctrine is that of the total depravity of the human
heart! How sweet it is to believe that the lives of all the good and
great were continual sins and perpetual crimes; that the love a mother
bears her child is, in the sight of God, a sin; that the gratitude of
the natural heart is simple meanness; that the tears of pity are impure;
that for the unconverted to live and labor for others is an offense to
heaven; that the noblest aspirations of the soul are low and groveling
in the sight of God. Guilty of Heresy

Whoever has an opinion of his own, and honestly expresses it, will be
guilty of heresy. Heresy is what the minority believe; it is the name
given by the powerful to the doctrine of the weak. This word was born of
the hatred, arrogance and cruelty of those who love their enemies, and
who, when smitten on one cheek, turn the other. This word was born of
intellectual slavery in the feudal ages of thought. It was an epithet
used in the place of argument. From the commencement of the Christian
era, every art has been exhausted and every conceivable punishment
inflicted to force all people to hold the same religious opinions. This
effort was born of the idea that a certain belief was necessary to the
salvation of the soul. One great trouble is that most teachers are dishonest. They teach as
certainties those things concerning which they entertain doubts. They
do not say, "we _think_ this is so," but "we _know_ this is so." They do
not appeal to the reason of the pupil, but they command his faith. They
keep all doubts to themselves; they do not explain, they assert. In all ages reason has been regarded as the enemy of religion. Nothing
has been considered so pleasing to the Deity as a total denial of the
authority of your own mind. Self-reliance has been thought a deadly
sin; and the idea of living and dying without the aid and consolation
of superstition has always horrified the Church. By some unaccountable
infatuation, belief has been and still is considered of immense
importance. All religions have been based upon the idea that God will
forever reward the true believer, and eternally damn the man who doubts
or denies. To practice
justice, to love mercy, is not enough. You must believe in some
incomprehensible creed. You must say, "Once one is three, and three
times one is one." The man who practiced every virtue, but failed to
believe, was execrated. Nothing so outrages the feelings of the Church
as a moral unbeliever--nothing so horrible as a charitable Atheist. A Hundred and Fifty Years Ago

One hundred and fifty years ago the foremost preachers would have
perished at the stake. A Universalist would have been torn in pieces in
England, Scotland, and America. Unitarians would have found themselves
in the stocks, pelted by the rabble with dead cats, after which their
ears would have been cut off, their tongues bored, and their foreheads
branded. The Despotism of Faith

The despotism of faith is justified upon the ground that Christian
countries are the grandest and most prosperous of the world. At one time
the same thing could have been truly said in India, in Egypt, in Greece,
in Rome, and in every other country that has, in the history of the
world, swept to empire. This argument proves too much not only, but the
assumption upon which it is based is utterly false. Believe, or Beware

And what does a trial for heresy mean? It means that the Church says
a heretic, "Believe as I do, or I will withdraw my support. I will pursue you until your garments are rags; until your
children cry for bread; until your cheeks are furrowed with tears. I
will hunt you to the very portals of the grave." Calvin's Petrified Heart

Luther denounced mental liberty with all the coarse and brutal vigor
of his nature; Calvin despised, from the very bottom of his petrified
heart, anything that even looked like religious toleration, and solemnly
declared that to advocate it was to crucify Christ afresh. All the
founders of all the orthodox churches have advocated the same infamous
tenet. The truth is, that what is called religion is necessarily
inconsistent with free thought. Must one be versed in Latin before he is entitled to express his opinion
as to the genuineness of a pretended revelation from God? Common sense
belongs exclusively to no tongue. Logic is not confined to, nor has it
been buried with, the dead languages. Paine attacked the bible as it is
translated. If the translation is wrong, let its defenders correct it. A gentleman, walking among the ruins of Athens came upon a fallen statue
of Jupiter; making an exceedingly low bow he said: "O Jupiter! He then added: "Should you ever sit upon the throne of heaven
again, do not, I pray you, forget that I treated you politely when you
were prostrate." The Tail of a Lion

There is no saying more degrading than this: "It is better to be the
tail of a lion than the head of a dog." It is a responsibility to think
and act for yourself. Most people hate responsibility; therefore they
join something and become the tail of some lion. They say, "My party
can act for me--my church can do my thinking. It is enough for me to
pay taxes and obey the lion to which I belong, without troubling myself
about the right, the wrong, or the why or the wherefore." While the Preachers Talked the People Slept

The fact is, the old ideas became a little monotonous to the people. The
fall of man, the scheme of redemption and irresistible grace, began
to have a familiar sound. The preachers told the old stories while the
congregations slept. Some of the ministers became tired of these stories
themselves. The five points grew dull, and they felt that nothing short
of irresistible grace could bear this endless repetition. The outside
world was full of progress, and in every direction men advanced, while
the church, anchored to a creed, idly rotted at the shore. Christianity no Friend to Progress

Christianity has always opposed every forward movement of the human
race. Across the highway of progress it has always been building
breastworks of bibles, tracts, commentaries, prayer-books, creeds,
dogmas and platforms, and at every advance the Christians have gathered
together behind these heaps of rubbish and shot the poisoned arrows of
malice at the soldiers of freedom. You may be laughed at in this world for insisting that God put Adam into
a deep sleep and made a woman out of one of his ribs, but you will be
crowned and glorified in the next. You will also have the pleasure of
hearing the gentlemen howl there, who laughed at you here. While you
will not be permitted to take any revenge, you will be allowed to
smilingly express your entire acquiescence in the will of God. The one was lost, and the other has not
been found. The Real Eden is Beyond

Nations and individuals fail and die, and make room for higher forms. The intellectual horizon of the world widens as the centuries pass. Ideals grow grander and purer; the difference between justice and mercy
becomes less and less; liberty enlarges, and love intensifies as the
years sweep on. The ages of force and fear, of cruelty and wrong, are
behind us and the real Eden is beyond. It is said that a desire for
knowledge lost us the Eden of the past; but whether that is true or not,
it will certainly give us the Eden of the future. Party Names Belittle Men

Let us forget that we are Baptists, Methodists, Catholics,
Presbyterians, or Free-thinkers, and remember only that we are men and
women. After all, man and woman are the highest possible titles. All
other names belittle us, and show that we have, to a certain extent,
given up our individuality. A FEW PLAIN QUESTIONS




507. On which of the six days was he
created? Is it possible that God would make a successful
rival? He must have known that Adam and Eve would fall. He knew what
a snake with a "spotted, dappled skin" could do with an inexperienced
woman. He knew that if the serpent
got into the garden, Adam and Eve would sin, that he would have to drive
them out, that afterwards the world would be destroyed, and that he
himself would die upon the cross. Must We Believe Fables to be Good and True? Must we, in order to be
good, gentle and loving in our lives, believe that the creation of woman
was a second thought? That Jehovah really endeavored to induce Adam to
take one of the lower animals as an helpmeet for him? After all, is it
not possible to live honest and courageous lives without believing these
fables? Why was not the serpent kept out of the garden? Why did not the Lord God
take him by the tail and snap his head off? Why did he not put Adam
and Eve on their guard about this serpent? They, of course, were not
acquainted in the neighborhood, and knew nothing about the serpent's
reputation. Questions About the Ark

How was the ark kept clean? We know how it was ventilated; but what
was done with the filth? How were some
portions of the ark heated for animals from the tropics, and others
kept cool for the polar bears? How did the animals get back to their
respective countries? Some had to creep back about six thousand miles,
and they could only go a few feet a day. Some of the creeping things
must have started for the ark just as soon as they were made, and kept
up a steady jog for sixteen hundred years. Think of a couple of the
slowest snails leaving a point opposite the ark and starting for the
plains of Shinar, a distance of twelve thousand miles. Going at the rate
rate of a mile a month, it would take them a thousand years. Polar bears must have gone several thousand miles, and
so sudden a change in climate must have been exceedingly trying upon
their health. Of course, all the polar
bears did not go. It could be confounded only by the
destruction of memory. Did God destroy the memory of mankind at
that time, and if so, how? Did he paralyze that portion of the brain
presiding over the organs of articulation, so that they could not speak
the words, although they remembered them clearly, or did he so touch
the brain that they could not hear? Will some theologian, versed in
the machinery of the miraculous, tell us in what way God confounded the
language of mankind? Would God Kill a Man for Making Ointment? Can we believe that the real God, if there is one, ever ordered a man
to be killed simply for making hair oil, or ointment? We are told in
the thirtieth chapter of Exodus, that the Lord commanded Moses to take
myrrh, cinnamon, sweet calamus, cassia, and olive oil, and make a
holy ointment for the purpose of anointing the tabernacle, tables,
candlesticks and other utensils, as well as Aaron and his sons; saying,
at the same time, that whosoever compounded any like it, or whoever put
any of it on a stranger, should be put to death. In the same chapter,
the Lord furnishes Moses with a recipe for making a perfume, saying,
that whoever should make any which smelled like it, should be cut off
from his people. This, to me, sounds so unreasonable that I cannot
believe it. Some Christians say that the fountains of the great deep were broken up. Will they be kind enough to tell us what the fountains of the great deep
are? Others say that God had vast stores of water in the center of the
earth that he used on the occasion of the flood. How did these waters
happen to run up hill? Would a Real God Uphold Slavery? Must we believe that God called some of his children the money of
others? Can we believe that God made lashes upon the naked back, a
legal tender for labor performed? Must we regard the auction block as an
altar? Were the
stealers and whippers of babes and women the justified children of God? Will some minister, who now believes in religious liberty, and
eloquently denounces the intolerance of Catholicism, explain these
things; will he tell us why he worships an intolerant God? Is a god who
will burn a soul forever in another world, better than a christian who
burns the body for a few hours in this? Do the angels all discuss questions on the same side? Are all the
investigators in perdition? Will the penitent thief, winged and crowned,
laugh at the honest folks in hell? Will the agony of the damned increase
or decrease the happiness of God? Will there be, in the universe, an
eternal _auto da fe_? Why should a believer in God hate an atheist? Surely the atheist has
not injured God, and surely he is human, capable of joy and pain, and
entitled to all the rights of man. Would it not be far better to treat
this atheist, at least, as well as he treats us? ORIENT PEARLS AS RANDOM STRUNG

I do not believe that Christians are as bad as their creeds. The highest crime against a creed is to change it. A believer is a bird in a cage, a free-thinker is an eagle parting the
clouds with tireless wing. All that is good in our civilization is the result of commerce, climate,
soil, geographical position. The heretics have not thought and suffered and died in vain. Every
heretic has been, and is, a ray of light. No man ever seriously attempted to reform a Church without being cast
out and hunted down by the hounds of hypocrisy. After all, the poorest bargain that a human being can make, is to give
his individuality for what is called respectability. On every hand are the enemies of individuality and mental freedom. Custom meets us at the cradle and leaves us only at the tomb. There can be nothing more utterly subversive of all that is really
valuable than the suppression of honest thought. No man, worthy of the form he bears, will at the command of Church or
State solemnly repeat a creed his reason scorns. Although we live in what is called a free government,--and politically
we are free,--there is but little religious liberty in America. According to orthodox logic, God having furnished us with imperfect
minds, has a right to demand a perfect result. Nearly all people stand in great horror of annihilation, and yet to give
up your individuality is to annihilate yourself. When women reason, and babes sit in the lap of philosophy, the victory
of reason over the shadowy host of darkness will be complete. Of all the religions that have been produced by the egotism, the malice,
the ignorance and ambition of man, Presbyterianism is the most hideous. And what man who really thinks can help repeating the words of Ennius:
"If there are gods they certainly pay no attention to the affairs of
man." Events, like the pendulum of a clock have swung forward and backward,
but after all, man, like the hands, has gone steadily on. In spite of Church and dogma, there have been millions and millions of
men and women true to the loftiest and most generous promptings of the
human heart. I was taught to hate Catholicism with every drop of my blood, it is only
justice to say, that in all essential particulars it is precisely the
same as every other religion. Wherever brave blood has been shed, the sword of the Church has been
wet. On every chain has been the sign of the cross. The altar and throne
have leaned against and supported each other. We have all been taught by the Church that nothing is so well calculated
to excite the ire of the Deity as to express a doubt as to his
existence, and that to deny it is an unpardonable sin. Universal obedience is universal stagnation; disobedience is one of the
conditions of progress. Select any age of the world and tell me what
would have been the effect of implicit obedience. We have no national religion, and no national God; but every citizen
is allowed to have a religion and a God of his own, or to reject all
religions and deny the existence of all gods. Whatever may be the truth upon any subject has nothing to do with our
right to investigate that subject, and express any opinion we may form. All that I ask, is the same right I freely accord to all others. Mental slavery is mental death, and every man who has given up his
intellectual freedom is the living coffin of his dead soul. In this
sense, every church is a cemetery and every creed an epitaph. Think of reading the 109th Psalm to a heathen who has a Bible of his own
in which is found this passage: "Blessed is the man and beloved of all
the gods, who is afraid of no man, and of whom no man is afraid." The trouble with most people is, they bow to what is called authority;
they have a certain reverence for the old because it is old. They think
a man is better for being dead, especially if he has been dead a long
time. We should all remember that to be like other people is to be unlike
ourselves, and that nothing can be more detestable in character than
servile imitation. The great trouble with imitation is, that we are apt
to ape those who are in reality far below us. Suppose the Church had had absolute control of the human mind at any
time, would not the words liberty and progress have been blotted from
human speech? In defiance of advice, the world has advanced. Over every fortress of tyranny has waved, and still waves, the banner of
the Church. The Church has won no victories for the rights of man. We have advanced in spite of religious zeal, ignorance, and opposition. Luther labored to reform the Church--Voltaire, to reform men. There have been, and still are, too many men who own themselves--too
much thought, too much knowledge for the Church to grasp again the
sword of power. For the Eg-lon of superstition
Science has a message from Truth. It is a blessed thing that in every age some one has had individuality
enough and courage enough to stand by his own convictions,--some one
who had the grandeur to say his say. "The Church says the earth is flat; but I have seen its shadow on the
moon, and I have more confidence even in a shadow than in the Church." "On the prow of his ship were disobedience, defiance, scorn, and
success. INGERSOLL'S ORATION AT HIS BROTHER'S GRAVE

     A Tribute to Ebon C. Ingersoll, by his Brother
     Robert--The Record of a Generous Life Runs
     Like a  Vine Around the Memory of our
     Dead,   and   Every   Sweet,   Unselfish
     Act is Now a Perfumed Flower. Dear Friends: I am going to do that which the dead oft promised he would
do for me. The loved and loving brother, husband, father, friend, died where
manhood's morning almost touches noon, and while the shadows still were
falling toward the west. He had not passed on life's highway the stone that marks the highest
point; but, being weary for a moment, he lay down by the wayside, and,
using his burden for a pillow, fell into that dreamless sleep that
kisses down his eyelids still. While yet in love with life and raptured
with the world, he passed to silence and pathetic dust. Yet, after all, it may be best, just in the happiest, sunniest hour
of all the voyage, while eager winds are kissing every sail, to dash
against the unseen rock, and in an instant hear the billows roar above a
sunken ship For whether in mid sea or '<DW41> the breakers of the farther
shore, a wreck at last must mark the end of each and all. And every
life, no matter if its every hour is rich with love and every moment
jeweled with a joy, will, at its close, become a tragedy as sad and deep
and dark as can be woven of the warp and woof of mystery and death. This brave and tender man in every storm of life was oak and rock; but
in the sunshine he was vine and flower. He was the friend of all heroic
souls. He climbed the heights, and left all superstitions far below,
while on his forehead fell the golden dawning of the grander day. He loved the beautiful, and was with color, form, and music touched to
tears. He sided with the weak, the poor, and wronged, and lovingly
gave alms. With loyal heart and with the purest hands he faithfully
discharged all public trusts. He was a worshiper of liberty, a friend of the oppressed. A thousand
times I have heard him quote these words: "For Justice all place a
temple, and all season, summer." He believed that happiness was the only
good, reason the only torch, justice the only worship, humanity the only
religion, and love the only priest. He added to the sum of human joy;
and were every one to whom he did some loving service to bring a blossom
to his grave, he would sleep to-night beneath a wilderness of sweet
flowers. Life is a narrow vale between the cold and barren peaks of two
eternities. We strive in vain to look beyond the heights. We cry aloud,
and the only answer is the echo of our wailing cry. From the voiceless
lips of the unreplying dead there comes no word; but in the night of
death hope sees a star and listening love can hear the rustle of a wing. He who sleeps here, when dying, mistaking the approach of death for the
return of health, whispered with his latest breath, "I am better now." Let us believe, in spite of doubts and dogmas, of fears and tears, that
these dear words are true of all the countless dead. And now, to you, who have been chosen, from among the many men he loved,
to do the last sad office for the dead, we give his sacred dust. There was, there is, no gentler,
stronger, manlier man. INGERSOLL'S DREAM OF THE WAR

     The Following Words of Matchless Eloquence were
     Addressed by Col. Ingersoll to the Veteran
     Soldiers of Indianapolis. The past, as it were, rises before me like a dream. Again we are in the
great struggle for national life. We hear the sound of preparation--the
music of the boisterous drums--the silver voices of heroic bugles. We
see thousands of assemblages, and hear the appeals of orators; we see
the pale cheeks of women, and the flushed faces of men; and in those
assemblages we see all the dead whose dust we have covered with flowers. We are with them when they enlist in the
great army of freedom. Some are
walking for the last time in quiet, woody places with the maidens they
adore. We hear the whisperings and the sweet vows of eternal love as
they lingeringly part forever. Others are bending over cradles kissing
babes that are asleep. Some are parting with
mothers who hold them and press them to their hearts again and again,
and say nothing; and some are talking with wives, and endeavoring with
brave words spoken in the old tones to drive away the awful fear. We see the wife standing in the door with the babe in her
arms--standing in the sunlight sobbing--at the turn of the road a hand
waves--she answers by holding high in her loving hands the child. We see them all as they march proudly away under the flaunting flags,
keeping time to the wild music of war--marching down the streets of the
great cities--through the towns and across the prairies--down to the
fields of glory, and do and to die for the eternal right. We are by their side on all the gory
fields, in all the hospitals of pain--on all the weary marches. We stand
guard with them in the wild storm and under the quiet stars. We are with
them in ravines running with blood--in the furrows of old fields. We are
with them between contending hosts, unable to move, wild with thirst,
the life ebbing slowly away among the withered leaves. We see them
pierced by balls and torn with shells in the trenches of forts, and in
the whirlwind of the charge, where men become iron with nerves of steel. We are with them in the prisons of hatred and famine, but human speech
can never tell what they endured. We are at home when the news comes that they are dead. We see the maiden
in the shadow of her sorrow. We see the silvered head of the old man
bowed with the last grief. The past rises before us, and we see four millions of human beings
governed by the lash--we see them bound hand and foot--we hear the
strokes of cruel whips--we see the hounds tracking women through
tangled swamps. We see babes sold from the breasts of mothers. Four million bodies in chains--four million souls in fetters. All the
sacred relations of wife, mother, father and child trampled beneath the
brutal feet of might. All this was done under our own beautiful banner
of the free. We hear the roar and shriek of the bursting
shell. Instead of
slaves we see men and women and children. The wand of progress touches
the auction-block, the slave-pen, and the whipping-post, and we see
homes and firesides, and school-houses and books, and where all was want
and crime, and cruelty and fear, we see the faces of the free. They died for liberty--they died for us. They
are at rest, They sleep in the land they made free, under the flag
they rendered stainless, under the solemn pines, the sad hemlocks, the
tearful willows, the embracing vines. They sleep beneath the shadows of
the clouds, careless alike of sunshine or storm, each in the window-less
palace of rest. Earth may run red with other wars--they are at peace. In
the midst of battle, in the roar of conflict, they found the serenity of
death. I have one sentiment for the soldiers living and dead--cheers for
the living and tears for the dead. It is not necessary to be a pig in order to raise one. A blow from a parent leaves a scar on the soul of the child. A mortgage casts a shadow on the sunniest field. It is better to be a whole farmer than part of a mechanic. One good school-master is worth a thousand priests. Out in the intellectual sea there is room for every sail. An honest God is the noblest work of man. A King is a non-producing thief, sitting on a throne, surrounded by
vermin. Whiskey is the son of villainies, the father of all crimes, the mother
of all abominations, the devil's best friend, and God's worst enemy. An Orthodox Man is a gentleman petrified in his mind. Chicago is a marvel of energy, a miracle of nerva

The Pulpit is a pillory. Civilization is the Child of Forethought

Prejudice is the Child of Ignorance. I believe in the democracy of the fireside, in the republicanism of the
home. I believe in truth, in
investigation, in forethought. I believe in the gospel of education, of cheerfulness, of justice and
intelligence. "A motor boat would be mighty convenient to go back and forth to
Annapolis," he said. "Look at the one cutting through the water there,
midway across!" It came nearer, halted a little way off in deep water, and an officer
in uniform swept the tents and them with a glass. Then the boat put
about and went chugging upstream. "We didn't seem to please him," remarked Macloud, gazing after the
boat. Suddenly it turned in toward shore and made the landing at the
Experiment Station. "We are about to be welcomed or else ordered off--I'll take a bet
either way," said Macloud. "Otherwise, they wouldn't have
despatched an officer--it would have been a file of marines instead. You haven't lost the permit, Macloud!" Presently, the officer appeared, walking rapidly down the roadway. As
soon as he sighted the tents, he swung over toward them. Macloud went a
few steps forward to meet him. "Senator Rickrose isn't coming until later. I am
one of his friends, Colin Macloud, and this is Mr. "The
Superintendent presents his compliments and desires to place himself
and the Academy at your disposal." (He was instructed to add, that
Captain Boswick would pay his respects to-morrow, having been called to
Washington to-day by an unexpected wire, but the absence of the
Chairman of the Naval Affairs Committee rendered it unnecessary.) "Thank Captain Boswick, for Senator Rickrose and us, and tell him we
appreciate his kindness exceedingly," Macloud answered. "We're camping
here for a week or so, to try sleeping in the open, under sea air. Then they took several drinks, and the aide departed. "So far, we're making delightful progress," said Croyden; "but there
are breakers ahead when Hook-nose and his partner get in the game. Suppose we inspect the premises and see if they have been here in our
absence." They went first to the place where they had seen them conceal the
tools--these were gone; proof that the thieves had paid a second visit
to the Point. But, search as they might, no evidence of work was
disclosed. "Not very likely," replied Macloud, "with half a million at stake. They
probably are seeking information; when they have it, we shall see them
back again." "Suppose they bring four or five others to help them?" "They won't--never fear!--they're not sharing the treasure with any one
else. Rather, they will knife each other for it. Honor among thieves is
like the Phoenix--it doesn't exist." "If the knifing business were to occur before the finding, it would
help some!" "Meantime, I'm going to look at the ruins
of the light-house. I discovered in an almanac I found in the hotel
last night, that the original light-house was erected on Greenberry
Point in 1818. They went out to the extreme edge, and stood gazing across the shoals
toward the ruins. "What do you make the distance from the land?" "About one hundred yards--but it's very difficult to estimate over
water. It may be two hundred for all I can tell." "It is exactly three hundred and twenty-two feet from the Point to the
near side of the ruins," said Croyden. "Why not three hundred and twenty-two and a half feet!" "I measured it this morning while you were dawdling over your
breakfast," answered Croyden. "Hitched a line to the land and waded out, I suppose." "Not exactly; I measured it on the Government map of the Harbor. It
gives the distance as three hundred and twenty-two feet, in plain
figures." "Now, what's the rest
of the figures--or haven't you worked it out?" "The calculation is of value only on the
assumption--which, however, is altogether reasonable--that the
light-house, when erected, stood on the tip of the Point. It is now
three hundred and twenty-two feet in water. Therefore, dividing
ninety-two--the number of years since erection--into three hundred and
twenty-two, gives the average yearly encroachment of the Bay as three
and a half feet. Parmenter buried the casket in 1720, just a hundred
and ninety years ago; so, multiplying a hundred and ninety by three and
a half feet gives six hundred and sixty-five feet. In other words, the
Point, in 1720, projected six hundred and sixty-five feet further out
in the Bay than it does to-day." "Then, with the point moved in six hundred and sixty-five feet
Parmenter's beeches should be only eighty-five feet from the shore
line, instead of seven hundred and fifty!" "As the Point from year to year slipped
into the Bay, the fierce gales, which sweep up the Chesapeake,
gradually ate into the timber. It is seventy years, at least, since
Parmenter's beeches went down." "Why shouldn't the Duvals have noticed the encroachment of the Bay, and
made a note of it on the letter?" "Probably, because it was so gradual they did not observe it. They,
likely, came to Annapolis only occasionally, and Greenberry Point
seemed unchanged--always the same narrow stretch of sand, with large
trees to landward." "Next let us measure back eighty-five feet," said Croyden, producing a
tape-line.... "There! this is where the beech tree should stand. But
where were the other trees, and where did the two lines drawn from them
intersect?"... said Macloud--"where were the trees, and where
did the lines intersect? You had a compass yesterday, still got
it?" Macloud drew it out and tossed it over. "I took the trouble to make a number of diagrams last night, and they
disclosed a peculiar thing. With the location of the first tree fixed,
it matters little where the others were, in determining the direction
of the treasure. The _objective point_ will
change as you change the position of the trees, but the _direction_
will vary scarcely at all. It is self-evident, of course, to those who
understand such things, but it was a valuable find for me. Now, if we
are correct in our assumption, thus far, the treasure is buried----"

He opened the compass, and having brought North under the needle, ran
his eye North-by-North-east. A queer look passed over his face, then he
glanced at Macloud and smiled. "The treasure is buried," he repeated--"the treasure is buried--_out in
the Bay_." "Looks as if wading would be a bit difficult," he said dryly. Croyden produced the tape-line again, and they measured to the low
bluff at the water's edge. "Two hundred and eighty-two feet to here," he said, "and Parmenter
buried the treasure at three hundred and thirty feet--therefore, it's
forty-eight feet out in the Bay." "Then your supposition is that, since Parmenter's time, the Bay has not
only encroached on the Point, but also has eaten in on the sides." "It's hard to dig in water," Macloud remarked. "It's apt to fill in the
hole, you know." "Don't be sarcastic," Croyden retorted. "I'm not responsible for the
Bay, nor the Point, nor Parmenter, nor anything else connected with the
fool quest, please remember." "Except the present measurements and the theory on which they're
based," Macloud replied. "And as the former seem to be accurate, and
the latter more than reasonable, we'd best act on them." "At least, I am satisfied that the treasure lies either in the Bay, or
close on shore; if so, we have relieved ourselves from digging up the
entire Point." "You have given us a mighty plausible start," said Macloud. as a
buggy emerged from among the timber, circled around, and halted before
the tents. "It is Hook-nose back again," said Macloud. "Come to pay a social call,
I suppose! "They're safe--I put them under the blankets." "Come to treat with us--to share the treasure." By this time, they had been observed by the men in the buggy who,
immediately, came toward them. said Croyden, and they sauntered
along landward. "And make them stop us--don't give the least indication that we know
them," added Macloud. As the buggy neared, Macloud and Croyden glanced carelessly at the
occupants, and were about to pass on, when Hook-nose calmly drew the
horse over in front of them. "Which of you men is named Croyden?" "Well, you're the man we're lookin' for. Geoffrey is the rest of your
handle, isn't it?" "You have the advantage of me," Croyden assured him. "Yes, I think I have, in more ways than your name. Where can we have a
little private talk?" said Croyden, stepping quickly around the horse and
continuing on his way--Macloud and Axtell following. "If you'd rather have it before your friends, I'm perfectly ready to
accommodate you," said the fellow. "I thought, however, you'd rather
keep the little secret. Well, we'll be waiting for you at the tents,
all right, my friend!" "Macloud, we are going to bag those fellows right now--and easy, too,"
said Croyden. "When we get to the tents, I'll take them into one--and
give them a chance to talk. When you and Axtell have the revolvers,
with one for me, you can join us. They are armed, of course, but only
with small pistols, likely, and you should have the drop on them before
they can draw. Come, at any time--I'll let down the tent flaps on the
plea of secrecy (since they've suggested it), so you can approach with
impunity." "This is where _we_ get killed, Axtell!" "I would that I
were in my happy home, or any old place but here. But I've enlisted for
the war, so here goes! If you think it will do any good to pray, we can
just as well wait until you've put up a few. I'm not much in that line,
myself." "I can't," said Macloud. "But there seem to be no rules to the game
we're playing, so I wanted to give you the opportunity." As they approached the tents, Hook-nose passed the reins to Bald-head
and got out. "Leave it to me, I'll get them together," Croyden answered.... "You
wish to see me, privately?" "I wish to see you--it's up to you whether to make it private or not." said Croyden, leading the way toward the tent, which was
pitched a trifle to one side.... "Now, sir, what is it?" as the flaps
dropped behind them. "You've a business way about you, which I like----" began Hook-nose. "Come to the point--what do
you want?" "There's no false starts with you, my friend, are there!" You lost a letter recently----"

"Not at all," Croyden cut in. "I had a letter _stolen_--you, I suppose,
are the thief." "I, or my pal--it matters not which," the fellow replied easily. "Now,
what we want, is to make some arrangement as to the division of the
treasure, when you've found it." "Well, let me tell you there won't
be any arrangement made with you, alone. You must get your pal here--I
don't agree with one. "Oh, very well, I'll have him in, if you wish." Hook-nose went to the front of the tent and raised the flap. he called, "hitch the horse and come in." And Macloud and Axtell heard and understood. While Hook-nose was summoning his partner, Croyden very naturally
retired to the rear of the tent, thus obliging the rogues to keep their
backs to the entrance. "I'm glad to make your acquaint----" began Smith. "There is no need for an introduction," Croyden interrupted curtly. "You're thieves, by profession, and blackmailers, in addition. Get down
to business, if you please!" "You're not overly polite, my friend--but we'll pass that by. You're
hell for business, and that's our style. You understand, I see, that
this treasure hunt has got to be kept quiet. If anyone peaches, the
Government's wise and Parmenter's chest is dumped into its strong
box--that is, as much as is left after the officials get their own
flippers out. Now, my idea is for you people to do the searching, and,
when the jewels is found, me and Bill will take half and youn's half. Then we all can knock off work, and live respectable." "Rather a good bargain for you," said Croyden. "We supply the
information, do all the work and give up half the spoils--for what,
pray?" "For our silence, and an equal share in the information. You have
doubtless forgot that we have the letter now." "Better
half a big loaf than no loaf at all." "I see what's in your mind, all right. But it won't work, and you know
it. You can have us arrested, yes--and lose your plunder. Parmenter's
money belongs to the United States because it's buried in United States
land. A word to the Treasury Department, with the old pirate's letter,
and the jig is up. We'll risk your giving us to the police, my friend!" "If you're one to throw away good money, I miss
my guess." "I forgot to say, that as you're fixed so comfortable here, me and Bill
might as well stay with you--it will be more convenient, when you
uncover the chest, you know; in the excitement, you're liable to forget
that we come in for a share." His ears were
primed, and they told him that Macloud and Axtell were coming--"Let us
have them all, so I can decide--I want no afterthoughts." "You've got them all--and very reasonable they are!" Just then, Macloud and Axtell stepped noiselessly into the tent. Something in Croyden's face caused Hook-nose's laugh to end abruptly. He swung sharply around--and faced Macloud's leveled revolver--Axtell's
covered his pal. --Croyden cried--"None of that,
Hook-nose!--make another motion to draw a gun, and we'll scatter your
brains like chickenfeed." His own big revolver was sticking out of
Macloud's pocket. "Now, I'll look after you, while my
friends tie up your pal, and the first one to open his head gets a
bullet down his throat." "Hands behind your back, Bald-head," commanded Axtell, briskly. Macloud is wonderfully easy on the trigger. He produced a pair of nippers, and snapped them on. "Now, lie down and put your feet together--closer! "Now, I'll do for you," Axtell remarked, turning toward Hook-nose. With Croyden's and Macloud's guns both covering him, the fellow was
quickly secured. "With your permission, we will search you," said Croyden. "Macloud, if
you will look to Mr. Smith, I'll attend to Hook-nose. We'll give them a
taste of their own medicine." "I don't care to shoot a prisoner, but I'll do
it without hesitation. It's going to be either perfect quiet or
permanent sleep--and you may do the choosing." He slowly went through Hook-nose's clothes--finding a small pistol,
several well-filled wallets, and, in his inside waistcoat pocket, the
Parmenter letter. Macloud did the same for Bald-head. "You stole one hundred and seventy-nine dollars from Mr. Macloud and
one hundred and eight from me," said Croyden. "You may now have the
privilege of returning it, and the letter. If you make no more trouble,
lie quiet and take your medicine, you'll receive no further harm. If
you're stubborn, we'll either kill you and dump your bodies in the Bay,
or give you up to the police. The latter would be less trouble, for,
without the letter, you can tell your story to the Department, or
whomever else you please--it's your word against ours--and you are
thieves!" "How long are you going to hold us prisoners?" asked Bald-head--"till
you find the treasure? "And luck is with you," Hook-nose sneered. "At present, it _is_ with us--very much with us, my friend," said
Croyden. "You will excuse us, now, we have pressing business,
elsewhere." When they were out of hearing, Macloud said:

"Doesn't our recovery of Parmenter's letter change things very
materially?" "It seems to me it does," Croyden answered. "Indeed, I think we need
fear the rogues no longer--we can simply have them arrested for the
theft of our wallets, or even release them entirely." "Arrest is preferable," said Macloud. "It will obviate all danger of
our being shot at long range, by the beggars. Let us put them where
they're safe, for the time." "But the arrest must not be made here!" "We can't
send for the police: if they find them here it would give color to
their story of a treasure on Greenberry Point." "Then Axtell and I will remain on guard, while you go to town and
arrange for their apprehension--say, just as they come off the Severn
bridge. "What if they don't cross the Severn--what if they scent our game, and
keep straight on to Baltimore? They can abandon their team, and catch a
Short Line train at a way station." "Then the Baltimore police can round them up. They've lost Parmenter's letter; haven't anything to substantiate their
story. Furthermore, we have a permit for the Chairman of the Naval
Affairs Committee and friends to camp here. I think that, now, we can
afford to ignore them--the recovery of the letter was exceedingly
lucky." said Macloud--"you're the one to be satisfied; it's a
whole heap easier than running a private prison ourselves." Croyden looked the other's horse over carefully, so he could describe
it accurately, then they hitched up their own team and he drove off to
Annapolis. "I told the Mayor we had passed two men on
the Severn bridge whom we identified as those who picked our pockets,
Wednesday evening, in Carvel Hall--and gave him the necessary
descriptions. He recognized the team as one of 'Cheney's Best,' and
will have the entire police force--which consists of four men--waiting
at the bridge on the Annapolis side." "They are
there, now, so we can turn the prisoners loose." Croyden and Macloud resumed their revolvers, and returned to the
tent--to be greeted with a volley of profanity which, for fluency and
vocabulary, was distinctly marvelous. Gradually, it died away--for want
of breath and words. "In the cuss line, you two are the real
thing. Why didn't you open up sooner?--you shouldn't hide such
proficiency from an admiring world." Whereat it flowed forth afresh from Hook-nose. Bald-head, however,
remained quiet, and there was a faint twinkle in his eyes, as though he
caught the humor of the situation. They were severely cramped, and in
considerable pain, but their condition was not likely to be benefited
by swearing at their captors. said Croyden, as Hook-nose took a fresh start. Now, if you'll be quiet a moment, like
your pal, we will tell you something that possibly you'll not be averse
to hear.... So, that's better. We're about to release you--let you go
free; it's too much bother to keep you prisoners. These little toy guns
of yours, however, we shall throw into the Bay, in interest of the
public peace. Now, you may arise and shake yourselves--you'll, likely,
find the circulation a trifle restricted, for a few minutes." Hook-nose gave him a malevolent look, but made no reply, Bald-head
grinned broadly. "Now, if you have sufficiently recovered, we will escort you to your
carriage! And with the two thieves in front, and the three revolvers bringing up
the rear, they proceeded to the buggy. XI

ELAINE CAVENDISH


"May we have seen the last of you!" said Macloud, as the buggy
disappeared among the trees; "and may the police provide for you in
future." "And while you're about it," said Croyden, "you might pray that we find
the treasure--it would be quite as effective." Now, to resume where those rogues interrupted us. We had the jewels located, somewhere, within a radius of fifty feet. They must be, according to our theory, either on the bank or in the
Bay. We can't go at the water without a boat. or go to town and procure a boat, and be ready for either in
the morning." "I have an idea," said Macloud. "Don't let it go to waste, old man, let's have it!" "If you can give up hearing yourself talk, for a moment, I'll try!" "It is conceded, I believe, that digging on the Point
by day may, probably will, provoke comment and possibly investigation
as well. Then as soon as dusky
Night has drawn her robes about her----"

"Oh, Lord!" ejaculated Croyden, with upraised hands. "Then, as soon as dusky Night has drawn her robes about her," Macloud
repeated, imperturbably, "we set to work, by the light of the silvery
moon. We arouse no comment--provoke no investigation. When morning
dawns, the sands are undisturbed, and we are sleeping as peacefully as
guinea pigs." "And if there isn't a moon, we will set to work by the light of the
silvery lantern, I reckon!" "And, when we tackle the water, it will be in a silver boat and with
silver cuirasses and silver helmets, a la Lohengrin." "And I suppose, our swan-song will be played on silver flutes!" "There won't be a swan-song--we're going to find Parmenter's treasure,"
said Macloud. Leaving Axtell in camp, they drove to town, stopping at the North end
of the Severn bridge to hire a row-boat,--a number of which were drawn
up on the bank--and to arrange for it to be sent around to the far end
of the Point. At the hotel, they found a telephone call from the
Mayor's office awaiting them. The thieves had been duly captured, the Mayor said, and they had been
sent to Baltimore. The Chief of Detectives happened to be in the
office, when they were brought in, and had instantly recognized them as
well-known criminals, wanted in Philadelphia for a particularly
atrocious hold-up. He had, thereupon, thought it best to let the Chief
take them back with him, thus saving the County the cost of a trial,
and the penitentiary expense--as well as sparing Mr. Croyden and his
friend much trouble and inconvenience in attending court. He had had
them searched, but found nothing which could be identified. Croyden assured him it was more than satisfactory. That night, and every night for the
next three weeks, they kept at it. They dug up the entire zone
of suspicion--it being loose sand and easy to handle. On the plea that
a valuable ruby ring had been lost overboard while fishing, they
dragged and scraped the bottom of the Bay for a hundred yards around. Nothing smiled on them but the weather--it had
remained uniformly good until the last two days before. Then there had
set in, from the North-east, such a storm of rain as they had never
seen. The very Bay seemed to be gathered up and dashed over the Point. They had sought refuge in the hotel, when the first chilly blasts of
wind and water came up the Chesapeake. As it grew fiercer,--and a <DW64>
sent out for information returned with the news that their tents had
been blown away, and all trace of the camp had vanished--it was
decided that the quest should be abandoned. "We knew from the first it
couldn't succeed." "But we wanted to prove that it couldn't succeed," Macloud observed. "If you hadn't searched, you always would have thought that, maybe, you
could have been successful. Now, you've had your try--and you've
failed. It will be easier to reconcile yourself to failure, than not to
have tried." "In other words, it's better to have tried and lost, than never to have
tried at all," Croyden answered. it's over and there's no profit
in thinking more about it. We have had an enjoyable camp, and the camp
is ended. I'll go home and try to forget Parmenter, and the jewel box
he buried down on Greenberry Point." "I think I'll go with you," said Macloud. "To Hampton--if you can put up with me a little longer." A knowing smile broke over Croyden's face. "Maybe!--and maybe it is just you. At any rate, I'll come if I may." You know you're more than welcome, always!" "I'll go out to Northumberland to-night, arrange a few
matters which are overdue, and come down to Hampton as soon as I can
get away." *       *       *       *       *

The next afternoon, as Macloud was entering the wide doorway of the
Tuscarora Trust Company, he met Elaine Cavendish coming out. There isn't a handy dinner man around, with you and Geoffrey
both away. Dine with us this evening, will you?--it will be strictly
_en famille_, for I want to talk business." he thought, as, having accepted, he went on
to the coupon department. "It has to do with that beggar Croyden, I
reckon." *       *       *       *       *

And when, the dinner over, they were sitting before the open grate
fire, in the big living room, she broached the subject without
timidity, or false pride. "You are more familiar with Geoffrey Croyden's affairs than any one
else, Colin," she said, crossing her knees, in the reckless fashion
women have now-a-days, and exposing a ravishing expanse of blue silk
stockings, with an unconscious consciousness that was delightfully
naive. "And I want to ask you something--or rather, several things." Macloud blew a whiff of cigarette smoke into the fire, and waited. "I, naturally, don't ask you to violate any confidence," she went on,
"but I fancy you may tell me this: was the particular business in which
Geoffrey was engaged, when I saw him in Annapolis, a success or a
failure?" "Did he tell you anything concerning
it?" "Only that his return to Northumberland would depend very much on the
outcome." "Well, it wasn't a success; in fact, it was a complete failure." "I do not mean, where is he this minute, but where
is he in general--where would you address a wire, or a letter, and know
that it would be received?" He threw his cigarette into the grate and lit another. "I am not at liberty to tell," he said. "Then, it is true--he is concealing himself." "Not exactly--he is not proclaiming himself----"

"Not proclaiming himself or his whereabouts to his Northumberland
friends, you mean?" "Are there such things as friends, when one
has been unfortunate?" "I can answer only for myself," she replied earnestly. "I believe you, Elaine----"

"Then tell me this--is he in this country or abroad?" "In this country," he said, after a pause. "Is he in want,--I mean, in want for the things he has been used to?" "He is not in want, I can assure you!--and much that he was used to
having, he has no use for, now. "Why did he leave Northumberland so suddenly?" He was forced to give up the old life, so he chose
wisely, I think--to go where his income was sufficient for his needs." She was silent for a while, staring into the blaze. He did not
interrupt--thinking it wise to let her own thoughts shape the way. "You will not tell me where he is?" she said suddenly, bending her blue
eyes hard upon his face. I ought not to have told you he was not abroad." "This business which you and he were on, in Annapolis--it failed, you
say?" "And is there no chance that it may succeed, some time?" "But may not conditions change--something happen----" she began. "It is the sort that does not happen. In this case, abandonment spells
finis." "Did he know, when we were in Annapolis?" "On the contrary, he was very sanguine--it looked most promising
then." He blew ring after ring of smoke, and
waited, patiently. He was the friend, he saw, now. Croyden was the lucky fellow--and would not! Well, he had
his warning and it was in time. Since she was baring her soul to him,
as friend to friend, it was his duty to help her to the utmost of his
power. Suddenly, she uncrossed her knees and sat up. "I have bought all the stock, and the remaining bonds of the Virginia
Development Company, from the bank that held them as collateral for
Royster & Axtell's loan," she said. I didn't
appear in the matter--my broker bought them in _your_ name, and paid
for them in actual money." She arose, and bending swiftly over, kissed him on the cheek. "I am, also, Geoffrey Croyden's friend, but
there are temptations which mortal man cannot resist." she smiled, leaning over the back of his chair, and
putting her head perilously close to his--"but I trust you--though I
shan't kiss you again--at least, for the present. Now, you have been so
_very_ good about the bonds, I want you to be good some more. He held his hands before him, to put them out of temptation. "Ask me to crawl in the grate, and see how quickly I do it!" "It might prove my power, but I should lose my friend," she whispered. it's
already granted, that you should know, Elaine." "You're a very sweet boy," she said, going back to her seat. But that you're a very sweet girl, needs no
proof--unless----" looking at her with a meaning smile. "I should accept it as such," he averred--"whenever you choose to
confer it." "_Confer_ smacks of reward for service done," she said. "Will it bide
till then?" "Wait--If you choose such pay, the----"

"I choose no pay," he interrupted. "Then, the reward will be in kind," she answered enigmatically. "I want
you----" She put one slender foot on the fender, and gazed at it,
meditatively, while the firelight stole covert glances at the silken
ankles thus exposed. "I want you to purchase for me, from Geoffrey
Croyden, at par, his Virginia Development Company bonds," she said. I will give you a check, now----"

"Wait!" he said; "wait until he sells----"

"You think he won't sell?" "I think he will have to be satisfied, first, as to the purchaser--in
plain words, that it isn't either you or I. We can't give Geoffrey
money! The bonds are practically worthless, as he knows only too
well." "I had thought of that," she said, "but, isn't it met by this very
plan? Your broker purchases the bonds for your account, but he,
naturally, declines to reveal the identity of his customer. You can,
truthfully, tell Geoffrey that _you_ are not buying them--for you're
not. And _I_--if he will only give me the chance--will assure him that
I am _not_ buying them from him--and you might confirm it, if he
asked." It's juggling with the facts--though true on the face," said
Macloud, "but it's pretty thin ice we're skating on." He may take the two hundred
thousand and ask no question." "You don't for a moment believe that!" "It _is_ doubtful," she admitted. "And you wouldn't think the same of him, if he did." "So, we are back to the thin ice. I'll do what I can; but, you forgot,
I am not at liberty to give his address to my brokers. I shall have to
take their written offer to buy, and forward it to him, which, in
itself will oblige me, at the same time, to tell him that _I_ am not
the purchaser." "I leave it entirely to you--manage it any way you see fit. All I ask,
is that you get him to sell. It's horrible to think of Geoffrey being
reduced to the bare necessities of life--for that's what it means, when
he goes 'where his income is sufficient for his needs.'" "It's unfortunate, certainly: it would be vastly worse for a woman--to
go from luxury to frugality, from everything to relatively nothing is
positively pathetic. However, Croyden is not suffering--he has an
attractive house filled with old things, good victuals, a more than
competent cook, and plenty of society. He has cut out all the
non-essentials, and does the essentials economically." "You speak of your own knowledge,
not from his inferences?" "Our own in the aggregate
or differentiated?" he laughed; "but quite the equal of our own
differentiated. If Croyden were a marrying man--with sufficient income
for two--I should give him about six months, at the outside." "And how much would you give one with sufficient for two--_yourself_,
for instance?" "Just long enough to choose the girl--and convince her of the propriety
of the choice." "And do you expect to join Geoffrey, soon?" "As soon as I can get through here,--probably in a day or two." "Then, we may look for the new Mrs. Macloud in time for the holidays, I
presume.--Sort of a Christmas gift?" "About then--if I can pick among so many, and she ratifies the pick." "No!--there are so many I didn't have time to more than look them over. When I go back, I'll round them up, cut out the most likely, and try to
tie and brand her." "One would think, from your talk, that
Geoffrey was in a cowboy camp, with waitresses for society." He grinned, and lighted a fresh cigarette. "And nothing can induce you to tell me the location of the camp?" "Let us try the bond matter, first. If
he sells, I think he will return; if not, I'll then consider telling." "You're a good fellow, Colin, dear!" she whispered, leaning over and
giving his hand an affectionate little pat. "You're so nice and
comfortable to have around--you never misunderstand, nor draw
inferences that you shouldn't." "Which means, I'm not to draw inferences now?" "Nor at any other time," she remarked. "Will be forthcoming," with an alluring smile. "I've a mind to take part payment now," said he, intercepting the hand
before she could withdraw it. whisking it loose, and darting around a table. With a swift movement, she swept up her skirts and fled--around chairs,
and tables, across rugs, over sofas and couches--always manoeuvring to
gain the doorway, yet always finding him barring the way;--until, at
last, she was forced to refuge behind a huge davenport, standing with
one end against the wall. he demanded, coming slowly toward her in the
cul de sac. "I'll be merciful," he said. "It is five steps, until I reach
you--One!--Will you yield?" "Four----"

Quick as thought, she dropped one hand on the back of the davenport;
there was a flash of slippers, lingerie and silk, and she was across
and racing for the door, now fair before her, leaving him only the echo
of a mocking laugh. she counted, tauntingly, from the hall. "Why don't you
continue, sir?" "I'll be good for to-night, Elaine--you
need have no further fear." She tossed her head ever so slightly, while a bantering look came into
her eyes. "I'm not much afraid of you, now--nor any time," she answered. "But you
have more courage than I would have thought, Colin--decidedly more!" XII

ONE LEARNED IN THE LAW


It was evening, when Croyden returned to Hampton--an evening which
contained no suggestion of the Autumn he had left behind him on the
Eastern Shore. It was raw, and damp, and chill, with the presage of
winter in its cold; the leaves were almost gone from the trees, the
blackening hand of frost was on flower and shrubbery. As he passed up
the dreary, deserted street, the wind was whistling through the
branches over head, and moaning around the houses like spirits of the
damned. He turned in at Clarendon--shivering a little at the prospect. He was
beginning to appreciate what a winter spent under such conditions
meant, where one's enjoyments and recreations are circumscribed by the
bounds of comparatively few houses and few people--people, he
suspected, who could not understand what he missed, of the hurly-burly
of life and amusement, even if they tried. Their ways were sufficient
for them; they were eminently satisfied with what they had; they could
not comprehend dissatisfaction in another, and would have no patience
with it. He could imagine the dismalness of Hampton, when contrasted with the
brightness of Northumberland. The theatres, the clubs, the constant
dinners, the evening affairs, the social whirl with all that it
comprehended, compared with an occasional dinner, a rare party,
interminable evenings spent, by his own fireside, alone! To be sure, Miss Carrington, and Miss Borden, and Miss Lashiel, and
Miss Tilghman, would be available, when they were home. But the winter
was when they went visiting, he remembered, from late November until
early April, and, at that period, the town saw them but little. There
was the Hampton Club, of course, but it was worse than nothing--an
opportunity to get mellow and to gamble, innocent enough to those who
were habituated to it, but dangerous to one who had fallen, by
adversity, from better things....

However, Macloud would be there, shortly, thank God! And the dear girls
were not going for a week or so, he hoped. And, when the worst came, he
could retire to the peacefulness of his library and try to eke out a
four months' existence, with the books, and magazines and papers. Moses held open the door, with a bow and a flourish, and the lights
leaped out to meet him. It was some cheer, at least, to come home to a
bright house, a full larder, faithful servants--and supper ready on the
table, and tuned to even a Clubman's taste. "Moses, do you know if Miss Carrington's at home?" he asked, the coffee
on and his cigar lit. her am home, seh, I seed she herse'f dis mornin' cum down
de parf from de front poach wid de dawg, seh." Croyden nodded and went across the hall to the telephone. Miss Carrington, herself, answered his call.--Yes, she intended to be
home all evening. She would be delighted to see him and to hear a full
account of himself. He was rather surprised at his own alacrity, in finishing his cigar and
changing his clothes--and he wondered whether it was the girl, or the
companionship, or the opportunity to be free of himself? A little of
all three, he concluded.... But, especially, the _girl_, as she came
from the drawing-room to meet him. "So you have really returned," she said, as he bowed over her slender
fingers. "We were beginning to fear you had deserted us." "You are quite too modest," he replied. "You don't appreciate your own
attractions." The "you" was plainly singular, but she refused to see it. "Our own attractions require us to be modest," she returned; "with
a--man of the world." "Whatever I may have been, I am, now, a man of
Hampton." "You can never be a man of Hampton." "Why not, if I live among you?" "If you live here--take on our ways, our beliefs, our mode of thinking,
you may, in a score of years, grow like us, outwardly; but, inwardly,
where the true like must start, _never_!" You've been bred differently, used to
different things, to doing them in a different way. We do things
slowly, leisurely, with a fine disregard of time, you, with the modern
rush, and bustle, and hurry. You are a man of the world--I repeat
it--up to the minute in everything--never lagging behind, unless you
wish. You never put off till to-morrow what you can do to-day. We never
do anything to-day that can be put off till to-morrow." "And which do you prefer, the to-day or the to-morrow?" "It depends on my humor, and my location, at the time--though, I must
admit, the to-day makes for thrift, and business, and success in
acquiring wealth." "And success also in getting rid of it. It is a return toward the
primitive condition--the survival of the fittest. There must be losers
as well as acquirers." she exclaimed, "that one must lose in order
that another may gain." "But as we are not in Utopia or Altruria," he smiled, "it will continue
so to be. Why, even in Baltimore, they----"

"Oh, Baltimore is only an overgrown country town!" "With half a million population, it is as
provincial as Hampton, and thanks God for it--the most smug,
self-satisfied, self-sufficient municipality in the land, with its
cobblestones, its drains-in-the-gutters, its how much-holier-than-thou
air about everything." "Because it happens to be on the main line between Washington and the
North." "At least, the people are nice, barring a few mushrooms who are making
a great to-do." "Yes, the people _are_ delightful!--And, when it comes to mushrooms,
Northumberland has Baltimore beaten to a frazzle. "Northumberland society must be exceedingly large!" "It is--but it's not overcrowded. About as many die every day, as are
born every night; and, at any rate, they don't interfere with those who
really belong--except to increase prices, and the cost of living, and
clog the avenue with automobiles." but whither it leads no one knows--to the devil,
likely--or a lemon garden." "'Blessed are the lemons on earth, for they shall be peaches in
Heaven!'" "What a glorious peach your Miss Erskine will be," he replied. "I'm afraid you don't appreciate the great honor the lady did you, in
condescending to view the _treasures_ of Clarendon, and to talk about
them afterward. To hear her, she is the most intimate friend you have
in Hampton." he said, "I'm glad you told me. Somehow, I'm always drawing
lemons." "Quite immaterial to the question, which is: A lemon or not a lemon?" "If you could but see yourself at this moment, you would not ask," he
said, looking at her with amused scrutiny. The lovely face, the blue black hair, the fine figure in the simple
pink organdie, the slender ankles, the well-shod feet--a lemon! "But as I can't see myself, and have no mirror handy, your testimony is
desired," she insisted. "Then you can't have any objection----"

"If you bring Miss Erskine in?" "----if I take you there for a game of Bridge--shall we go this very
evening?" "I don't wish--and we are growing very silly. Come, tell
about your Annapolis trip. "It's a queer old town, Annapolis--they call it the 'Finished City!' It's got plenty of landmarks, and relics, but nothing more. If it were
not for the State Capitol and Naval Academy, it would be only a lot of
ruins, lost in the sand. No one on
the streets, no one in the shops, no one any place.--Deserted--until
there's a fire. "But, with the
autumn and the Academy in session, the town seemed very much alive. We
sampled 'Cheney's Best,' Wegard's Cakes, and saw the Custard-and-Cream
Chapel." "You've been to Annapolis, sure!" "There's only one thing
more--did you see Paul Jones?" You can't find him without the aid of a
detective or a guide." "No one!--and there is the shame. We accepted the vast labors and the
money of our Ambassador to France in locating the remains of America's
first Naval Hero; we sent an Embassy and a warship to bring them back;
we received them with honor, orated over them, fired guns over them. And then, when the spectators had departed--assuming they were to be
deposited in the crypt of the Chapel--we calmly chucked them away on a
couple of trestles, under a stairway in Bancroft Hall, as we would an
old broom or a tin can. That's _our_ way of honoring the only Naval
Commander we had in the Revolution. It would have been better, much
better, had we left him to rest in the quiet seclusion of his grave in
France--lost, save in memory, with the halo of the past and privacy of
death around him." "And why didn't we finish the work?" "Why bring him here,
with the attendant expense, and then stop, just short of completion? Why didn't we inter him in the Chapel (though, God save me from burial
there), or any place, rather than on trestles under a stairway in a
midshipmen's dormitory?" "Because the appropriation was exhausted, or because the Act wasn't
worded to include burial, or because the Superintendent didn't want the
bother, or because it was a nuisance to have the remains around--or
some other absurd reason. At all events, he is there in the cellar, and
he is likely to stay there, till Bancroft Hall is swallowed up by the
Bay. The junket to France, the parade, the speeches, the spectacular
part are over, so, who cares for the entombment, and the respect due
the distinguished dead?" "I don't mean to be disrespectful," he observed, "but it's hard luck to
have one's bones disturbed, after more than a hundred years of
tranquillity, to be conveyed clear across the Atlantic, to be orated
over, and sermonized over, and, then, to be flung aside like old junk
and forgot. However, we have troubles of our own--I know I have--more
real than Paul Jones! He may be glad he's dead, so he won't have any to
worry over. In fact, it's a good thing to be dead--one is saved from a
heap of worry." "A daily struggle to procure fuel sufficient
to keep up the fire." Why not make an end of life, at once?" "Sometimes, I'm tempted," he admitted. "It's the leap in the dark, and
no returning, that restrains, I reckon--and the fact that we must face
it alone. You have
begged the question, or what amounts to it. But, to return to
Annapolis; what else did you see?" "Then you know what I saw," he replied. This isn't the day of the rapier and the mask." She half closed her eyes and looked at him through the long lashes. "What were you doing down on Greenberry Point?" I was in Annapolis--I saw your name on the
register--I inquired--and I had the tale of the camp. No one, however,
seemed to think it queer!" Camping out is entirely natural," Croyden answered. "With the Chairman of the Senate Committee on Naval Affairs?" "A party which until five days ago he had not joined--at least, so the
Superintendent told me, when I dined at his house. He happened to
mention your name, found I knew you--and we gossiped. Perhaps we
shouldn't, but we did." he didn't seem even to wonder at your being there----"

"But _you_ did?" "It's the small town in me, I suppose--to be curious about other people
and their business; and it was most suspicious." First, you hire a boat and cross the Bay direct from
Hampton to Annapolis. Second, you procure, through Senator Rickrose, a
permit from the Secretary of the Navy to camp on Greenberry Point. Third, you actually do camp, there, for nearly, or quite three weeks. Why go clear to the Western Shore, and choose a
comparatively inaccessible and exposed location on United States
property, if the idea were only a camp? Why not camp over on Kent
Island, or on this coast? Anywhere, within a few miles of Hampton,
there are scores of places better adapted than Greenberry Point." With a series of premises, you can reach whatever conclusion
you wish--you're not bound by the probabilities." "You're simply obscuring the point," she insisted. "In this instance,
my premises are facts which are not controverted. Why?----" She held up her hand. I'm simply
'chaffing of you,' don't you know!" "With just a lingering curiosity, however," he added. "A casual curiosity, rather," she amended. "Which, some time, I shall gratify. You've trailed me down--we _were_
on Greenberry Point for a purpose, but nothing has come of it, yet--and
it's likely a failure." Croyden, I don't wish to know. It was a mistake to refer
to it. I should simply have forgot what I heard in Annapolis--I'll
forget now, if you will permit." You can't forget, if you would--and I
would not have you, if you could. Moreover, I inherited it along with
Clarendon, and, as you were my guide to the place, it's no more than
right that you should know. I think I shall confide in you--no use to
protest, it's got to come!" "You are determined?--Very well, then, come over to the couch in the
corner, where we can sit close and you can whisper." She put out her hand and led him--and he
suffered himself to be led. when they were seated, "you may begin. Once upon a time----" and
laughed, softly. "I'll take this, if you've no immediate use for it,"
she said, and released her hand from his. "I shall want it back, presently, however." "Do you, by any chance, get all you want?" Else I would have kept what I already had." She put her hands behind her, and faced around. "Well,--once upon a time----" Then he stopped. "I'll go over to the
house and get the letter--it will tell you much better than I can. You
will wait here, _right here_, until I return?" She looked at him, with a tantalizing smile. "Won't it be enough, if I am here _when_ you return?" When he came out on the piazza the rain had ceased, the clouds were
gone, the temperature had fallen, and the stars were shining brightly
in a winter sky. He strode quickly down the walk to the street and crossed it diagonally
to his own gates. As he passed under the light, which hung near the
entrance, a man walked from the shadow of the Clarendon grounds and
accosted him. Croyden halted, abruptly, just out of distance. "With your permission, I will accompany you to your house--to which I
assume you are bound--for a few moments' private conversation." He was about thirty years of age, tall
and slender, was well dressed, in dark clothes, a light weight
top-coat, and a derby hat. His face was ordinary, however, and Croyden
had no recollection of ever having seen it--certainly not in Hampton. "I'm not in the habit of discussing business with strangers, at night,
nor of taking them to my house," he answered, brusquely. "If you have
anything to say to me, say it now, and be brief. "Some one may hear us," the man objected. "Pardon me, but I think, in this matter, you would have objection." "You'll say it quickly, and here, or not at all," snapped Croyden. "It's scarcely a subject to be discussed on the street," he observed,
"but, if I must, I must. Did you ever hear of Robert Parmenter? Well, the business concerns a certain letter--need I
be more explicit?" "If you wish to make your business intelligible." "As you wish," he said, "though it only consumes time, and I was under
the impression that you were in a hurry. However: To repeat--the
business concerns a letter, which has to do with a certain treasure
buried long ago, on Greenberry Point, by the said Robert Parmenter. Do
I make myself plain, now, sir?" "Your language is entirely intelligible--though I cannot answer for the
facts recited." The man smiled imperturbably, and went on:

"The letter in question having come into your possession recently, you,
with two companions, spent three weeks encamped on Greenberry Point,
ostensibly for your health, or the night air, or anything else that
would deceive the Naval authorities. During which time, you dug up the
entire Point, dragged the waters immediately adjoining--and then
departed, very strangely choosing for it a time of storm and change of
weather. Evidently, the thieves had managed to
communicate with a confederate, and this was a hold-up. "Therefore, it is entirely reasonable to suppose that your search was
not ineffectual. In plain words, you have recovered the treasure." Croyden only smiled, and waited, too. "Very good!--we will proceed," said the stranger. "The jewels were
found on Government land. It makes no difference whether recovered on
the Point or on the Bay--the law covering treasure trove, I am
informed, doesn't apply. The Government is entitled to the entire find,
it being the owner in fee of the land." "I have devoted my spare moments to the study of
the law----"

"And how to avoid it," Croyden interjected. "And also how to prevent _others_ from avoiding it," he replied,
suggestively. "Let us take up that phase, if it please you." asked Croyden, suppressing an inclination
to laugh. "Then let us take it up, any way--unless you wish to forfeit your find
to the Government." "We are arriving, now, at the pith of the
matter. We will take Parmenter's estimate and
multiply it by two, though jewels have appreciated more than that in
valuation. Fifty thousand pounds is two hundred and fifty thousand
dollars, which will total, according to the calculation, half a million
dollars,--one half of which amount you pay us as our share." Why don't you call it properly--blackmail?" "If you prefer blackmail to
share, it will not hinder the contract--seeing that it is quite as
illegal on your part as on ours. Share merely sounds a little better
but either obtains the same end. Call it what you
will--but _pay_." "If you are not familiar
with the law covering the subject under discussion, let me enlighten
you." "I was endeavoring to state the matter succinctly," the stranger
replied, refusing to be hurried or flustered. "The Common Law and the
practice of the Treasury Department provide, that all treasure found on
Government land or within navigable waters, is Government property. If
declared by the finder, immediately, he shall be paid such reward as
the Secretary may determine. If he does not declare, and is informed
on, the informer gets the reward. You will observe that, under the law,
you have forfeited the jewels--I fancy I do not need to draw further
deductions." "No!--it's quite unnecessary," Croyden remarked. "Your fellow thieves
went into that phase (good word, I like it!) rather fully, down on
Greenberry Point. Unluckily, they fell into the hands of the police,
almost immediately, and we have not been able to continue the
conversation." "I have the honor to continue the conversation--and, in the interim,
you have found the treasure. So, Parmenter's letter won't be
essential--the facts, circumstances, your own and Mr. Macloud's
testimony, will be sufficient to prove the Government's case. Then, as
you are aware, it's pay or go to prison for larceny." "There is one very material hypothesis, which you assume as a fact, but
which is, unfortunately, not a fact," said Croyden. The man laughed, good-humoredly. "We don't ask you to acknowledge the
finding--just pay over the quarter of a million and we will forget
everything." "My good man, I'm speaking the truth!" "Maybe it's
difficult for you to recognize, but it's the truth, none the less. I
only wish I _had_ the treasure--I think I'd be quite willing to share
it, even with a blackmailer!" "I trust it will give no offence if I say I don't believe you." And, without more ado, he turned his back and went up the path to
Clarendon. XII

I COULD TELL SOME THINGS


When Croyden had got Parmenter's letter from the secret drawer in the
escritoire, he rang the old-fashioned pull-bell for Moses. It was only
a little after nine, and, though he did not require the <DW64> to remain
in attendance until he retired, he fancied the kitchen fire still held
him. In a moment Moses appeared--his eyes heavy
with the sleep from which he had been aroused. "Moses, did you ever shoot a pistol?" "Fur de Lawd, seh! Hit's bin so long sence I dun hit, I t'ink I'se
gun-shy, seh." "Yass, seh, I has don hit." "And you could do it again, if necessary?" "I speck so, seh--leas'wise, I kin try--dough I'se mons'us unsuttin,
seh, mons'us unsuttin!" "Uncertain of what--your shooting or your hitting?" "Well, we're all of us somewhat uncertain in that line. At least you
know enough not to point the revolver toward yourself." "Hi!--I sut'n'y does! seh, I sut'n'y does!" said the <DW64>, with a
broad grin. "There is a revolver, yonder, on the table," said Croyden, indicating
one of those they used on Greenberry Point. "It's a self-cocker--you
simply pull the trigger and the action does the rest. "Yass, seh, I onderstands," said Moses. "Bring it here," Croyden ordered. Moses' fingers closed around the butt, a bit timorously, and he carried
it to his master. "I'll show you the action," said Croyden. "Here, is the ejector,"
throwing the chamber out, "it holds six shots, you see: but you never
put a cartridge under the firing-pin, because, if anything strikes the
trigger, it's likely to be discharged." Croyden loaded it, closed the cylinder, and passed it over to Moses,
who took it with a little more assurance. He was harkening back thirty
years, and more. "What do yo warn me to do, seh?" "I want you to sit down, here, while I'm away, and if any one tries to
get in this house, to-night, you're to shoot him. I'm going over to
Captain Carrington's--I'll be back by eleven o'clock. It isn't likely
you will be disturbed; if you are, one shot will frighten him off, even
if you don't hit him, and I'll hear the shot, and come back at once. "Yass, seh!--I'm to shoot anyone what tries to get in." "You're to shoot anyone who tries to
_break_ in. don't shoot me, when I return, or any
one else who comes legitimately. Be sure he is an intruder, then bang
away." "Sut'n'y, seh! I'se dub'us bout hittin', but I kin bang
away right nuf. Does yo' spose any one will try to git in, seh?" Croyden smiled--"but you be ready for them, Moses, be
ready for them. It's just as well to provide against contingencies." as Croyden went out and the front door closed behind him,
"but dem 'tingencies is monty dang'ous t'ings to fools wid. I don'
likes hit, dat's whar I don'." Croyden found Miss Carrington just where he had left her--a quick
return to the sofa having been synchronous with his appearance in the
hall. "I had a mind not to wait here," she said; "you were an inordinately
long time, Mr. "I was, and I admit
it--but it can be explained." "Before you listen to me, listen to Robert Parmenter, deceased!" said
he, and gave her the letter. "Oh, this is the letter--do you mean that I am to read it?" She read it through without a single word of comment--an amazing thing
in a woman, who, when her curiosity is aroused, can ask more questions
to the minute than can be answered in a month. When she had finished,
she turned back and read portions of it again, especially the direction
as to finding the treasure, and the postscript bequests by the Duvals. At last, she dropped the letter in her lap and looked up at Croyden. "Most extraordinary in its
ordinariness, and most ordinary in its extraordinariness. And you
searched, carefully, for three weeks and found--nothing?" "Now, I'll tell you about it." "First, tell me where you obtained this letter?" "I found it by accident--in a secret compartment of an escritoire at
Clarendon," he answered. "This is the tale of Parmenter's treasure--and how we did _not_ find
it!" Then he proceeded to narrate, briefly, the details--from the finding of
the letter to the present moment, dwelling particularly on the episode
of the theft of their wallets, the first and second coming of the
thieves to the Point, their capture and subsequent release, together
with the occurrence of this evening, when he was approached, by the
well-dressed stranger, at Clarendon's gates. And, once again, marvelous to relate, Miss Carrington did not
interrupt, through the entire course of the narrative. Nor did she
break the silence for a time after he had concluded, staring
thoughtfully, the while, down into the grate, where a smouldering back
log glowed fitfully. "What do you intend to do, as to the treasure?" In the
words of the game, popular hereabout, he is playing a bobtail!" "But he doesn't know it's a bobtail. He is convinced you found the
treasure," she objected. "Let him make whatever trouble he can, it won't bother me, in the
least." "He is not acting alone," she persisted. "He has confederates--they may
attack Clarendon, in an effort to capture the treasure." this is the twentieth century, not the seventeenth!" "We don't'stand-by to repel boarders,' these days." "Pirate's gold breeds pirate's ways!" "Rather queer!--I've heard those same words before, in this
connection." "Possibly--though I don't recall it. Suppose you are attacked and
tortured till you reveal where you've hidden the jewels?" "However, I
put Moses on guard--with a big revolver and orders to fire at anyone
molesting the house. If we hear a fusillade we'll know it's he shooting
up the neighborhood." "Then the same idea _did_ suggest itself to you!" "Only to the extent of searching for the jewels--I regarded that as
vaguely possible, but there isn't the slightest danger of any one being
tortured." "You know best, I suppose," she said--"but you've had your warning--and
pirate's gold breeds pirate's ways. You've given up all hope of finding
the treasure--abandoned jewels worth--how many dollars?" "Possibly half a million," he filled in. "If you can suggest what to do--anything which hasn't been done, I
shall be only too glad to consider it." "You say you dug up the entire Point for a hundred yards inland?" "And dredged the Bay for a hundred yards?" She puckered her brows in thought. He regarded her with an amused
smile. "I don't see what you're to do, except to do it all over again," she
announced--"Now, don't laugh! It may sound foolish, but many a thing
has been found on a second seeking--and this, surely, is worth a
second, or a third, or even many seekings." "If there were any assurance of ultimate success, it would pay to spend
a lifetime hunting. The two essentials, however, are wanting: the
extreme tip of Greenberry Point in 1720, and the beech-trees. We made
the best guess at their location. More than that, the zone of
exploration embraced every possible extreme of territory--yet, we
failed. It will make nothing for success to try again." "Somewhere, in the Bay!--It's shoal water, for three or four hundred
feet around the Point, with a rock bottom. The Point itself has been
eaten into by the Bay, down to this rock. Parmenter's chest disappeared
with the land in which it was buried, and no man will find it now,
except by accident." "Without anyone having the fun of wasting it!" She took up Parmenter's letter again, and glanced over it. Then she
handed it back, and shook her head. "It's too much for my poor brain," she said. We gave it rather more than a fair trial,
and, then, we gave it up. When I go home, to-night, I shall
return the letter to the escritoire where I found it, and forget it. "You can return it to its hiding place," she reflected, "but you can't
cease wondering. Why didn't Marmaduke Duval get the treasure while the
landmarks were there? "Probably on account of old Parmenter's restriction that it be left
until the 'extremity of need.'" "Probably," she said, "the Duvals would regard it as a matter of honor
to observe the exact terms of the bequest. "It's only because they did so, that I got a chance to search!" "You mean that, otherwise, there would be no buried treasure!" And with all that money, the Duvals
might have gone away from Hampton--might have experienced other
conditions. Colonel Duval might never have met your father--you might
have never come to Clarendon.--My goodness! "In the realm of pure conjecture," he answered. "It is idle to theorize
on the might-have-beens, or what might-have-happened if the
what-did-happen hadn't happened. Dismiss it, at least, for this
evening. You asked what I was doing for three weeks at Annapolis, and I
have consumed a great while in answering--let us talk of something
else. What have you been doing in those three weeks?" A little Bridge, a few riding parties, some sails on the Bay,
with an occasional homily by Miss Erskine, when she had me cornered,
and I couldn't get away. Then is when I learned what a deep impression
you had made!" "We both were learning, it seems," he replied. "I don't quite understand," she said. "You made an impression, also--of course, that's to be expected, but
this impression is much more than the ordinary kind!" _"Merci, Monsieur_," she scoffed. "No, it isn't _merci_, it's a fact. And he is a mighty good fellow on
whom to make an impression." "You mean, Mr.--Macloud?" "For he's coming back----"

"To Hampton?" "To be accurate, I expect him not later than the day-after-to-morrow." "I shall believe you, when I see him!" "He is, I think, coming solely on your account." "But you're not quite sure?--oh! "Naturally, he hasn't confided in me." "So you're confiding in me--how clever!" "I could tell some things----"

"Which are fables." "----but I won't--they might turn your head----"

"Which way--to the right or left?" "----and make you too confident and too cruel. He saw you but
twice----"

"Once!" "Once, on the street; again, when we called in the evening--but he gave
you a name, the instant he saw you----"

"How kind of him!" "He called you: 'The Symphony in Blue.'" "Was that the first time you had noticed it?" "No, you most assuredly do not!" she said, "I know you're intrepid--but you _won't_!" "Because, it would be false to your friend. "Yes!--as between you two, you have renounced, in his favor." "At least, I so view it," with a teasingly fascinating smile. "Don't you think that you protest over-much?" "If we were two children, I'd say: 'You think you're smart, don't
you?'" "And I'd retort: 'You got left, didn't you?'" "Seriously, however--do you really expect Mr. "I surely do--probably within two days; and I'm not chaffing when I say
that you're the inducement. So, be good to him--he's got more than
enough for two, I can assure you." "And what number am I--the twenty-first, or thereabout?" "What matters it, if you're _the_ one, at present?" "I'd sooner be the present one than all the has-beens," he insisted. "If it will advantage any----"

"I didn't say so," she interrupted.

" ----I can tell you----"

"Many fables, I don't doubt!" ----that we have been rather intimate, for a few years, and I have
never before known him to exhibit particular interest in any woman." "'Why don't you speak for yourself, John,'" she quoted, merrily. "Because, to be frank, I haven't enough for two," he answered, gayly. But beneath the gayety, she thought she detected the faintest note of
regret. And, woman-like, when he had gone, she wondered about her--whether she
was dark or fair, tall or small, vivacious or reserved, flirtatious or
sedate, rich or poor--and whether they loved each other--or whether it
was he, alone, who loved--or whether he had not permitted himself to be
carried so far--or whether--then, she dropped asleep. Croyden went back to Clarendon, keeping a sharp look-out for anyone
under the trees around the house. He found Moses in the library,
evidently just aroused from slumber by the master's door key. "No one's bin heah, seh, 'cep de boy wid dis'spatch," he hastened to
say. Croyden tore open the envelope:--It was a wire from Macloud, that he
would be down to-morrow. yass, seh!--I'se pow'ful glad yo's back, seh. Nothin' I kin
git yo befo I goes?" "You're a good soldier, Moses, you didn't
sleep on guard." I keps wide awake, Marster Croyden, wide awake all de time,
seh. Croyden finished his cigar, put out the light, and went slowly
upstairs--giving not a thought to the Parmenter treasure nor the man he
had met outside. His mind was busy with Elaine Cavendish--their last
night on the moonlit piazza--the brief farewell--the lingering pressure
of her fingers--the light in her eyes--the subdued pleasure, when they
met unexpectedly in Annapolis--her little ways to detain him, keep him
close to her--her instant defense of him at Mattison's scurrilous
insinuation--the officers' hop--the rhythmic throb of the melody--the
scented, fluttering body held close in his arms--the lowered head--the
veiled eyes--the trembling lashes--his senses steeped in the fragrance
of her beauty--the temptation well-nigh irresistible--his resolution
almost gone--trembling--trembling----

                  *       *       *       *       *

The vision passed--music ceased--the dance was ended. Sentiment
vanished--reason reigned once more. to think of her, to dream of the past, even. But
it is pleasant, sometimes, to be a fool--where a beautiful woman is
concerned, and only one's self to pay the piper. XIV

THE SYMPHONY IN BLUE


Macloud arrived the next day, bringing for his host a great batch of
mail, which had accumulated at the Club. "I thought of it at the last moment--when I was starting for the
station, in fact," he remarked. "The clerk said he had no instructions
for forwarding, so I just poked it in my bag and brought it along. Stupid of me not to think of it sooner. I
can understand why you didn't leave an address, but not why I shouldn't
forward it." "I didn't care, when I left--and I don't care much, now--but I'm
obliged, just the same!" "It's something to do; the most
exciting incident of the day, down here, is the arrival of the mail. The people wait for it, with bated breath. I am getting in the way,
too, though I don't get much.... I never did have any extensive
correspondence, even in Northumberland--so this is just circulars and
such trash." He took the package, which Macloud handed him, and tossed it on the
desk. Everybody is
back--everybody is hard up or says he is--everybody is full of lies,
as usual, and is turning them loose on anyone who will listen,
credulous or sophisticated, it makes no difference. It's the telling,
not the believing that's the thing. the little cad Mattison is
engaged--Charlotte Brundage has landed him, and the wedding is set for
early next month." "I don't envy her the job," Croyden remarked. "She'll be privileged to draw
on his bank account, and that's the all important thing with her. He
will fracture the seventh commandment, and she won't turn a hair. She
is a chilly proposition, all right." "Well, I wish her joy of her bargain," said Croyden. "May she have
everything she wants, and see Mattison not at all, after the wedding
journey--and but very occasionally, then." He took up the letters and ran carelessly through them. he commented, as he consigned them, one by one,
to the waste-basket. Macloud watched him, languidly, behind his cigar smoke, and made no
comment. Presently Croyden came to a large, white envelope--darkened on the
interior so as to prevent the contents from being read until opened. It
bore the name of a firm of prominent brokers in Northumberland. "'We own and offer, subject to
prior sale, the following high grade investment bonds.' He drew out the letter and looked at it,
perfunctorily, before sending it to rest with its fellows.--It wasn't
in the usual form.--He opened it, wider.--It was signed by the senior
partner. Croyden:

  "We have a customer who is interested in the Virginia Development
  Company. He has purchased the Bonds and the stock of Royster &
  Axtell, from the bank which held them as collateral. He is
  willing to pay you par for your Bonds, without any accrued
  interest, however. If you will consent to sell, the Company can
  proceed without reorganization but, if you decline, he will
  foreclose under the terms of the mortgage. We have suggested the
  propriety and the economy to him--since he owns or controls all
  the stock--of not purchasing your bonds, and, frankly, have told
  him it is worse than bad business to do so. But he refuses to be
  advised, insisting that he must be the sole owner, and that he is
  willing to submit to the additional expense rather than go
  through the tedious proceeding for foreclosure and sale. We are
  prepared to honor a sight-draft with the Bonds attached, or to
  pay cash on presentation and transfer. We shall be obliged for a
  prompt reply. "Yours very truly,

                                              "R. J. "What the devil!----"

He read it a second time. No, he wasn't asleep--it was all there,
typewritten and duly signed. Two hundred thousand dollars!--honor sight
draft, or pay cash on presentation and transfer! Then he passed it across to Macloud. "Read this aloud, will you,--I want to see if I'm quite sane!" Macloud was at his favorite occupation--blowing smoke rings through one
another, and watching them spiral upward toward the ceiling. he said, as Croyden's words roused him from his
meditation. He and Blaxham had spent considerable time on that letter, trying to
explain the reason for the purchase, and the foolishly high price they
were offering, in such a way as to mislead Croyden. "It is typewritten, you haven't a chance to get wrong!" he exclaimed.... "So, I wasn't crazy: and either
Blaxham is lying or his customer needs a guardian--which is it?" "I don't see that it need concern you, in the least, which it is," said
Macloud. "Be grateful for the offer--and accept by wireless or any
other way that's quicker." "But the bonds aren't worth five cents on the dollar!" "So much the more reason to hustle the deal through. You may have slipped up on the Parmenter treasure, but you
have struck it here." "There's something queer about that
letter." Macloud smoked his cigar, and smiled. "Blaxham's customer
may have the willies--indeed, he as much as intimates that such is the
case--but, thank God! we're not obliged to have a commission-in-lunacy
appointed on everybody who makes a silly stock or bond purchase. If we
were, we either would have no markets, or the courts would have time
for nothing else. take what the gods have given you
and be glad. You can return to
Northumberland, resume the old life, and be happy ever after;--or you
can live here, and there, and everywhere. You're unattached--not even a
light-o'-love to squander your money, and pester you for gowns and
hats, and get in a hell of a temper--and be false to you, besides." "No, I haven't one of them, thank God!" "I've got
troubles enough of my own. "It clears some of them away--if I take it." man, you're not thinking, seriously, of refusing?" "It will put me on 'easy street,'" Croyden observed. "And it comes with remarkable timeliness--so timely, indeed, as to be
suspicious." "It's a bona fide offer--there's no trouble on that score." "This," said Croyden: "I'm broke--finally. The Parmenter treasure is
moonshine, so far as I'm concerned. I'm down on my uppers, so to
speak--my only assets are some worthless bonds. along comes an
offer for them at par--two hundred thousand dollars for nothing! I
fancy, old man, there is a friend back of this offer--the only friend I
have in the world--and I did not think that even he was kind and
self-sacrificing enough to do it.--I'm grateful, Colin, grateful from
the heart, believe me, but I can't take your money." exclaimed Macloud--"you do me too much credit, Croyden. I'm
ashamed to admit it, but I never thought of the bonds, or of helping
you out, in your trouble. It's a way we have in Northumberland. We may
feel for misfortune, but it rarely gets as far as our pockets. Don't
imagine for a moment that I'm the purchaser. I'm not, though I wish,
now, that I was." "Will you give me your word on that?" "I most assuredly will," Macloud answered. He looked at the
letter again.... "And, yet, it is very suspicious, very suspicious....
I wonder, could I ascertain the name of the purchaser of the stocks and
bonds, from the Trust Company who held them as collateral?" "They won't know," said Macloud. "Blaxham & Company bought them at the
public sale." "I could try the transfer agent, or the registrar." "They never tell anything, as you are aware," Macloud replied. "I could refuse to sell unless Blaxham & Company disclosed their
customer." "Yes, you could--and, likely, lose the sale; they won't disclose. However, that's your business," Macloud observed; "though, it's a pity
to tilt at windmills, for a foolish notion." Croyden creased and uncreased the letter--thinking. Macloud resumed the smoke rings--and waited. It had proved easier than
he had anticipated. Croyden had not once thought of Elaine
Cavendish--and his simple word had been sufficient to clear
himself....

At length, Croyden put the letter back in its envelope and looked up. "I'll sell the bonds," he said--"forward them at once with draft
attached, if you will witness my signature to the transfer. But it's a
queer proceeding, a queer proceeding: paying good money for bad!" "That's his business--not yours," said Macloud, easily. Croyden went to the escritoire and took the bonds from one of the
drawers. "You can judge, from the place I keep them, how much I thought them
worth!" When they were duly transferred and witnessed, Croyden attached a draft
drawn on an ordinary sheet of paper, dated Northumberland, and payable
to his account at the Tuscarora Trust Company. He placed them in an
envelope, sealed it and, enclosing it in a second envelope, passed it
over to Macloud. "I don't care to inform them as to my whereabouts," he remarked, "so,
if you don't mind, I'll trouble you to address this to some one in New
York or Philadelphia, with a request that he mail the enclosed envelope
for you." Macloud, when he had done as requested, laid aside the pen and looked
inquiringly at Croyden. "Which, being interpreted," he said, "might mean that you don't intend
to return to Northumberland." "The interpretation does not go quite so far; it means, simply, that I
have not decided." "It's a question of resolution, not of inclination," Croyden answered. "I don't know whether I've sufficient resolution to go, and sufficient
resolution to stay, if I do go. It may be easier not to go, at all--to
live here, and wander, elsewhere, when the spirit moves." "I've been thinking over the proposition you
recently advanced of the folly of a relatively poor man marrying a rich
girl," he said, "and you're all wrong. It's a question of the
respective pair, not a theory that can be generalized over. I admit,
the man should not be a pauper, but, if he have enough money to support
_himself_, and the girl love him and he loves the girl, the fact that
she has gobs more money, won't send them on the rocks. It's up to the
pair, I repeat." "Meaning, that it would be up to Elaine Cavendish and me?" "I wish I could be so sure," Croyden reflected. "Sure of the girl, as
well as sure of myself." "What are you doubtful about--yourself?" Croyden laughed, a trifle self-consciously. "I fancy I could manage myself," he said. "Try her!--she's worth the try." "Get the miserable money out of your mind a moment, will you?--you're
hipped on it!" "All right, old man, anything for peace! Tell me, did you see her, when
you were home?" "I did--I dined with her." "You--she talked Croyden at least seven-eighths of the time; I, the
other eighth." Anything left of the
victim, afterward?" "I refuse to become facetious," Macloud responded. Then he threw his
cigar into the grate and arose. "It matters not what was said, nor who
said it! If you will permit me the advice, you will take your chance
while you have it." "You have--more than a chance, if you act, now----" He walked across to
the window. He would let that sink in.--"How's the Symphony in Blue?" "As charming as ever--and prepared for your coming." "As charming as ever, and prepared for your coming." "I left that finality for you--being the person most interested." "When did you arrange for me to go over?" "She confided in you, I suppose?" "Not directly; she let me infer it." "In other words, you worked your imagination--overtime!" "It's a pity you couldn't work it a bit over the Parmenter
jewels. "I'm done with the Parmenter jewels!" "But they're not done with you, my friend. So long as you live, they'll
be present with you. You'll be hunting for them in your dreams." "Meet me to-night in dream-land!" "Well, they're not
likely to disturb my slumbers--unless--there was a rather queer thing
happened, last night, Colin." "Yes!--I got in to Hampton, in the evening; about nine o'clock, I was
returning to Clarendon when, at the gates, I was accosted by a tall,
well-dressed stranger. Here is the substance of our talk.... What do
you make of it?" "It seems to me the fellow made it very plain," Macloud returned,
"except on one possible point. He evidently believes we found the
treasure." "Then, he knows that you came direct from Annapolis to Hampton--I mean,
you didn't visit a bank nor other place where you could have deposited
the jewels. Ergo, the jewels are still in your possession, according to
his theory, and he is going to make a try for them while they are
within reach. He hoped, by that
means, to induce you to keep the jewels on the premises--not to make
evidence against yourself, which could be traced by the United States,
by depositing them in any bank." "Why shouldn't I have taken them to a dealer in precious stones?" "Because that would make the best sort of evidence against you. You
must remember, he thinks you have the jewels, and that you will try to
conceal it, pending a Government investigation." "You make him a very canny gentleman." "No--I make him only a clever rogue, which, by your own account, he
is." "And the more clever he is, the more he will have his wits' work for
naught. There's some compensation in everything--even in failure!" "It would be a bit annoying," observed Macloud, "to be visited by
burglars, who are obsessed with the idea that you have a fortune
concealed on the premises, and are bent on obtaining it." "Annoying?--not a bit!" "I should rather enjoy the
sport of putting them to flight." "Or of being bound, and gagged, and ill-treated." you've transferred your robber-barons from Northumberland to the
Eastern Shore." "The robber-barons were still on the
job in Northumberland. These are banditti, disguised as burglars, about
to hold you up for ransom." "I wish I had your fine imagination," scoffed Croyden. "I could make a
fortune writing fiction." "Oh, you're not so bad yourself!" "It's bully good to think you're coming back to us!" "Here, Moses," said Croyden, "take this letter down to the post
office--I want it to catch the first mail." "I fancy you haven't heard of the stranger since last evening?" "And of course you haven't told any one?" "I suppose you even told
her the entire story--from the finding of the letter down to date." "I did!--and showed her the letter besides. "No reason in the world, my dear fellow--except that in twenty-four
hours the dear public will know it, and we shall be town curiosities." "We don't have to remain," said Croyden, with affected seriousness--"there
are trains out, you know, as well as in." "I don't want to go away--I came here to visit you." "But we can't take the Symphony in Blue!" You don't think I came down here to see only
you, after having just spent nearly four weeks with you, in that fool
quest on Greenberry Point?" He turned, suddenly, and faced Croyden. "Think she will retail it to the
dear public?" "Because, if you do, you might mention it to her--there, she goes,
now!" said Macloud, whirling around toward the window. On the opposite side of
the street, Miss Carrington--in a tailored gown of blue broadcloth,
close fitting and short in the skirt, with a velvet toque to match--was
swinging briskly back from town. Macloud watched her a moment in silence. "The old man is done for, at last!" "Look at the poise of the
head, and ease of carriage, and the way she puts down her feet!--that's
the way to tell a woman. "You better go over," said his friend. "It's about the tea hour, she'll
brew you a cup." "And I'll drink it--as much as she will give me. I despise the stuff,
but I'll drink it!" "She'll put rum in it, if you prefer!" laughed Croyden; "or make you a
high ball, or you can have it straight--just as you want." "I'll be over, presently," Croyden replied. "_I_ don't want any tea,
you know." "Come along, as soon as you
wish--but don't come _too soon_." XV

AN OLD RUSE


Macloud found Miss Carrington plucking a few belated roses, which,
somehow, had escaped the frost. She looked up at his approach, and smiled--the bewilderingly bewitching
smile which lighted her whole countenance and seemed to say so much. "And, if I may, to you," he replied. After them, you belong to _me_," she laughed. "I don't know--it was the order of speech, and the order of
acquaintance," with a naive look. "But not the order of--regard." "You did it very well for a--novice." "You decline to accept it?--Very well, sir, very well!" "I can't accept, and be honest," he replied. Perchance,
you will accept a reward: a cup of tea--or a high ball!" "Perchance, I will--the high ball!" She looked at him, with a sly smile. "You know that I have just returned," she said. "I saw you in the
window at Clarendon." "And you came over at once--prepared to be surprised that I was here." "And found you waiting for me--just as I expected." Peccavi!_" he said humbly. "_Te absolvo!_" she replied, solemnly. "Now, let us make a fresh
start--by going for a walk. You can postpone the high ball until we
return." "I can postpone the high ball for ever," he averred. "Meaning, you could walk forever, or you're not thirsty?" "Meaning, I could walk forever _with you_--on, and on, and on----"

"Until you walked into the Bay--I understand. I'll take the will for
the deed--the water's rather chilly at this season of the year." Macloud held up his hand, in mock despair. "Let us make a third start--drop the attempt to be clever and talk
sense. I think I can do it, if I try." As they came out on the side walk, Croyden was going down the street. "I've not forgot your admonition, so don't be uneasy," he observed to
Macloud. "I'm going to town now, I'll be back in about half an hour--is
that too soon?" Miss Carrington looked at Macloud, quizzically, but made no comment. "The regulation walk--to the Cemetery and back." "It's the favorite walk, here," she explained--"the most picturesque
and the smoothest." "To say nothing of accustoming the people to their future home,"
Macloud remarked. "You're not used to the ways of small towns--the Cemetery is a resort,
a place to spend a while, a place to visit." "Does it make death any easier to hob-nob with it?" "I shouldn't think so," she replied. "However, I can see how it would
induce morbidity, though there are those who are happiest only when
they're miserable." "Such people ought to live in a morgue," agreed Macloud. "However
we're safe enough--we can go to the Cemetery with impunity." "There are some rather queer old headstones, out there," she said. "Remorse and the inevitable pay-up for earthly transgression seem to be
the leading subjects. There is one in the Duval lot--the Duvals from
whom Mr. Croyden got Clarendon, you know--and I never have been able to
understand just what it means. It is erected to the memory of one
Robert Parmenter, and has cut in the slab the legend: 'He feared nor
man, nor god, nor devil,' and below it, a man on his knees making
supplication to one standing over him. If he feared nor man, nor god,
nor devil, why should he be imploring mercy from any one?" "Do you know who Parmenter was?" "No--but I presume a connection of the family, from having been buried
with them." "You read his letter only last evening--his letter to Marmaduke
Duval." "His letter to Marmaduke Duval!" "I didn't read any----"

"Robert Parmenter is the pirate who buried the treasure on Greenberry
Point," he interrupted. Then, suddenly, a light broke in on her. "I see!--I didn't look at the name signed to the letter. And the
cutting on the tombstone----?" "Is a victim begging mercy from him," said Macloud. "I like that
Marmaduke Duval--there's something fine in a man, in those times,
bringing the old buccaneer over from Annapolis and burying him beside
the place where he, himself, some day would rest.--That is
friendship!" "It was a sad day in Hampton
when the Colonel died." "He left a good deputy," Macloud replied. "Croyden is well-born and
well-bred (the former does not always comprehend the latter, these
days), and of Southern blood on his mother's side." "We are a bit clannish,
still." "Delighted to hear you confess it! "Mine doesn't go so far South, however, as Croyden's--only,
to Virginia." I knew there was some reason for my liking you!" "Than your Southern ancestors?--isn't that enough?" "Not if there be a means to increase it." "Southern blood is never satisfied with _some_ things--it always wants
more!" "Is the disposition to want more, in Southerners, confined to the male
sex?" "In _some things_--yes, unquestionably yes!" Croyden told you of his experience, last
evening?" "What possible danger could there be--the treasure isn't at
Clarendon." "But they think it is--and desperate men sometimes take desperate
means, when they feel sure that money is hidden on the premises." "In a town the size of Hampton, every stranger is known." "How will that advantage, in the prevention of the crime?" "They don't need stay in the town--they can come in an automobile." "They could also drive, or walk, or come by boat," he added. "They are not so likely to try it if there are two in the house. Do you
intend to remain at Clarendon some time?" "It depends--on how you treat me." "I engage to be nice for--two weeks!" "Done!--I'm booked for two weeks, at least." "And when the two weeks have expired we shall consider whether to
extend the period." She flung him a look that was delightfully alluring. "Do you wish me to--consider that?" "If you will," he said, bending down. "This pace is getting rather
brisk--did you notice it, Mr. "You're in a fast class, Miss Carrington." "Now don't misunderstand me----"

"You were speaking in the language of the race track, I presume." "A Southern girl usually loves--horses," with a tantalizing smile. "It is well for you this is a public street," he said. "But then if it hadn't been, you would not have ventured to tempt me,"
he added. "I'm grateful for the temptation, at any rate." "No, not likely--but his first that he has resisted." The fact that we are on a public street would
not restrain you. There was absolutely no one within sight--and you
knew it." "This is rather faster than the former going!" "Any way, here is
the Cemetery, and we dare not go faster than a walk in it. Yonder, just
within the gates, is the Duval burial place. Come, I'll show you
Parmenter's grave?" They crossed to it--marked by a blue slate slab, which covered it
entirely. The inscription, cut in script, was faint in places and
blurred by moss, in others. Macloud stooped and, with his knife, scratched out the latter. "He died two days after the letter was written: May 12, 1738," said he. Duval did not know it, I reckon." "See, here is the picture--it stands out very plainly," said Miss
Carrington, indicating with the point of her shoe. "I'm not given to moralizing, particularly over a grave," observed
Macloud, "but it's queer to think that the old pirate, who had so much
blood and death on his hands, who buried the treasure, and who wrote
the letter, lies at our feet; and we--or rather Croyden is the heir of
that treasure, and that we searched and dug all over Greenberry Point,
committed violence, were threatened with violence, did things
surreptitiously, are threatened, anew, with blackmail and
violence----"

"Pirate's gold breeds pirate's ways," she quoted. "It does seem one cannot get away from its pollution. It was gathered
in crime and crime clings to it, still. However, I fancy Croyden would
willingly chance the danger, if he could unearth the casket." "And is there no hope of finding it?" "Absolutely none--there's half a million over on Greenberry Point, or
in the water close by, and none will ever see it--except by accident." "My own idea--and Croyden's (as he has,
doubtless, explained to you) is that the place, where Parmenter buried
the jewels, is now under water, possibly close to the shore. We dragged
every inch of the bottom, which has been washed away to a depth more
than sufficient to uncover the iron box, but found nothing. A great
storm, such as they say sometimes breaks over the Chesapeake, may wash
it on the beach--that, I think, is the only way it will ever be
found.... It makes everything seem very real to have stood by
Parmenter's grave!" he said, thoughtful, as they turned back toward
town. On nearing the Carrington house, they saw Croyden approaching. "I've been communing with Parmenter," said Macloud. "I didn't know there was a spiritualistic medium in Hampton! "Well, did he help you to locate his jewel box?" "He wasn't especially communicative--he was in his grave." "That isn't surprising--he's been dead something over one hundred and
seventy years. "He's buried with the Duvals in the Cemetery, here." one more circumstance to prove the
letter speaks the truth. We find his
will, probated with Marmaduke Duval as executor, we even discover a
notice of his death in the _Gazette_, and now, finally, you find his
body--or the place of its interment! what is really
worth while, we can't find." "Come into the house--I'll give you something to soothe your feelings
temporarily," said Miss Carrington. They encountered Miss Erskine just coming from the library on her way
to the door. "My dear Davila, so glad to see you!" Croyden,
we thought you had deserted us, and just when we're trying to make you
feel at home. "I'm delighted to be back," said Croyden. "The Carringtons seemed
genuinely glad to see me--and, now, if I may include you, I'm quite
content to return," and he shook her hand, as though he meant it. "Of course you may believe it," with an inane giggle. "I'm going to
bring my art class over to Clarendon to revel in your treasures, some
day, soon. You'll be at home to them, won't you, dear Mr. I shall take pleasure in being at home," Croyden replied,
soberly. Then Macloud, who was talking with the Captain, was called over and
presented, that being, Miss Carrington thought, the quickest method of
getting rid of her. The evident intention to remain until he was
presented, being made entirely obvious by Miss Erskine, who, after she
had bubbled a bit more, departed. "What is her name, I didn't catch it?--and" (observing smiles on
Croyden and Miss Carrington's faces) "what is she?" "I think father can explain, in more appropriate language!" "She's the most intolerable nuisance and greatest fool in Hampton!" "A red flag to a bull isn't in it with Miss Erskine and father," Miss
Carrington observed. "But I hide it pretty well--while she's here," he protested. "If she's not here too long--and you can get away, in time." When the two men left the Carrington place, darkness had fallen. As
they approached Clarendon, the welcoming brightness of a well-lighted
house sprang out to greet them. It was Croyden's one extravagance--to
have plenty of illumination. He had always been accustomed to it, and
the gloom, at night, of the village residence, bright only in library
or living room--with, maybe, a timid taper in the hall--set his nerves
on edge. And Moses, with considerable wonder
at, to his mind, the waste of gas, and much grumbling to himself and
Josephine, obeyed. They had finished dinner and were smoking their cigars in the library,
when Croyden, suddenly bethinking himself of a matter which he had
forgotten, arose and pulled the bell. said old Mose a moment later from the doorway. "Moses, who is the best carpenter in town?" "Mistah Snyder, seh--he wuz heah dis arfternoon, yo knows, seh!" "I didn't know it," said Croyden. "Why yo sont 'im, seh." "Dat's mons'us 'culiar, seh--he said yo sont 'im. He com'd 'torrectly
arfter yo lef! Him an' a'nudder man, seh--I didn't know the nudder man,
hows'ever." "Dey sed yo warn dem to look over all de place, seh, an' see what
repairs wuz necessary, and fix dem. Dey wuz heah a'most two hours, I
s'pose." "Do you mean they were
in this house for two hours?" I didn't stays wid em, seh--I knows
Mistah Snyder well; he's bin heah off'n to wuk befo' yo cum, seh. But I
seed dem gwine th'oo de drawers, an' poundin on the floohs, seh. Dey
went down to de cellar, too, seh, an wuz dyar quite a while." seh, don't you t'inks I knows 'im? I knows 'im from de time
he wuz so high." "Go down and tell Snyder I want to see him, either
to-night or in the morning." The <DW64> bowed, and departed. Croyden got up and went to the escritoire: the drawers were in
confusion. He glanced at the book-cases: the books were disarranged. He
turned and looked, questioningly, at Macloud--and a smile slowly
overspread his face. "Well, the tall gentleman has visited us!" "I wondered how long you would be coming to it!" "It's the old ruse, in a slightly modified form. Instead of a
telephone or gas inspector, it was a workman whom the servant knew; a
little more trouble in disguising himself, but vastly more satisfactory
in results." "They are clever rogues," said Croyden--"and the disguise must have
been pretty accurate to deceive Moses." "Disguise is their business," Macloud replied, laconically. "If they're
not proficient in it, they go to prison--sure." "And if they _are_ proficient, they go--sometimes." "We'll make a tour of inspection--they couldn't find what they wanted,
so we'll see what they took." Every drawer was turned upside down, every
closet awry, every place, where the jewels could be concealed, bore
evidence of having been inspected--nothing, apparently, had been
missed. They had gone through the house completely, even into the
garret, where every board that was loose had evidently been taken up
and replaced--some of them carelessly. Not a thing was gone, so far as Croyden could judge--possibly, because
there was no money in the house; probably, because they were looking
for jewels, and scorned anything of moderate value. "Really, this thing grows interesting--if it were not so ridiculous,"
said Croyden. "I'm willing to go to almost any trouble to convince them
I haven't the treasure--just to be rid of them. "Abduction, maybe," Macloud suggested. "Some night a black cloth will
be thrown over your head, you'll be tossed into a cab--I mean, an
automobile--and borne off for ransom like Charlie Ross of fading
memory." "Moral--don't venture out after sunset!" "And don't venture out at any time without a revolver handy and a good
pair of legs," added Macloud. "I can work the legs better than I can the revolver." "Or, to make sure, you might have a guard of honor and a gatling gun." "You're appointed to the position--provide yourself with the gun!" said Macloud, "it would be well to take some
precaution. They seem obsessed with the idea that you have the jewels,
here--and they evidently intend to get a share, if it's possible." Macloud shrugged his shoulders, helplessly. XVI

THE MARABOU MUFF


The next two weeks passed uneventfully. The thieves did not manifest
themselves, and the Government authorities did nothing to suggest that
they had been informed of the Parmenter treasure. Macloud had developed an increasing fondness for Miss Carrington's
society, which she, on her part, seemed to accept with placid
equanimity. They rode, they drove, they walked, they sailed when the
weather warranted--and the weather had recovered from its fit of the
blues, and was lazy and warm and languid. In short, they did everything
which is commonly supposed to denote a growing fondness for each
other. Croyden had been paid promptly for the Virginia Development Company
bonds, and was once more on "comfortable street," as he expressed it. But he spoke no word of returning to Northumberland. On the contrary,
he settled down to enjoy the life of the village, social and otherwise. He was nice to all the girls, but showed a marked preference for Miss
Carrington; which, however, did not trouble his friend, in the least. Macloud was quite willing to run the risk with Croyden. He was
confident that the call of the old life, the memory of the girl that
was, and that was still, would be enough to hold Geoffrey from more
than firm friendship. He was not quite sure of himself, however--that
he wanted to marry. And he was entirely sure she had not decided
whether she wanted him--that was what gave him his lease of life; if
she decided _for_ him, he knew that he would decide for her--and
quickly. Then, one day, came a letter--forwarded by the Club, where he had left
his address with instructions that it be divulged to no one. It was
dated Northumberland, and read:

  "My dear Colin--

  "It is useless, between us, to dissemble, and I'm not going to
  try it. I want to know whether Geoffrey Croyden is coming back to
  Northumberland? If he is not
  coming and there is no one else--won't you tell me where you are? (I don't ask you to reveal his address, you see.) I shall come
  down--if only for an hour, between trains--and give him his
  chance. It is radically improper, according to accepted
  notions--but notions don't bother me, when they stand (as I am
  sure they do, in this case), in the way of happiness. "Sincerely,

                                           "Elaine Cavendish." At dinner, Macloud casually remarked:

"I ought to go out to Northumberland, this week, for a short time,
won't you go along?" "I'm not going back to Northumberland," he said. "I'll promise to come back
with you in two days at the most." "You can easily find your
way back. For me, it's easier to stay away from Northumberland, than to
go away from it, _again_." And Macloud, being wise, dropped the conversation, saying only:

"Well, I may not have to go." A little later, as he sat in the drawing-room at Carringtons', he
broached a matter which had been on his mind for some time--working
around to it gradually, with Croyden the burden of their talk. When his
opportunity came--as it was bound to do--he took it without
hesitation. "Croyden had two reasons for leaving
Northumberland: one of them has been eliminated; the other is stronger
than ever." "A woman who has plenty of money--more than she can ever
spend, indeed." "What was the
trouble--wouldn't she have him?" "Her money--she has so much!--So much, that, in comparison, he is a
mere pauper:--twenty millions against two hundred thousand." "If she be willing, I can't see why he is shy?" "He says it is all right for a poor girl to marry a rich man, but not
for a poor man to marry a rich girl. His idea is, that the husband
should be able to maintain his wife according to her condition. To
marry else, he says, is giving hostages to fortune, and is derogatory
to that mutual respect which should exist between them." "We all give hostages to fortune when we marry!" "What is it you want me to do?" she asked hastily--"or can I do
anything?" "You can ask Miss Cavendish to visit you for a
few days." "Can you, by any possibility, mean Elaine Cavendish?" "That's exactly who I do mean--do you know her?" "After a fashion--we went to Dobbs Ferry together." "She will think it a trifle peculiar." "On the contrary, she'll think it more than kind--a positive favor. You
see, she knows I'm with Croyden, but she doesn't know where; so she
wrote to me at my Club and they forwarded it. Croyden left
Northumberland without a word--and no one is aware of his residence but
me. She asks that I tell her where _I_ am. Then she intends to come
down and give Croyden a last chance. I want to help her--and your
invitation will be right to the point--she'll jump at it." "Come, we'll work out the letter
together." "Would I not be permitted to kiss you as Miss Cavendish's deputy?" "Miss Cavendish can be her own deputy," she answered.--"Moreover, it
would be premature." The second morning after, when Elaine Cavendish's maid brought her
breakfast, Miss Carrington's letter was on the tray among tradesmen's
circulars, invitations, and friendly correspondence. She did not recognize the handwriting, and the postmark was unfamiliar,
wherefore, coupled with the fact that it was addressed in a
particularly stylish hand, she opened it first. It was very brief, very
succinct, very informing, and very satisfactory. "Ashburton,

                             "Hampton, Md. "My dear Elaine:--

  "Mr. Macloud tells me you are contemplating coming down to the
  Eastern Shore to look for a country-place. Let me advise
  Hampton--there are some delightful old residences in this
  vicinity which positively are crying for a purchaser. Geoffrey
  Croyden, whom you know, I believe, is resident here, and is
  thinking of making it his home permanently. If you can be
  persuaded to come, you are to stay with me--the hotels are simply
  impossible, and I shall be more than delighted to have you. We
  can talk over old times at Dobbs, and have a nice little visit
  together. Don't trouble to write--just wire the time of your
  arrival--and come before the good weather departs. "With lots of love,

                                          "Davila Carrington." Elaine Cavendish read the letter slowly--and smiled. "Colin is rather a diplomat--he
managed it with exceeding adroitness--and the letter is admirably
worded. I'd forgotten about
Davila Carrington, and I reckon she had forgotten me, till he somehow
found it out and jogged her memory. She went to her desk and wrote this wire,
in answer:

  "Miss Davila Carrington,

       "Hampton, Md. "I shall be with you Friday, on morning train. Miss Carrington showed the wire to Macloud. "Now, I've done all that I can; the rest is in your hands," she said. "I'll cooperate, but you are the general." "Until Elaine comes--she will manage it then," Macloud answered. And on Friday morning, a little before noon, Miss Cavendish arrived. Miss Carrington, alone, met her at the station. "You're just the same Davila I'd forgotten for years," said she,
laughingly, as they walked across the platform to the waiting carriage. "And you're the same I had forgotten," Davila replied. "And it's just as delightful to be able to remember," was the reply. Just after they left the business section, on the drive out, Miss
Carrington saw Croyden and Macloud coming down the street. Evidently
Macloud had not been able to detain him at home until she got her
charge safely into Ashburton. She glanced at Miss Cavendish--she had
seen them, also, and, settling back into the corner of the phaeton, she
hid her face with her Marabou muff. as both men raised their
hats--and drove straight on. "Who was the girl with Miss Carrington?" "I noticed a bag in the trap,
however, so I reckon she's a guest." "Your opportunity, for the
solitariness of two, will be limited." It depends on what she is--I'm not
sacrificing myself on the altar of general unattractiveness." "Rest easy, I'll fuss her to the limit. You shan't have her to
plead for an excuse." I'm not worried about the guest," Macloud
remarked. "There was a certain style about as much of her as I could see which
promised very well," Croyden remarked. "I think this would be a good
day to drop in for tea." "And if you find her something over sixty, you'll gallantly shove her
off on me, and preempt Miss Carrington. "She's not over sixty--and you know it. You're by no means as blind as
you would have me believe. In fact, now that I think of it, there was
something about her that seems familiar." "You're an adept in many things," laughed Macloud, "but, I reckon,
you're not up to recognizing a brown coat and a brown hat. I think I've
seen the combination once or twice before on a woman." "Well, what about tea-time--shall we go over?" "I haven't the slightest objection----"

"Really!" "----to your going along with me--I'm expected!" pretty soon it will be: 'Come over and
see us, won't you?'" "I trust so," said Macloud, placidly.--"But, as you're never coming
back to Northumberland, it's a bit impossible." "I've a faint recollection of having heard that remark before." "I dare say, it's popular there on smoky days." "Which is the same as saying it's popular there any time." "No, I don't mean that; Northumberland isn't half so bad as it's
painted. We may make fun of it--but we like it, just the same." "Yes, I suppose we do," said Macloud. "Though we get mighty sick of
seeing every scatterbrain who sets fire to the Great White Way branded
by the newspapers as a Northumberland millionaire. We've got our share
of fools, but we haven't a monopoly of them, by any means." "We had a marvelously large crop, however, running loose at one time,
recently!" "True!--and there's the reason for it, as well as the fallacy. Because
half a hundred light-weights were made millionaires over night, and,
top heavy, straightway went the devil's pace, doesn't imply that the
entire town is mad." "It's no worse than any other big town--and
the fellows with unsavory reputations aren't representative. They just
came all in a bunch. The misfortune is, that the whole country saw the
fireworks, and it hasn't forgot the lurid display." "And isn't likely to very soon," Macloud responded, "with the whole
Municipal Government rotten to the core, councilmen falling over one
another in their eagerness to plead _nolle contendere_ and escape the
penitentiary, bankers in jail for bribery, or fighting extradition; and
graft! permeating every department of the civic life--and
published by the newspapers' broadcast, through the land, for all the
world to read, while the people, as a body, sit supine, and meekly
suffer the robbers to remain. The trouble with the Northumberlander is,
that so long as he is not the immediate victim of a hold up, he is
quiescent. Let him be touched direct--by burglary, by theft, by
embezzlement--and the yell he lets out wakes the entire bailiwick." "It's the same everywhere," said Croyden. "No, it's not,--other communities have waked up--Northumberland hasn't. There is too much of the moneyed interest to be looked after; and the
councilmen know it, and are out for the stuff, as brazen as the
street-walker, and vastly more insistent.--I'm going in here, for some
cigarettes--when I come out, we'll change the talk to something less
irritating. I like Northumberland, but I despise about ninety-nine one
hundredths of its inhabitants." When he returned, Croyden was gazing after an automobile which was
disappearing in a cloud of dust. "The fellow driving, unless I am mightily
fooled, is the same who stopped me on the street, in front of
Clarendon," he said. "That's interesting--any one with him?" "He isn't travelling around with
a petticoat--at least, if he's thinking of tackling you." "It isn't likely, I admit--but suppose he is?" "He is leaving here as fast as the wheels will turn." "I've got a very accurate memory for faces," said Croyden. If it was he, and he has some new scheme, it will be
declared in due time. So long as they think you have the jewels, they will try
for them. There's Captain Carrington standing at his office door. "Sitting up to grandfather-in-law!" "Distinctly
proper, sir, distinctly proper! Go and chat with him; I'll stop for
you, presently." *       *       *       *       *

Meanwhile, the two women had continued on to Ashburton. Elaine asked, dropping her muff from before her
face, when they were past the two men. "It would make a difference in my--attitude toward him when we met!" The
fact that Croyden did not come out and stop them, that he let them go
on, was sufficient proof that he had not recognized her. "You see, I am assuming that you know why I wanted to come to Hampton,"
Elaine said, when, her greeting made to Mrs. Carrington, she had
carried Davila along to her room. "And you made it very easy for me to come." "I did as I thought you would want--and as I know you would do with me
were I in a similar position." "I'm sadly afraid I should not have thought of you, were you----"

"Oh, yes, you would! If you had been in a small town, and Mr. Croyden
had told you of my difficulty----"

"As _Mr. Macloud_ told you of mine--I see, dear." "Not exactly that," said Davila, blushing. Macloud has been very
attentive and very nice and all that, you know, but you mustn't forget
there are not many girls here, and I'm convenient, and--I don't take
him seriously." "I don't know--sometimes I think he does, and sometimes I think he
doesn't!" "He is an accomplished flirt and difficult to
gauge." "Well, let me tell you one fact, for your information: there isn't a
more indifferent man in Northumberland. He goes everywhere, is in great
demand, is enormously popular, yet, I've never known him to have even
an affair. He is armor-plated--but he is a dear, a perfect dear,
Davila!" she said, with heightening color--and Elaine said no more,
then. Croyden alone, for the first time, or in
company?" "I confess I don't know, but I think, however, it would be better to
have a few words with Colin, first--if it can be arranged." Macloud is to come in a moment before
luncheon, if he can find an excuse that will not include Mr. "Is an excuse difficult to find--or is any, even, needed?" "He doesn't usually come before four--that's the tea hour in Hampton." "If you've got him into the tea habit, you can
do what you want with him--he will eat out of your hand." "I never tried him with tea," said Davila. "He chose a high ball the
first time--so it's been a high ball ever since." Elaine sat down on the couch and put her arm about Davila. "But we shall be good friends, better
friends than ever, Davila, when you come to Northumberland to live." "That is just the question, Elaine," was the quick answer; "whether I
shall be given the opportunity, and whether I shall take it, if I am. I
haven't let it go so far, because I don't feel sure of him. Until I do,
I intend to keep tight hold on myself." Just before luncheon, Macloud arrived. "I'm glad to see
you here." "Yes, I'm here, thanks to you," said Elaine--and Davila not being
present, she kissed him. "No--but I wish the other--would, too!" "You're not wont to be so timid," she returned. "I wish I had some of your bravery," he said. "Isn't it impetuous womanliness." There isn't a doubt as to his feelings." "But there is a doubt as to his letting them control--I see." And you alone can help him solve it--if any one can. And I have
great hopes, Elaine, great hopes!" "How any chap could resist you is inconceivable--I could not." "You could not at one time, you mean." "You gave me no encouragement,--so I must, perforce, fare elsewhere." "How many love affairs have you come down here to settle?" "By the way, Croyden is impatient to come over this afternoon. The
guest in the trap with Miss Carrington has aroused his curiosity. He
could see only a long brown coat and a brown hat, but the muff before
your face, and his imagination, did the rest." It's simply the country town beginning to tell
on him. He is curious about new guests, and Miss Carrington hadn't
mentioned your coming! He suggested, in a vague sort of way, that there
was something familiar about you, but he didn't attempt to
particularize. "I think not--we shall all be present." "And _how_ shall you meet him?" "I reckon you don't know much about it--haven't any plans?" He will know why I'm
here, and whether he is glad or sorry or displeased at my coming, I
shall know instantly. It's absurd, this
notion of his, and why let it rule him and me! I've always got what I
wanted, and I'm going to get Geoffrey. A Queen of a Nation must propose
to a suitor, so why not a Queen of Money to a man less rich than
she--especially when she is convinced that that alone keeps them apart. I shall give him a chance to propose to me first; several chances,
indeed!" "Then, if he doesn't respond--I shall do it
myself." XVII

A HANDKERCHIEF AND A GLOVE


Miss Cavendish was standing behind the curtains in the window of her
room, when Croyden and Macloud came up the walk, at four o'clock. She was waiting!--not another touch to be given to her attire. Her
gown, of shimmering blue silk, clung to her figure with every movement,
and fell to the floor in suggestively revealing folds. Her dark hair
was arranged in simple fashion--the simplicity of exquisite
taste--making the fair face below it, seem fairer even than it was. She heard them enter the lower hall, and pass into the drawing-room. She glided out to the stairway, and stood, peering down over the
balustrade. She heard Miss Carrington's greeting and theirs--heard
Macloud's chuckle, and Croyden's quiet laugh. Then she heard Macloud
say:

"Mr. Croyden is anxious to meet your guest--at least, we took her to be
a guest you were driving with this morning." "My guest is equally anxious to meet Mr. Croyden," Miss Carrington
replied. "Did you ever know a woman to be ready?" Croyden imagined there was something familiar about her," Macloud
remarked. (Elaine strained her ears to catch his answer.) "She didn't let me have the chance to recognize her," said he--"she
wouldn't let me see her face." (Elaine gave a little sigh of relief.) "She couldn't have covered it completely--she saw you." "She can't--I'm on the pinnacle of expectation, now." "Humpty-Dumpty risks a great fall!" "If the guest doesn't please me, I'm going
to talk to Miss Carrington." "You're growing blase," she warned. "If it is, I know one who must
be too blase even to move," with a meaning glance at Macloud. A light foot-fall on the stairs, the soft swish of skirts in the
hallway, Croyden turned, expectantly--and Miss Cavendish entered the
room. Croyden's from astonishment; the
others' with watching him. Elaine's eyes were intent on Croyden's face--and what she saw there
gave her great content: he might not be persuaded, but he loved her,
and he would not misunderstand. Her face brightened with a fascinating
smile. "You are surprised to see me, messieurs?" Croyden's eyes turned quickly to his friend, and back again. "I'm not so sure as to Monsieur Macloud," he said. "Surprised is quite too light a word--stunned would but meekly express
it." "Did neither of you ever hear me mention Miss Carrington?--We were
friends, almost chums, at Dobbs Ferry." "If I did, it has escaped me?" "Well, you're likely not to forget it again." "Did you know that I--that we were here?" I knew that you and Colin were both here," Elaine replied,
imperturbably. "Do you think yourself so unimportant as not to be
mentioned by Miss Carrington?" "What will you have to drink, Mr. she asked--while Elaine and Macloud
laughed. "You said you would take a _sour_ ball." A man who mixes a
high ball with a sour ball is either rattled or drunk, I am not the
latter, therefore----"

"You mean that my coming has rattled you?" "Yes--I'm rattled for very joy." "You could spare a few--and not miss them!" said Macloud, handing him the glass. "Sweetened by your touch, I suppose!" By the ladies' presence--God save them!" "Colin," said Croyden, as, an hour later, they walked back to
Clarendon, "you should have told me." "Don't affect ignorance, old man--you knew Elaine was coming." "And that it was she in the trap." "The muff hid her face from me, too." "Do you think it was wise to let her come?" "I had nothing to do with her decision. Miss Carrington asked her, she
accepted." "Didn't you give her my address?" Croyden looked at him, doubtfully. "I'm telling you the truth," said Macloud. "She tried to get your
address, when I was last in Northumberland, and I refused." "And then, she stumbles on it through Davila Carrington! I reckon, if I went off into some deserted spot in Africa, it
wouldn't be a month until some fellow I knew, or who knows a mutual
friend, would come nosing around, and blow on me." I'm not sorry she came--at least, not now, since she's here.--I'll
be sorry enough when she goes, however." "I must--it's the only proper thing to do." "Would it not be better that _she_ should decide what is proper for
her?" "Based on your peculiar notion of relative wealth between husband and
wife--without regard to what she may think on the subject. In other
words, have you any right to decline the risk, if she is willing to
undertake it?" Her income, for three
months, about equals my entire fortune." "And live at the rate of pretty near two hundred thousand dollars a
year?" "I think I could, if I loved the girl." "And suffer in your self-respect forever after?" If you
play _your_ part, you won't lose your self-respect." "It is a trifle difficult to do--to play my part, when all the world is
saying, 'he married her for her money,' and shows me scant regard in
consequence." "Why the devil need you care what the world says!" "I don't--the world may go hang. But the question is, how long can the
man retain the woman's esteem, with such a handicap." "It depends entirely on yourself.--If you start with it, you can hold
it, if you take the trouble to try." Croyden laughed, as they entered
Clarendon. "Just what I should like to know----"

"Well, I'll tell you what you are if you don't marry Elaine Cavendish,"
Macloud interrupted--"You're an unmitigated fool!" "Assuming that Miss Cavendish would marry me." "You're not likely to marry her, otherwise," retorted Macloud, as he
went up the stairs. On the landing he halted and looked down at Croyden
in the hall below. "And if you don't take your chance, the chance she
has deliberately offered you by coming to Hampton, you are worse
than----" and, with an expressive gesture, he resumed the ascent. "How do you know she came down here just for that purpose?" But all that came back in answer, as Macloud went down the hall and
into his room, was the whistled air from a popular opera, then running
in the Metropolis. "Ev'ry little movement has a meaning all its own,
          Ev'ry thought and action----"

The door slammed--the music ceased. "I won't believe it," Croyden reflected, "that Elaine would do anything
so utterly unconventional as to seek me out deliberately.... I might
have had a chance if--Oh, damn it all! why didn't we find the old
pirate's box--it would have clarified the whole situation." As he changed into his evening clothes, he went over the matter,
carefully, and laid out the line of conduct that he intended to
follow. He would that Elaine had stayed away from Hampton. It was putting him
to too severe a test--to be with her, to be subject to her alluring
loveliness, and, yet, to be unmoved. It is hard to see the luscious
fruit within one's reach and to refrain from even touching it. It grew
harder the more he contemplated it....

"It's no use fighting against it, here!" he exclaimed, going into
Macloud's room, and throwing himself on a chair. "I'm going to cut the
whole thing." Macloud inquired, pausing with
his waistcoat half on. "What the devil do you think I'm talking about?" "Not being a success at solving riddles, I give it up." "Can you comprehend this:--I'm going to
leave town?" "He is coming to it, at last," he thought. What he said was:--"You're
not going to be put to flight by a woman?" "I am.--If I stay here I shall lose." "Most people would not call that _losing_," said Macloud. "I have nothing to do with most people--only, with myself." "It seems so!--even Elaine isn't to be considered." "Haven't we gone over all that?" "I don't know--but, if we have, go over it again." "You assume she came down here solely on my account--because I'm
here?" "I assume nothing," Macloud answered, with a quiet chuckle. "I said you
have a chance, and urged you not to let it slip. I should not have
offered any suggestion--I admit that----"

"Oh, bosh!" "Don't be so humble--you're rather
proud of your interference." I'm only sorry it is so unavailing." "You did!--or, at least, I inferred as much." "I'm not responsible for your inferences." Nothing!--not even for my resolution--I haven't any--I can't
make any that holds. Desire clamors for me to stay--to hasten over to Ashburton--to
put it to the test. When I get to Ashburton, common sense will be in
control. When I come away, desire will tug me back, again--and so on,
and so on--and so on." "You need a cock-tail, instead
of a weather-cock. if we are to dine at the Carringtons' at
seven, we would better be moving. Having thrown the blue funk, usual to
a man in your position, you'll now settle down to business." "Let future events determine--take it as it comes," Macloud urged. "If I let future events
decide for me, the end's already fixed." The big clock on the landing was chiming seven when they rang the bell
at Ashburton and the maid ushered them into the drawing-room. Carrington was out of town, visiting in an adjoining county, and the
Captain had not appeared. He came down stairs a moment later, and took
Macloud and Croyden over to the library. After about a quarter of an hour, he glanced at his watch a trifle
impatiently.--Another fifteen minutes, and he glanced at it again. he called, as the maid passed the door. "Go up to Miss
Davila's room and tell her it's half-after-seven." Then he continued with the story he was relating. Presently, the maid returned; the Captain looked at her,
interrogatingly. "Mis' Davila, she ain' deah, no seh," said the girl. "She is probably in Miss Cavendish's room,--look, there, for her," the
Captain directed. I looks dyar--she ain' no place up stairs, and neither is
Mis' Cav'dish, seh. Hit's all dark, in dey rooms, seh, all dark." "Half-after-seven, and not here?" "They were here, two hours ago," said Croyden. "Find out from the other servants whether they left any word." excuse me, sirs, I'll try to locate them." He went to the telephone, and called up the Lashiels, the Tilghmans,
the Tayloes, and all their neighbors and intimates, only to receive the
same answer: "They were not there, and hadn't been there that
afternoon." "We are at your service, Captain Carrington," said Macloud
instantly.--"At your service for anything we can do." "They knew, of course, you were expected for dinner?" he asked, as he
led the way upstairs.--"I can't account for it." The Captain inspected his granddaughter's and Miss Cavendish's rooms,
Macloud and Croyden, being discreet, the rooms on the other side of the
house. "We will have dinner," said the Captain. "They will surely turn up
before we have finished." The dinner ended, however, and the missing ones had not returned. "Might they have gone for a drive?" "The keys of the stable are on my desk,
which shows that the horses are in for the night. I admit I am at a
loss--however, I reckon they will be in presently, with an explanation
and a good laugh at us for being anxious." But when nine o'clock came, and then half-after-nine, and still they
did not appear, the men grew seriously alarmed. The Captain had recourse to the telephone again, getting residence
after residence, without result. "I don't know what to make of it," he said, bewildered. "I've called
every place I can think of, and I can't locate them. "Let us see how the matter stands," said Macloud. "We left them here
about half-after-five, and, so far as can be ascertained, no one has
seen them since. Consequently, they must have gone out for a walk or a
drive. A drive is most unlikely, at this time of the day--it is dark
and cold. Furthermore, your horses are in the stable, so, if they went,
they didn't go alone--some one drove them. The alternative--a walk--is
the probable explanation; and that remits us to an accident as the
cause of delay. Which, it seems to me, is the likely explanation." "But if there were an accident, they would have been discovered, long
since; the walks are not deserted," the Captain objected. "Possibly, they went out of the town." "A young woman never goes out of town, unescorted," was the decisive
answer. "This is a Southern town, you know." "I suppose you don't care to telephone the police?" "No--not yet," the Captain replied. "Davila would never forgive me, if
nothing really were wrong--besides, I couldn't. The Mayor's office is
closed for the night--we're not supposed to need the police after six
o'clock." "Then Croyden and I will patrol the roads, hereabout," said Macloud. I will go out the Queen Street pike a mile or two," the Captain
said. Croyden can take the King Street pike, North and
South. We'll meet here not later than eleven o'clock. Excuse me a
moment----"

"What do you make of it?" "It is either very serious or else it's nothing at all. I mean, if
anything _has_ happened, it's far out of the ordinary," Croyden
answered. "Exactly my idea--though, I confess, I haven't a notion what the
serious side could be. It's safe to assume that they didn't go into the
country--the hour, alone, would have deterred them, even if the danger
from the <DW64> were not present, constantly, in Miss Carrington's mind. On the other hand, how could anything have happened in the town which
would prevent one of them from telephoning, or sending a message, or
getting some sort of word to the Captain." "It's all very mysterious--yet, I dare say, easy of solution and
explanation. There isn't any danger of the one thing that is really
terrifying, so I'm not inclined to be alarmed, unduly--just
disquieted." take these," he said, giving each a revolver. "Let us hope there
won't be any occasion to use them, but it is well to be prepared." They went out together--at the intersection of Queen and King Streets,
they parted. eleven o'clock at my house," said the Captain. "If any one
of us isn't there, the other two will know he needs assistance." It was a chilly November night, with
frost in the air. The moon, in its second quarter and about to sink
into the waters of the Bay, gave light sufficient to make walking easy,
where the useless street lamps did not kill it with their timid
brilliancy. He passed the limits of the town, and struck out into the
country. It had just struck ten, when they parted--he would walk for
half an hour, and then return. He could do three miles--a mile and a
half each way--and still be at the Carrington house by eleven. He
proceeded along the east side of the road, his eyes busy lest, in the
uncertain light, he miss anything which might serve as a clue. For the
allotted time, he searched but found nothing--he must return. He
crossed to the west side of the road, and faced homeward. A mile passed--a quarter more was added--the feeble lights of the town
were gleaming dimly in the fore, when, beside the track, he noticed a
small white object. It was a woman's handkerchief, and, as he picked it up, a faint odor of
violets was clinging to it still. Here might be a clue--there was a
monogram on the corner, but he could not distinguish it, in the
darkness. He put it in his pocket and hastened on. A hundred feet
farther, and his foot hit something soft. He groped about, with his
hands, and found--a woman's glove. It, also, bore the odor of violets. At the first lamp-post, he stopped and examined the handkerchief--the
monogram was plain: E. C.--and violets, he remembered, were her
favorite perfume. He took out the glove--a soft, undressed kid
affair--but there was no mark on it to help him. He pushed the feminine trifles back
into his pocket, and hurried on. He was late, and when he arrived at Ashburton, Captain Carrington and
Macloud were just about to start in pursuit. he said, tossing the glove and the handkerchief on the
table--"on the west side of the road, about half a mile from town." "The violets are familiar--and the handkerchief is Elaine's," said he. "I'm going to call in our friends," he said. XVIII

THE LONE HOUSE BY THE BAY


When Croyden and Macloud left the Carrington residence that evening,
after their call and tea, Elaine and Davila remained for a little while
in the drawing-room rehearsing the events of the day, as women will. Presently, Davila went over to draw the shades. "What do you say to a walk before we dress for dinner?" "I should like it, immensely," Elaine answered. They went upstairs, changed quickly to street attire, and set out. "We will go down to the centre of the town and back," said Davila. "It's about half a mile each way, and there isn't any danger, so long
as you keep in the town. I shouldn't venture beyond it unescorted,
however, even in daylight." It's the curse that hangs over the South
since the Civil War: the <DW64>." "I don't mean that all black men are bad, for they are not. Many are
entirely trustworthy, but the trustworthy ones are much, very much, in
the minority. The vast majority are worthless--and a worthless <DW65>
is the worst thing on earth." "I think I prefer only the lighted streets," Elaine remarked. "And you will be perfectly safe there," Davila replied. They swung briskly along to the centre of the town--where the two main
thoroughfares, King and Queen Streets, met each other in a wide circle
that, after the fashion of Southern towns, was known, incongruously
enough, as "The Diamond." Passing around this circle, they retraced
their steps toward home. As they neared Ashburton, an automobile with the top up and side
curtains on shot up behind them, hesitated a moment, as though
uncertain of its destination and then drew up before the Carrington
place. Two men alighted, gave an order to the driver, and went across
the pavement to the gate, while the engine throbbed, softly. Then they seemed to notice the women approaching, and stepping back
from the gate, they waited. said one, raising his hat and bowing, "can you
tell me if this is where Captain Carrington lives?" said the man, standing aside to let them pass. "I am Miss Carrington--whom do you wish to see?" "Captain Carrington, is he at home?" "I do not know--if you will come in, I'll inquire." Davila thanked him with a smile,
and she and Elaine went in, leaving the strangers to follow. The next instant, each girl was struggling in the folds of a shawl,
which had been flung over her from behind and wrapped securely around
her head and arms, smothering her cries to a mere whisper. In a trice,
despite their struggles--which, with heads covered and arms held close
to their sides, were utterly unavailing--they were caught up, tossed
into the tonneau, and the car shot swiftly away. In a moment, it was clear of the town, the driver "opened her up," and
they sped through the country at thirty miles an hour. "Better give them some air," said the leader. "It doesn't matter how
much they yell here." He had been holding Elaine on his lap, his arms keeping the shawl tight
around her. Now he loosed her, and unwound the folds. "You will please pardon the liberty we have taken," he said, as he
freed her, "but there are----"

Crack! Elaine had struck him straight in the face with all her strength, and,
springing free, was on the point of leaping out, when he seized her
and forced her back, caught her arms in the shawl, which was still
around her, and bound them tight to her side. "I got an upper cut on the
jaw that made me see stars." "I've been very easy with mine," his companion returned. However, he took care not to loosen the shawl from her
arms. "There you are, my lady, I hope you've not been greatly
inconvenienced." "Don't forget, Bill!--mum's the word!" "At least, you can permit us to sit on the floor of the car," said
Elaine. "Whatever may be your scheme, it's scarcely necessary to hold
us in this disgusting position." "I reckon that is a trifle overstated!" "What about you,
Miss Carrington?" Davila did not answer--contenting herself with a look, which was far
more expressive than words. "Well, we will take pleasure in honoring your first request, Miss
Cavendish." He caught up a piece of rope, passed it around her arms, outside the
shawl, tied it in a running knot, and quietly lifted her from his lap
to the floor. "Do you, Miss Carrington, wish to sit beside your
friend?" He took the rope and tied her, likewise. he said, and they placed her beside Elaine. "If you will permit your legs to be tied, we will gladly let you have
the seat----"

"No!----"

"Well, I didn't think you would--so you will have to remain on the
floor; you see, you might be tempted to jump, if we gave you the
seat." They were running so rapidly, through the night air, that the country
could scarcely be distinguished, as it rushed by them. To Elaine, it
was an unknown land. Davila, however, was looking for something she
could recognize--some building that she knew, some stream, some
topographical formation. But in the faint and uncertain moonlight,
coupled with the speed at which they travelled, she was baffled. he said, and taking two handkerchiefs from his
pocket, he bound the eyes of both. "It is only for a short while," he explained--"matter of an hour or
so, and you suffer no particular inconvenience, I trust." Neither Elaine nor Davila condescended to reply. After a moment's pause, the man went on:

"I neglected to say--and I apologize for my remissness--that you need
fear no ill-treatment. You will be shown every consideration--barring
freedom, of course--and all your wants, within the facilities at our
command, will be gratified. Naturally, however, you will not be
permitted to communicate with your friends." "But I should be better pleased if you
would tell us the reason for this abduction." "That, I regret, I am not at liberty to discuss." "And if it is not acceded to?" "In that event--it would be necessary to decide what should be done
with you." "Nothing!--the time hasn't come to imply--I hope it will not come." "Do you mean that your failure would imperil our lives?" "Is it possible you mean to threaten our lives?" "But you will threaten,
if----"

"Exactly! if--you are at liberty to guess the rest." "Do you appreciate that the
whole Eastern Shore will be searching for us by morning--and that, if
the least indignity is offered us, your lives won't be worth a penny?" "We take the risk, Miss Carrington," replied the man, placidly. Davila shrugged her shoulders, and they rode in silence, for half an
hour. Then the speed of the car slackened, they ran slowly for half a mile,
and stopped. The chief reached down, untied the handkerchiefs, and
sprang out. "You may descend," he said, offering his hand. Elaine saw the hand, and ignored it; Davila refused even to see the
hand. They could make out, in the dim light, that they were before a long,
low, frame building, with the waters of the Bay just beyond. A light
burned within, and, as they entered, the odor of cooking greeted them. "I
suppose it's scarcely proper in an abducted maiden, but I'm positively
famished." "I'm too enraged to eat," said Davila. "Afraid?--not in the least!" "No more am I--but oughtn't we be afraid?" They had been halted on the porch, while the chief went in, presumably,
to see that all was ready for their reception. "If you will come in," he said, "I will show you to your apartment." "Prison, you mean," said Davila. "Apartment is a little better word, don't you think?" "However, as you wish, Miss Carrington, as you wish! We shall try to
make you comfortable, whatever you may call your temporary
quarters.--These two rooms are yours," he continued, throwing open the
door. "They are small, but quiet and retired; you will not, I am sure,
be disturbed. Pardon me, if I remove these ropes, you will be less
hampered in your movements. supper will be served in fifteen
minutes--you will be ready?" "Yes, we shall be ready," said Elaine, and the man bowed and retired. "They might be worse," Davila retorted. "Yes!--and we best be thankful for it." "The rooms aren't so bad," said Elaine, looking around. "We each have a bed, and a bureau, and a wash-stand, and a couple of
chairs, a few chromos, a rug on the floor--and bars at the window." "I noticed the bars," said Davila. "They've provided us with water, so we may as well use it," she said. "I think my face needs--Heavens! "Haven't you observed the same sight in me?" "I've lost
all my puffs, I know--and so have you--and your hat is a trifle awry." "Since we're not trying to make an impression, I reckon it doesn't
matter!" "We will have ample opportunity to put them to
rights before Colin and Geoffrey see us." She took off her hat, pressed her hair into shape, replaced a few pins,
dashed water on her face, and washed her hands. "Now," she said, going into the other room where Miss Carrington was
doing likewise, "if I only had a powder-rag, I'd feel dressed." Davila turned, and, taking a little book, from the pocket of her coat,
extended it. "Here is some Papier Poudre," she said. Elaine exclaimed, and, tearing out a sheet, she
rubbed it over her face. A door opened and a young girl appeared, wearing apron and cap. said Elaine as she saw the table, with its candles and
silver (plated, to be sure), dainty china, and pressed glass. "If the food is in keeping, I think we can get along for a few days. We
may as well enjoy it while it lasts." "You always were of a philosophic mind." She might have added, that it was the only way she knew--her wealth
having made all roads easy to her. The meal finished, they went back to their apartment, to find the bed
turned down for the night, and certain lingerie, which they were
without, laid out for them. "You might think this was a
hotel." "We haven't tried, yet--wait until morning." A pack of cards was on the
table. Come, I'll play you Camden for a
cent a point." "I can't understand what their move is?" "What
can they hope to accomplish by abducting us--or me, at any rate. It
seems they don't want anything from us." "I make it, that they hope to extort something, from a third party,
through us--by holding us prisoners." "Captain Carrington has no money--it can't be he," said Davila, "and
yet, why else should they seize me?" "The question is, whose hand are they trying to force?" "They will hold us until something is acceded to, the man said. Until _what_ is acceded to, and _by whom_?" "You think that we are simply the pawns?" "And if it isn't acceded to, they will kill us?" "We won't contemplate it, just yet. They may gain their point, or we may
be rescued; in either case, we'll be saved from dying!" "And, at the worst, I may be able to buy them off--to pay our own
ransom. If it's money they want, we shall not die, I assure you." "If I have to choose between death and paying, I reckon I'll pay." "Yes, I think I can pay," she said quietly. "I'm not used to boasting
my wealth, but I can draw my check for a million, and it will be
honored without a moment's question. Does that make you feel easier, my
dear?" "Considerably easier," said Davila, with a glad laugh. "I couldn't draw
my check for much more than ten thousand cents. I am only----" She
stopped, staring. "What on earth is the matter, Davila?" "I have it!--it's the thieves!" "I reckon I must be in a trance,
also." "Then maybe I shouldn't--but I will. Parmenter's chest is a fortune in
jewels." Croyden has searched for and not
found--and the thieves think----"

"You would better tell me the story," said Elaine, pushing back the
cards. And Davila told her....

"It is too absurd!" laughed Elaine, "those rogues trying to force
Geoffrey to divide what he hasn't got, and can't find, and we abducted
to constrain him. He couldn't comply if he wanted to, poor fellow!" "But they will never believe it," said Davila. Well, if we're not rescued shortly, I can
advance the price and buy our freedom. I
reckon two hundred thousand will be sufficient--and, maybe, we can
compromise for one hundred thousand. it's not so bad, Davila, it's
not so bad!" Unless she were wofully mistaken, this abduction
would release her from the embarrassment of declaring herself to
Geoffrey. "I was thinking of Colin and Geoffrey--and how they are pretty sure to
know their minds when this affair is ended." I mean, if this doesn't bring Colin to his senses, he is
hopeless." All his theoretical notions of relative wealth
will be forgotten. I've only to wait for rescue or release. On the
whole, Davila, I'm quite satisfied with being abducted. Moreover, it is
an experience which doesn't come to every girl." "What are you going to do about Colin? I rather
think you should have an answer ready; the circumstances are apt to
make him rather precipitate." The next morning after breakfast, which was served in their rooms,
Elaine was looking out through the bars on her window, trying to get
some notion of the country, when she saw, what she took to be, the
chief abductor approaching. He was a tall, well-dressed man of middle
age, with the outward appearance of a gentleman. She looked at him a
moment, then rang for the maid. "I should like to have a word with the man who just came in," she
said. He appeared almost immediately, an inquiring look on his face. "How can I serve you, Miss Cavendish?" "By permitting us to go out for some air--these rooms were not
designed, apparently, for permanent residence." "You will have no objection to being attended, to
make sure you don't stray off too far, you know?" "None whatever, if the attendant remains at a reasonable distance." Elaine asked, when they were some distance
from the house. "It is south of Hampton, I think, but I can't
give any reason for my impression. The car was running very rapidly; we
were, I reckon, almost two hours on the way, but we can't be more than
fifty miles away." "If they came direct--but if they circled, we could be much less,"
Elaine observed. "It's a pity we didn't think to drop something from the car to inform
our friends which way to look for us." "I tossed out a handkerchief and a glove a short
distance from Hampton--just as I struck that fellow. The difficulty is,
there isn't any assurance we kept to that road. Like as not, we started
north and ended east or south of town. What is this house, a fishing
club?" There is a small wharf, and a board-walk down to
the Bay, and the house itself is one story and spread-out, so to
speak." "Likely it's a summer club-house, which these men have either rented or
preempted for our prison." "Hence, a proper choice for our temporary residence." "I can't understand the care they are taking of us--the deference with
which we are treated, the food that is given us." "Parmenter's treasure, and the prize they think they're playing for,
has much to do with it. We are of considerable value, according to
their idea." After a while, they went back to the house. The two men, who had
remained out of hearing, but near enough to prevent any attempt to
escape, having seen them safely within, disappeared. As they passed
through the hall they encountered the chief. "You are incurring considerable expense for nothing." "It is a very great pleasure, I assure you." "You are asking the impossible," she went on. Croyden told you
the simple truth. He _didn't_ find the Parmenter jewels." The man's face showed his surprise, but he only shrugged his shoulders
expressively, and made no reply. "I know you do not believe it--yet it's a fact, nevertheless. Croyden couldn't pay your demands, if he wished. Of course, we enjoy
the experience, but, as I said, it's a trifle expensive for you." he said--"a jolly good sport! Macloud, so, you'll pardon me if I decline to
discuss the subject." XIX

ROBERT PARMENTER'S SUCCESSORS


In half-an-hour from the time Captain Carrington strode to the
telephone to arouse his friends, all Hampton had the startling news:
Davila Carrington and her guest, Miss Cavendish, had disappeared. How, when, and where, it could not learn, so it supplied the deficiency
as best pleased the individual--by morning, the wildest tales were
rehearsed and credited. Miss Carrington and Miss Cavendish
were not in the town, nor anywhere within a circuit of five miles. Croyden, Macloud, all the men in the place had searched the night
through, and without avail. Every horse, and every boat had been
accounted for. It remained, that they either had fallen into the Bay,
or had gone in a strange conveyance. Croyden and Macloud had returned to Clarendon for a bite of
breakfast--very late breakfast, at eleven o'clock. They had met by
accident, on their way to the house, having come from totally different
directions of search. "Parmenter:--Pirate's gold breeds pirate's ways. I told you it was he I saw, yesterday, driving the
automobile." "I don't quite understand why they selected Elaine and Miss Carrington
to abduct," Macloud objected, after a moment's consideration. "Because they thought we would come to time more quickly, if they took
the women. They seem to be informed on everything, so, we can assume,
they are acquainted with your fondness for Miss Carrington and mine for
Elaine. Or, it's possible they thought that we both were interested in
Davila--for I've been with her a lot this autumn--and then, at the
pinch, were obliged to take Elaine, also, because she was with her and
would give the alarm if left behind." "A pretty fair scheme," said Macloud. "The fellow who is managing this
business knew we would do more for the women than for ourselves." "It's the same old difficulty--we haven't got Parmenter's treasure, but
they refuse to be convinced." The telephone rang, and Croyden himself answered it. "Captain Carrington asks that we come over at once," he said, hanging
up the receiver. Half way to the gate, they
met the postman coming up the walk. He handed Croyden a letter, faced
about and trudged away. Croyden glanced at it, mechanically tore open the envelope, and drew it
out. As his eyes fell on the first line, he stopped, abruptly. "On Board The Parmenter,
                                      "Pirate Sloop of War,
                             "Off the Capes of the Chesapeake. "Dear Sir:--

  "It seems something is required to persuade you that we mean
  business. Therefore, we have abducted Miss Carrington and her
  friend, Miss Cavendish, in the hope that it will rouse you to a
  proper realization of the eternal fitness of things, and of our
  intention that there shall be a division of the jewels--or their
  value in money. Our attorney had the pleasure of an interview
  with you, recently, at which time he specified a sum of two
  hundred and fifty thousand dollars, as being sufficient. A
  further investigation of the probable value of the jewels, having
  convinced us that we were in slight error as to their present
  worth, induces us to reduce the amount, which we claim as our
  share, to two hundred thousand dollars. This is the minimum of
  our demand, however, and we have taken the ladies, aforesaid, as
  security for its prompt payment. "They will be held in all comfort and respect (if no effort at
  rescue be attempted--otherwise we will deal with them as we see
  fit), for the period of ten days from the receipt of this letter,
  which will be at noon to-morrow. If the sum indicated is not
  paid, they will, at the expiration of the ten days, be turned
  over to the tender mercies of the crew.--Understand? "As to the manner of payment--You, yourself, must go to
  Annapolis, and, between eleven and twelve in the morning, proceed
  to the extreme edge of Greenberry Point and remain standing, in
  full view from the Bay, for the space of fifteen minutes. You
  will, then, face about, step ten paces, and bury the money, which
  must be in thousand dollar bills, under a foot of sand. You will
  then, immediately, return to Annapolis and take the first car to
  Baltimore, and, thence, to Hampton. "In the event that you have not reduced the jewels to cash, we
  will be content with such a division as will insure us a moiety
  thereof. It will be useless to try deception concerning
  them,--though a few thousand dollars, one way or the other, won't
  matter. When you have complied with these terms, the young women
  will be released and permitted to return to Hampton. If not--they
  will wish they were dead, even before they are. We are, sir, with
  deep respect,

                       "Y'r h'mbl. serv'ts,

                               "Robert Parmenter's Successors. "Geoffrey Croyden, Esq'r. It was postmarked Hampton, 6.30 A.M.,
of that day. "Which implies that it was mailed some time during the night," said
he. "Do you mean, will they carry out their threat?" "They have been rather persistent," Macloud replied. Damn
Parmenter and his infernal letter!" "Parmenter is not to blame," said Macloud. "And damn my carelessness in letting them pick my pocket! "Well, the thing, now, is to save the women--and how?" "The two hundred thousand I got
for the Virginia Development bonds will be just enough." "I'm in for half, old man. Aside from any personal
feelings we may have for the women in question," he said, with a
serious sort of smile, "we owe it to them--they were abducted solely
because of us--to force us to disgorge." "I'm ready to pay the cash at once." "We have ten days, and the police
can take a try at it." "They're
all bunglers--they will be sure to make a mess of it, and, then, no man
can foresee what will happen. It's not right to subject the women to
the risk. Let us pay first, and punish after--if we can catch the
scoundrels. How long do you think Henry Cavendish will hesitate when he
learns that Elaine has been abducted, and the peril which menaces
her?" "Just what he shouldn't be," Croyden returned. "What is the good in
alarming him? Free her--then she may tell him, or not, as it pleases
her." "Our first duty _is_ to save the women, the rest can
bide until they are free. "Much obliged, old man," said Croyden, "but a wire will do it--they're
all listed on New York." "Will you lose much, if you sell now?" He wished Croyden
would let him pay the entire amount. "Just about even; a little to the good, in fact," was the answer. And Macloud said no more--he knew it was useless. At Ashburton, they found Captain Carrington pacing the long hall, in
deep distress--uncertain what course to pursue, because there was no
indication as to what had caused the disappearance. He turned, as the
two men entered. "The detectives are quizzing the servants in the library," he said. "I
couldn't sit still.--You have news?" he exclaimed, reading Croyden's
face. said Croyden, and gave him the letter. As he read, concern, perplexity, amazement, anger, all
showed in his countenance. "They have been abducted!--Davila and Miss Cavendish, and are held for
ransom!--a fabulous ransom, which you are asked to pay," he said,
incredulously. "So much, at least, is intelligible. Who
are Robert Parmenter's Successors?--and who was he? and the jewels?--I
cannot understand----"

"I'm not surprised," said Croyden. "It's a long story--too long to
tell--save that Parmenter was a pirate, back in 1720, who buried a
treasure on Greenberry Point, across the Severn from Annapolis, you
know, and died, making Marmaduke Duval his heir, under certain
conditions. Marmaduke, in turn, passed it on to his son, and so on,
until Colonel Duval bequeathed it to me. Macloud and
I--for three weeks, but did not find it. Our secret was chanced upon by
two rogues, who, with their confederates, however, are under the
conviction we _did_ find it. I laughed at
them--and this abduction is the result." "Because they think I can be coerced more easily. They are under the
impression that I am--fond of Miss Carrington. At any rate, they know
I'm enough of a friend to pay, rather than subject her to the hazard." My whole fortune isn't over twenty thousand dollars. It I will gladly sacrifice, but more is impossible." "You're not to pay, my old friend," said Croyden. Macloud and I
are the ones aimed at and we will pay." "There is no reason
for you----"

"Tut! said Croyden, "you forget that we are wholly responsible;
but for us, Miss Carrington and Miss Cavendish would not have been
abducted. The obligation is ours, and we will discharge it. It is our
plain, our very plain, duty." The old man threw up his hands in the extremity of despair. We'll have Miss Carrington back in
three days." "And safe--if the letter is trustworthy, and I think it is. The police
can't do as well--they may fail entirely--and think of the possible
consequences! Miss Carrington and Miss Cavendish are very handsome
women." If they were
men, or children, it would be different--they could take some chances. --He sank on a chair and covered his face with his hands. "You must let me pay what I am able," he insisted. "All that I
have----"

Croyden let his hand fall sympathizingly on the other's shoulder. "It shall be as you wish," he said quietly. "We will pay, and you can
settle with us afterward--our stocks can be converted instantly, you
see, while yours will likely require some time." "I've been sort of unmanned--I'm better now. Shall you show the detectives the letter--tell them we are going to pay
the amount demanded?" "I don't know," said Croyden, uncertainly. "What's your opinion,
Colin?" "Let them see the letter," Macloud answered, "but on the distinct
stipulation, that they make no effort to apprehend 'Robert Parmenter's
Successors' until the women are safely returned. They may pick up
whatever clues they can obtain for after use, but they must not do
anything which will arouse suspicion, even." "Why take them into our confidence at all?" "For two reasons: It's acting square with them (which, it seems to me,
is always the wise thing to do). And, if they are not let in on the
facts, they may blunder in and spoil everything. We want to save the
women at the earliest moment, without any possible handicaps due to
ignorance or inadvertence." "We will have to explain the letter, its reference to the Parmenter
jewels, and all that it contains." We didn't find the treasure, and, I reckon,
they're welcome to search, if they think there is a chance." "Well, let it be exactly as you wish--you're quite as much concerned
for success as I am," said Croyden. "Possibly, more so," returned Macloud, seriously. The two detectives arose at their
entrance. The one, Rebbert, was a Pinkerton man, the other, Sanders,
was from the Bureau at City Hall. Both were small men, with clean
shaven faces, steady, searching eyes, and an especially quiet manner. Croyden," said Rebbert, "we have been questioning the servants,
but have obtained nothing of importance, except that the ladies wore
their hats and coats (at least, they have disappeared). This, with the
fact that you found Miss Cavendish's glove and handkerchief, on a road
without the limits of Hampton, leads to the conclusion that they have
been abducted. Miss Carrington, we are informed, has no great
wealth--how as to Miss Cavendish?" "She has more than sufficient--in fact, she is very rich----"

"Ah! then we _have_ a motive," said the detective. "There is a motive, but it is not Miss Cavendish," Croyden answered. "You're correct as to the abduction, however--this will explain," and
he handed him the letter. "At noon to-day," replied Croyden, passing over the envelope. "Do you object to explaining certain things in this letter?" "Not in the least," replied Croyden. "I'll tell you the entire
story.... Is there anything I have missed?" Now, we prefer that you should take no measures to
apprehend the abductors, until after Miss Cavendish and Miss
Carrington have been released. We are going to pay the amount
demanded." "Going to pay the two hundred thousand dollars!" "Afterward, you can get as busy as you like." A knowing smile broke over the men's faces, at the same instant. "It looks that way, sir," said Rebbert; while Sanders acquiesced, with
another smile. Croyden turned to Macloud and held up his hands, hopelessly. XX

THE CHECK


On the second morning after their abduction, when Elaine and Davila
arose, the sky was obscured by fog, the trees exuded moisture, and only
a small portion of the Bay was faintly visible through the mist. "We must have moved out to
Northumberland, in the night." Davila smiled, a feeble sort of smile. It was not a morning to promote
light-heartedness, and particularly under such circumstances. "Yes!--Only Northumberland is more so. For a misty day, this would be
remarkably fine.--With us, it's midnight at noon--all the lights
burning, in streets, and shops, and electric cars, bells jangling,
people rushing, pushing, diving through the dirty blackness, like
devils in hell. Oh, it's pleasant, when you get used to it.--Ever been
there?" "No," said Davila, "I haven't." "We must have you out--say, immediately after the holidays. "I'll be glad to come, if I'm alive--and we ever get out of this awful
place." "It _is_ stupid here," said Elaine. "I thought there was something
novel in being abducted, but it's rather dreary business. I'm ready to
quit, are you?" "I was ready to quit before we started!" "We will see what can be done about it. "Ask the chief to be kind enough to come here a
moment," she said, to the girl who attended them. In a few minutes, he appeared--suave, polite, courteous. "You sent for me, Miss Cavendish?" Sit down, please, I've something to say to you, Mr.----"

"Jones, for short," he replied. Jones, for short--you will pardon me, I know, if I seem unduly
personal, but these quarters are not entirely to our liking." "I'm very sorry, indeed," he replied. "We tried to make them
comfortable. In what are they unsatisfactory?--we will remedy it, if
possible." "We would prefer another locality--Hampton, to be specific." "You mean that you are tired of captivity?" "I see your
point of view, and I'm hopeful that Mr. Croyden will see it, also, and
permit us to release you, in a few days." "It is that very point I wish to discuss a moment with you," she
interrupted. Croyden didn't find the
jewels and that, therefore, it is impossible for him to pay." "You will pardon me if I doubt your statement.--Moreover, we are not
privileged to discuss the matter with you. Croyden, as I think I have already intimated." "Then you will draw an empty covert," she replied. "That remains to be seen, as I have also intimated," said Mr. "But you don't want to draw an empty covert, do you--to have only your
trouble for your pains?" "It would be a great disappointment, I assure you." "You have been at considerable expense to provide for our
entertainment?" "Pray do not mention it!--it's a very great pleasure." "It would be a greater pleasure to receive the cash?" "Since the cash is our ultimate aim, I confess it would be equally
satisfactory," he replied. "Are _we_ not
to be given a chance to find the cash?" "But assume that he cannot," she reiterated, "or won't--it's the same
result." "In that event, you----"

"Would be given the opportunity," she broke in. "Then why not let us consider the matter in the first instance?" It can make no difference to you whence
it comes--from Mr. "And it would be much more simple to accept a check and to release us
when it is paid?" "Checks are not accepted in this business!" "Ordinarily not, it would be too dangerous, I admit. But if it could be
arranged to your satisfaction, what then?" "I don't think it can be arranged," he replied. "And that amount is----" she persisted, smiling at him the while. "None--not a fraction of a penny!" "I want to know why you think it can't be arranged?" No bank would pay a check for that amount to
an unknown party, without the personal advice of the drawer." "Not if it were made payable to self, and properly indorsed for
identification?" "You can try it--there's no harm in trying. When it's paid, they will pay you. If it's not paid, there
is no harm done--and we are still your prisoners. You stand to win
everything and lose nothing." "If it isn't paid, you still have us," said Elaine. If the check is presented, it will be paid--you may
rest easy, on that score." "But remember," she cautioned, "when it is paid, we are to be released,
instantly. If we play
square with you, you must play square with us. I risk a fortune, see
that you make good." "Your check--it should be one of the sort you always use----"

"I always carry a few blank checks in my handbag--and fortunately, I
have it with me. You were careful to wrap it in with my arms. In a moment she returned, the blank check in
her fingers, and handed it to him. It was of a delicate robin's-egg
blue, with "The Tuscarora Trust Company" printed across the face in a
darker shade, and her monogram, in gold, at the upper end. "Is it sufficiently individual to raise a presumption of regularity?" "Then, let us understand each other," she said. "I give you my check for two hundred thousand dollars, duly executed,
payable to my order, and endorsed by me, which, when paid, you, on
behalf of your associates and yourself, engage to accept in lieu of the
amount demanded from Mr. Croyden, and to release Miss Carrington and
myself forthwith." "There is one thing more," he said. "You, on your part, are to
stipulate that no attempt will be made to arrest us." "We will engage that _we_ will do nothing to apprehend you." "Yes!--more than that is not in our power. You will have to assume the
general risk you took when you abducted us." "We will take it," was the quiet answer. "I think not--at least, everything is entirely satisfactory to us." "Despite the fact that it couldn't be made so!" "I didn't know we had to deal with a woman of such business sense
and--wealth," he answered gallantly. "If you will get me ink and pen, I will sign the check,"
she said. She filled it in for the amount specified, signed and endorsed it. Then
she took, from her handbag, a correspondence card, embossed with her
initials, and wrote this note:

                                              "Hampton, Md. Thompson:--

  "I have made a purchase, down here, and my check for Two Hundred
  Thousand dollars, in consideration, will come through, at once. "Yours very sincerely,

                                            "Elaine Cavendish. "To James Thompson, Esq'r., "Treasurer, The Tuscarora Trust Co.,
  "Northumberland." She addressed the envelope and passed it and the card across to Mr. "If you will mail this, to-night, it will provide against any chance of
non-payment," she said. "You are a marvel of accuracy," he answered, with a bow. "I would I
could always do business with you." monsieur, I pray thee, no
more!" There was a knock on the door; the maid entered and spoke in a low tone
to Jones. "I am sorry to inconvenience you again," he said, turning to them, "but
I must trouble you to go aboard the tug." "On the water--that is usually the place for well behaved tugs!" "Now--before I go to deposit the check!" "You will be safer
on the tug. There will be no danger of an escape or a rescue--and it
won't be for long, I trust." "Your trust is no greater than ours, I assure you," said Elaine. Their few things were quickly gathered, and they went down to the
wharf, where a small boat was drawn up ready to take them to the tug,
which was lying a short distance out in the Bay. "One of the Baltimore tugs, likely," said Davila. "There are scores of
them, there, and some are none too chary about the sort of business
they are employed in." Jones conducted them to the little
cabin, which they were to occupy together--an upper and a lower bunk
having been provided. "The maid will sleep in the galley," said he. "She will look after the
cooking, and you will dine in the small cabin next to this one. It's a
bit contracted quarters for you, and I'm sorry, but it won't be for
long--as we both trust, Miss Cavendish." I will have my bank send it direct for
collection, with instructions to wire immediately if paid. I presume
you don't wish it to go through the ordinary course." "The check, and your note, should reach
the Trust Company in the same mail to-morrow morning; they can be
depended upon to wire promptly, I presume?" "Then, we may be able to release you to-morrow night, certainly by
Saturday." "It can't come too soon for us." "You don't seem to like our hospitality," Jones observed. "It's excellent of its sort, but we don't fancy the sort--you
understand, monsieur. And then, too, it is frightfully expensive." "We have done the best we could under the circumstances," he smiled. "Until Saturday at the latest--meanwhile, permit me to offer you a very
hopeful farewell." "Why do you treat him so amiably?" "I couldn't, if I
would." It wouldn't help our case
to be sullen--and it might make it much worse. I would gladly shoot
him, and hurrah over it, too, as I fancy you would do, but it does no
good to show it, now--when we _can't_ shoot him." "But I'm glad I don't have to play the
part." "Elaine, I don't know how to thank you
for my freedom----"

"Wait until you have it!" "Though there isn't a
doubt of the check being paid." "My grandfather, I know, will repay you with his entire fortune, but
that will be little----"

Elaine stopped her further words by placing a hand over her mouth, and
kissing her. "Take it that the reward is for
my release, and that you were just tossed in for good measure--or, that
it is a slight return for the pleasure of visiting you--or, that the
money is a small circumstance to me--or, that it is a trifling sum to
pay to be saved the embarrassment of proposing to Geoffrey,
myself--or, take it any way you like, only, don't bother your pretty
head an instant more about it. In the slang of the day: 'Forget it,'
completely and utterly, as a favor to me if for no other reason." "I'll promise to forget it--until we're free," agreed Davila. "And, in the meantime, let us have a look around this old boat," said
Elaine. "You're nearer the door, will you open it? Davila tried the door--it refused to open. we will content ourselves with watching the Bay through the
port hole, and when one wants to turn around the other can crawl up in
her bunk. I'm going to write a book about this experience, some
time.--I wonder what Geoffrey and Colin are doing?" she
laughed--"running around like mad and stirring up the country, I
reckon." XXI

THE JEWELS


Macloud went to New York on the evening train. He carried Croyden's
power of attorney with stock sufficient, when sold, to make up his
share of the cash. He had provided for his own share by a wire to his
brokers and his bank in Northumberland. He would reduce both amounts to one thousand dollar bills and hurry
back to Annapolis to meet Croyden. But they counted not on the railroads,--or rather they did count on
them, and they were disappointed. A freight was derailed just south of
Hampton, tearing up the track for a hundred yards, and piling the right
of way with wreckage of every description. Macloud's train was twelve
hours late leaving Hampton. Then, to add additional ill luck, they ran
into a wash out some fifty miles further on; with the result that they
did not reach New York until after the markets were over and the banks
had closed for the day. The following day, he sold the stocks,
the brokers gave him the proceeds in the desired bills, after the
delivery hour, and he made a quick get-away for Annapolis, arriving
there at nine o'clock in the evening. Croyden was awaiting him, at Carvel Hall. "I'm sorry, for the girls' sake," said he, "but it's only a day lost. And, then, pray God, they be freed
before another night! That lawyer thief is a rogue and a robber, but
something tells me he will play straight." "I reckon we will have to trust him," returned Macloud. He will be over on the Point in the morning, disguised
as a <DW64> and chopping wood, on the edge of the timber. There isn't
much chance of him identifying the gang, but it's the best we can do. It's the girls first, the scoundrels afterward, if possible." At eleven o'clock the following day, Croyden, mounted on one of
"Cheney's Best," rode away from the hotel. There had been a sudden
change in the weather, during the night; the morning was clear and
bright and warm, as happens, sometimes, in Annapolis, in late November. The Severn, blue and placid, flung up an occasional white cap to greet
him, as he crossed the bridge. He nodded to the draw-keeper, who
recognized him, drew aside for an automobile to pass, and then trotted
sedately up the hill, and into the woods beyond. He could hear the Band of the Academy pounding out a quick-step, and
catch a glimpse of the long line of midshipmen passing in review,
before some notable. The "custard and cream" of the chapel dome
obtruded itself in all its hideousness; the long reach of Bancroft Hall
glowed white in the sun; the library with its clock--the former, by
some peculiar idea, placed at the farthest point from the dormitory,
and the latter where the midshipmen cannot see it--dominated the
opposite end of the grounds. Everywhere was quiet, peace, and
discipline--the embodiment of order and law,--the Flag flying over
all. And yet, he was on his way to pay a ransom of very considerable amount,
for two women who were held prisoners! He tied his horse to a limb of a maple, and walked out on the Point. Save for a few trees, uprooted by the gales, it was the same Point they
had dug over a few weeks before. A <DW64>, chopping at a log, stopped
his work, a moment, to look at him curiously, then resumed his labor. Daniel went back to the bathroom. thought Croyden, but he made no effort to speak to
him. Somewhere,--from a window in the town, or from one of the numerous
ships bobbing about on the Bay or the River--he did not doubt a glass
was trained on him, and his every motion was being watched. For full twenty minutes, he stood on the extreme tip of the Point, and
looked out to sea. Then he faced directly around and stepped ten paces
inland. Kneeling, he quickly dug with a small trowel a hole a foot deep
in the sand, put into it the package of bills, wrapped in oil-skin,
and replaced the ground. "Pirate's gold breeds pirate's ways. May
we have seen the last of you--and may the devil take you all!" He went slowly back to his horse, mounted, and rode back to town. They
had done their part--would the thieves do theirs? Adhering strictly to the instructions, Croyden and Macloud left
Annapolis on the next car, caught the boat at Baltimore, and arrived in
Hampton in the evening, in time for dinner. They stopped a few minutes
at Ashburton, to acquaint Captain Carrington with their return, and
then went on to Clarendon. Neither wanted the other to know and each
endeavored to appear at ease. He threw his cigarette into his coffee cup, and
pushed his chair back from the table. "You're trying to appear nonchalant,
and you're doing it very well, too, but you can't control your fingers
and your eyes--and neither can I, I fancy, though I've tried hard
enough, God knows! These four days of strain and
uncertainty have taken it all out of us. If I had any doubt as to my
affection for Elaine, it's vanished, now.----I don't say I'm fool
enough to propose to her, yet I'm scarcely responsible, at present. If
I were to see her this minute, I'd likely do something rash." "You're coming around to it, gradually," said Macloud. I don't know about the 'gradually.' I want to pull
myself together--to get a rein on myself--to--what are you smiling at;
am I funny?" "I never saw a man fight so hard against his
personal inclinations, and a rich wife. You don't deserve her!--if I
were Elaine, I'd turn you down hard, hard." "And hence, with a woman's unreasonableness and trust in the one she
loves, she will likely accept you." Macloud blew a couple of smoke rings and watched them sail upward. "I suppose you're equally discerning as to Miss Carrington, and her
love for you," Croyden commented. "I regret to say, I'm not," said Macloud, seriously. "That is what
troubles me, indeed. Unlike my friend, Geoffrey Croyden, I'm perfectly
sure of my own mind, but I'm not sure of the lady's." "Then, why don't you find out?" "Exactly what I shall do, when she returns." We each seem to be able to answer the other's uncertainty," he
remarked, calmly. "I'm going over to Ashburton, and talk with the Captain a little--sort
of cheer him up. "It's a very good occupation for you, sitting up to
the old gent. I'll give you a chance by staying away, to-night. Make a
hit with grandpa, Colin, make a hit with grandpa!" "And you make a hit with yourself--get rid of your foolish theory, and
come down to simple facts," Macloud retorted, and he went out. "Get rid of your foolish theory," Croyden soliloquized. "Well,
maybe--but _is_ it foolish, that's the question? I'm poor, once
more--I've not enough even for Elaine Cavendish's husband--there's the
rub! she won't be Geoffrey Croyden's wife, it's I who will be Elaine
Cavendish's husband. 'Elaine Cavendish _and her husband_ dine with us
to-night!' --'Elaine Cavendish _and her husband_ were at the horse
show!' 'Elaine Cavendish _and her husband_ were here!--or there!--or
thus and so!'" It would be too belittling, too disparaging of
self-respect.--Elaine Cavendish's husband!--Elaine Cavendish's
husband! Might he out-grow it--be known for himself? He glanced up at
the portrait of the gallant soldier of a lost cause, with the high-bred
face and noble bearing. "You were a brave man, Colonel Duval!" He took out a cigar, lit it very deliberately, and fell to thinking....
Presently, worn out by fatigue and anxiety, he dozed....

                  *       *       *       *       *

And as he dozed, the street door opened softly, a light step crossed
the hall, and Elaine Cavendish stood in the doorway. She was clad in black velvet, trimmed in sable. A
blue cloak was thrown, with careless grace, about her gleaming
shoulders. One slender hand lifted the gown from before her feet. She
saw the sleeping man and paused, and a smile of infinite tenderness
passed across her face. A moment she hesitated, and at the thought, a faint blush suffused her
face. Then she glided softly over, bent and kissed him on the lips. She was there, before him,
the blush still on cheek and brow. And, straightway took her, unresisting,
in his arms....

"Tell me all about yourself," he said, at last, drawing her down into
the chair and seating himself on the arm. "Where is Miss
Carrington--safe?" "Colin's with her--I reckon she's safe!" "It won't be
his fault if she isn't, I'm sure.--I left them at Ashburton, and came
over here to--you." "I'll go back at once----"

He laughed, joyously. "My hair,
dear,--do be careful!" "I'll be good--if you will kiss me again!" "But you're not asleep," she objected. "And you will promise--not to kiss me again?" She looked up at him tantalizingly, her red lips parted, her bosom
fluttering below. "If it's worth coming half way for, sweetheart--you may," she said....

"Now, if you're done with foolishness--for a little while," she said,
gayly, "I'll tell you how we managed to get free." "Oh, yes!--the Parmenter jewels. Davila told me the story, and how you
didn't find them, though our abductors think you did, and won't believe
otherwise." "None--we were most courteously treated; and they released us, as
quickly as the check was paid." "I mean, that I gave them my check for the ransom money--you hadn't the
jewels, you couldn't comply with the demand. I knew you couldn't pay it, so I did. Don't let us think of
it, dear!--It's over, and we have each other, now. Then suddenly she, woman-like, went straight back to
it. "How did you think we managed to get free--escaped?" "Yes--I never thought of your paying the money." she said, "you are deceiving me!--you are--_you_ paid the money,
also!" Macloud and I _did_ pay the ransom to-day--but of what consequence is
it; whether you bought your freedom, or we bought it, or both bought
it? You and Davila are here, again--that's the only thing that
matters!" came Macloud's voice from the
hallway, and Davila and he walked into the room. Elaine, with a little shriek, sprang up. "Davila and I were occupying similar
positions at Ashburton, a short time ago. as
he made a motion to put his arm around her. Davila eluded him--though the traitor red confirmed his words--and
sought Elaine's side for safety. "It's a pleasure only deferred, my dear!" "By the way,
Elaine, how did Croyden happen to give in? He was shying off at your
wealth--said it would be giving hostages to fortune, and all that
rot." "I'm going to try to make
good." "Geoffrey," said Elaine, "won't you show us the old pirate's
letter--we're all interested in it, now." "I'll show you the letter, and where I
found it, and anything else you want to see. Croyden opened the secret drawer, and
took out the letter. he said, solemnly, and handed it to Elaine. She carried it to the table, spread it out under the lamp, and Davila
and she studied it, carefully, even as Croyden and Macloud had
done--reading the Duval endorsements over and over again. "It seems to me there is something queer about these postscripts," she
said, at last; "something is needed to make them clear. Is this the
entire letter?--didn't you find anything else?" "It's a bit dark in this hole. She struck it, and peered back into the recess. "Here is something!--only a corner visible." "It has slipped down, back of the false partition. She drew out a tiny sheet of paper, and handed it to Croyden. Croyden glanced at it; then gave a cry of amazed surprise. The rest crowded around him while he read:

                                         "Hampton, Maryland. "Memorandum to accompany the letter of Robert Parmenter, dated 10
  May 1738. "Whereas, it is stipulated by the said Parmenter that the Jewels
  shall be used only in the Extremity of Need; and hence, as I have
  an abundance of this world's Goods, that Need will, likely, not
  come to me. And judging that Greenberry Point will change, in
  time--so that my son or his Descendants, if occasion arise, may
  be unable to locate the Treasure--I have lifted the Iron box,
  from the place where Parmenter buried it, and have reinterred it
  in the cellar of my House in Hampton, renewing the Injunction
  which Parmenter put upon it, that it shall be used only in the
  Extremity of Need. When this Need arise, it will be found in the
  south-east corner of the front cellar. At the depth of two feet,
  between two large stones, is the Iron box. It contains the
  jewels, the most marvelous I have ever seen. For a moment, they stood staring at one another too astonished to
speak. "To think that it was here, all
the time!" They trooped down to the cellar, Croyden leading the way. Moses was off
for the evening, they had the house to themselves. As they passed the
foot of the stairs, Macloud picked up a mattock. "Which is the south-east corner,
Davila?" "The ground is not especially hard," observed Macloud, with the first
stroke. "I reckon a yard square is sufficient.--At a depth of two feet
the memorandum says, doesn't it?" Fascinated, they were watching the fall of the pick. With every blow, they were listening for it to strike the stones. "Better get a shovel, Croyden, we'll need it," said Macloud, pausing
long enough, to throw off his coat.... "Oh! I forgot to say, I wired
the Pinkerton man to recover the package you buried this morning." Croyden only nodded--stood the lamp on a box, and returned with the
coal scoop. "This will answer, I reckon," he said, and fell to work. "To have hunted
the treasure, for weeks, all over Greenberry Point, and then to find it
in the cellar, like a can of lard or a bushel of potatoes." "You haven't found it, yet," Croyden cautioned. "And we've gone the
depth mentioned." we haven't found it, yet!--but we're going to find it!" Macloud
answered, sinking the pick, viciously, in the ground, with the last
word. Macloud cried, sinking the pick in at another
place. The fifth stroke laid the stone
bare--the sixth and seventh loosened it, still more--the eighth and
ninth completed the task. When the earth was away and the stone exposed, he stooped and, putting
his fingers under the edges, heaved it out. "The rest is for you, Croyden!" For a moment, Croyden looked at it, rather dazedly. Could it be the
jewels were _there_!--within his reach!--under that lid! Suddenly, he
laughed!--gladly, gleefully, as a boy--and sprang down into the hole. The box clung to its resting place for a second, as though it was
reluctant to be disturbed--then it yielded, and Croyden swung it onto
the bank. "We'll take it to the library," he said, scraping it clean of the
adhering earth. And carrying it before them, like the Ark of the Covenant, they went
joyously up to the floor above. He placed it on the table under the chandelier, where all could see. It
was of iron, rusty with age; in dimension, about a foot square; and
fastened by a hasp, with the bar of the lock thrust through but not
secured. "Light the gas, Colin!--every burner," he said. "We'll have the full
effulgence, if you please."... The scintillations which leaped out to meet them, were like the rays
from myriads of gleaming, glistening, varicolored lights, of dazzling
brightness and infinite depth. A wonderful cavern of coruscating
splendor--rubies and diamonds, emeralds and sapphires, pearls and opals
glowing with all the fire of self, and the resentment of long neglect. "You may touch them--they will not
fade." They put them out on the table--in little heaps of color. The women
exclaiming whene'er they touched them, cooingly as a woman does when
handling jewels--fondling them, caressing them, loving them. They stood back and gazed--fascinated by it
all:--the color--the glowing reds and whites, and greens and blues. "It is wonderful--and it's true!" Two necklaces lay among the rubies, alike as lapidary's art could make
them. Croyden handed one to Macloud, the other he took. "In remembrance of your release, and of Parmenter's treasure!" he said,
and clasped it around Elaine's fair neck. Macloud clasped his around Davila's. "Who cares, now, for the time spent on Greenberry Point or the double
reward!" *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's note:

Minor changes have been made to correct typesetters' errors;
otherwise, every effort has been made to remain true to the
author's words and intent. Such we may account the importance which they attach to
organisation, and the value they set upon a common spiritual faith and
doctrine as a social basis. That the form which the recognition of these
principles is destined to assume will at all correspond to their hopes
and anticipations, is one of the most unlikely things possible. This,
however, need not detract from the worth for our purpose of their
exposition of the principles themselves. Again, the visible traces of
the impression made by the writings of this school on the influential
founder of the earliest Positivist system, are sufficiently deep and
important to make some knowledge of them of the highest historical
interest, both to those who accept and those who detest that system. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, there were three chief
schools of thought, the Sensational, the Catholic, and the Eclectic; or
as it may be put in other terms, the Materialist, the Theological, and
the Spiritualist. The first looked for the sources of knowledge, the
sanction of morals, the inspiring fountain and standard of aesthetics, to
the outside of men, to matter, and the impressions made by matter on the
corporeal senses. The second looked to divine revelation, authority and
the traditions of the Church. The third, steering a middle course,
looked partly within and partly without, relied partly on the senses,
partly on revelation and history, but still more on a certain internal
consciousness of a direct and immediate kind, which is the supreme and
reconciling judge of the reports alike of the senses, of history, of
divine revelation. [1] Each of these schools had many exponents. The
three most conspicuous champions of revived Catholicism were De Maistre,
De Bonald, and Chateaubriand. The last of them, the author of the _Genie
du Christianisme_, was effective in France because he is so deeply
sentimental, but he was too little trained in speculation, and too
little equipped with knowledge, to be fairly taken as the best
intellectual representative of their way of thinking. De Bonald was of
much heavier calibre. He really thought, while Chateaubriand only felt,
and the _Legislation Primitive_ and the _Pensees sur Divers Sujets_
contain much that an enemy of the school will find it worth while to
read, in spite of an artificial, and, if a foreigner may judge, a
detestable style. De Maistre was the greatest of the three, and deserves better than
either of the others to stand as the type of the school for many
reasons. His style is so marvellously lucid, that, notwithstanding the
mystical, or, as he said, the illuminist side of his mind, we can never
be in much doubt about his meaning, which is not by any means the case
with Bonald. To say nothing of his immensely superior natural capacity,
De Maistre's extensive reading in the literature of his foes was a
source of strength, which might indeed have been thought indispensable,
if only other persons had not attacked the same people as he did,
without knowing much or anything at all at first-hand about them. Then
he goes over the whole field of allied subjects, which we have a right
to expect to have handled by anybody with a systematic view of the
origin of knowledge, the meaning of ethics, the elements of social order
and progressiveness, the government and scheme of the universe. And
above all, his writings are penetrated with the air of reality and life,
which comes of actual participation in the affairs of that world with
which social philosophers have to deal. Lamennais had in many respects a
finer mind than De Maistre, but the conclusions in which he was finally
landed, no less than his liberal aims, prevent him from being an example
of the truly Catholic reaction. He obviously represented the Revolution,
or the critical spirit, within the Catholic limits, while De Maistre's
ruling idea was, in his own trenchant phrase, '_absolument tuer
l'esprit du dix-huitieme siecle_.' On all these accounts he appears to
be the fittest expositor of those conceptions which the anarchy that
closed the eighteenth century provoked into systematic existence. FOOTNOTE:

[1] See Damiron's _La Philosophie en France au XIXieme Siecle_. I.


Joseph de Maistre was born at Chambery in the year 1754. [2] His family
was the younger branch of a stock in Languedoc, which about the
beginning of the seventeenth century divided itself into two, one
remaining in France, the other establishing itself in Piedmont. It is
not wonderful that the descendants of the latter, settled in a country
of small extent and little political importance, placed a high value on
their kinship with an ancient line in the powerful kingdom of France. Joseph de Maistre himself was always particularly anxious to cultivate
close relations with his French kinsfolk, partly from the old
aristocratic feeling of blood, and partly from his intellectual
appreciation of the gifts of the French mind, and its vast influence as
an universal propagating power. His father held a high office in the
government of Savoy, and enjoyed so eminent a reputation that on his
death both the Senate and the King of Sardinia deliberately recorded
their appreciation of his loss as a public calamity. His mother is said
to have been a woman of lofty and devout character, and her influence
over her eldest son was exceptionally strong and tender. He used to
declare in after life that he was as docile in her hands as the youngest
of his sisters. Among other marks of his affectionate submission to
parental authority, we are told that during the whole time of his
residence at Turin, where he followed a course of law, he never read a
single book without previously writing to Chambery to one or other of
his parents for their sanction. Such traditions linger in families, and
when he came to have children of his own, they too read nothing of which
their father had not been asked to express his approbation. De Maistre's
early education was directed by the Jesuits; and as might have been
expected from the generous susceptibility of his temper, he never ceased
to think of them with warm esteem. To the end of his life he remembered
the gloom which fell upon the household, though he was not nine years
old at the time, when the news arrived of the edict of 1764, abolishing
the Society in the kingdom of France. One element of his education he
commemorates in a letter to his favourite daughter. 'Let your brother,'
he says, 'work hard at the French poets. Let him learn them by heart,
especially the incomparable Racine; never mind whether he understands
him yet or not. I didn't understand him when my mother used to come
repeating his verses by my bedside, and lulled me to sleep with her
fine voice to the sound of that inimitable music. I knew hundreds of
lines long before I knew how to read; and it is thus that my ears,
accustomed betimes to this ambrosia, have never since been able to
endure any sourer draught.' After his law studies at the University of Turin, then highly renowned
for its jurisconsults, the young De Maistre went through the successive
stages of an official career, performing various duties in the public
administration, and possessing among other honours a seat in the Senate,
over which his father presided. He led a tranquil life at Chambery, then
as at all other times an ardent reader and student. Unaided he taught
himself five languages. English he mastered so perfectly, that though he
could not follow it when spoken, he could read a book in that tongue
with as much ease as if it had been in his own. To Greek and German he
did not apply himself until afterwards, and he never acquired the same
proficiency in them as in English, French, Italian, Latin, and Spanish. To be ignorant of German then, it will be remembered, was not what it
would be now, to be without one of the literary senses. Like nearly every other great soldier of reaction, he showed in his
early life a decided inclination for new ideas. The truth that the
wildest extravagances of youthful aspiration are a better omen of a
vigorous and enlightened manhood than the decorous and ignoble faith in
the perfection of existing arrangements, was not belied in the case of
De Maistre. His intelligence was of too hard and exact a kind to
inspire him with the exalted schemes that present themselves to those
more nobly imaginative minds who dream dreams and see visions. He
projected no Savoyard emigration to the banks of the Susquehanna or
Delaware, to found millennial societies and pantisocratic unions. These
generous madnesses belong to men of more poetic temper. But still, in
spite of the deadening influences of officialism and relations with a
court, De Maistre had far too vigorous and active a character to subside
without resistance into the unfruitful ways of obstruction and social
complacency. It is one of the most certain marks, we may be sure, of a
superior spirit, that the impulses earliest awakened by its first fresh
contact with the facts of the outer world are those which quicken a
desire for the improvement of the condition of society, the increase of
the happiness of men, the amelioration of human destiny. With this
unwritten condition of human nature De Maistre, like other men of his
mental calibre, is found to have complied. He incurred the suspicion and
ill-will of most of those by whom he was immediately surrounded, by
belonging to a Reform Lodge at Chambery. The association was one of a
perfectly harmless character, but being an association, it diffused a
tarnishing vapour of social disaffection and insurgency over the names
of all who ventured to belong to it, and De Maistre was pointed out to
the Sardinian court as a man with leanings towards new things, and
therefore one of whom it were well to beware. In very small countries there is seldom room enough
for the growth of a spirit of social revolution; not at least until some
great and dominant country has released the forces of destruction. So,
when the menacing sounds of the approaching hurricane in France grew
heavy in the air, the little lodge at Chambery voluntarily dissolved
itself, and De Maistre was deputed to convey to the king, Victor Amadeo
III., the honourable assurance of its members that they had assembled
for the last time. In 1786, at the age of thirty-two, De Maistre had married, and when the
storm burst which destroyed all the hopes of his life, he was the father
of two children. In one of his gay letters to a venerable lady who was
on intimate terms with them both, he has left a picture of his wife,
which is not any less interesting for what it reveals of his own
character. 'The contrast between us two is the very strangest in the
world. For me, as you may have found out, I am the _pococurante_
senator, and above all things very free in saying what I think. She, on
the contrary, will take care that it is noon before allowing that the
sun has risen, for fear of committing herself. She knows what must be
done or what must not be done on the tenth of October 1808, at ten
o'clock in the morning, to avoid some inconvenience which otherwise
would come to pass at midnight between the fifteenth and sixteenth of
March 1810. "But, my dear husband, you pay attention to nothing; you
believe that nobody is thinking of any harm. Now I know, I have been
told, I have guessed, I foresee, I warn you," etc. "Come now, my dear,
leave me alone. You are only wasting your time: I foresee that I shall
never foresee things: that's your business." She is the supplement to
me, and hence when I am separated from her, as I am now, I suffer
absurdly from being obliged to think about my own affairs; I would
rather have to chop wood all day.... My children ought to kiss her very
steps; for my part, I have no gift for education. She has such a gift,
that I look upon it as nothing less than the eighth endowment of the
Holy Ghost; I mean a certain fond persecution by which it is given her
to torment her children from morning to night to do something, not to do
something, to learn--and yet without for a moment losing their tender
affection for her. She was
laughingly called by himself and her friends, Madame Prudence. It is
certain that few women have found more necessity for the qualities
implied in this creditable nickname. They had not been married many years before they were overtaken by
irreparable disaster. The French Revolution broke out, and Savoy was
invaded by the troops of the new Republic. Count De Maistre, with his
wife and children, fled from Chambery across the Alps to Aosta. '_Ma
chere amie_,' he said to his wife, by the side of a great rock which he
never afterwards forgot, 'the step that we are taking to-day is
irrevocable; it decides our lot for life;' and the presentiment was
true. Soon the _Loi des Allobroges_ was promulgated, which enjoined upon
all who had left their homes in Savoy to return instantly, under pain of
confiscation of all their property. Madame de Maistre was in the ninth month of her pregnancy. She knew that
her husband would endure anything rather than expose her to the risks of
a journey in such a season. So, urged by a desire to save something from
the wreck of their fortune by compliance with the French decree, she
seized the opportunity of her husband's absence at Turin, and started
for Savoy without acquainting him with her design. Bernard in the beginning of January on the back of a mule,
accompanied by her two little children wrapped in blankets. The Count,
on his return to Aosta two or three days afterwards, forthwith set off
in her steps, in the trembling expectation of finding her dead or dying
in some Alpine hovel. But the favour of fate and a stout heart brought
her safe to Chambery, where shortly afterwards she was joined by her
husband. The authorities vainly tendered him the oath, vainly bade him
inscribe his name on the register of citizens; and when they asked him
for a contribution to support the war, he replied curtly that he did not
give money to kill his brothers in the service of the King of Sardinia. As soon as his wife was delivered of their third child, whom he was
destined not to see again for nearly twenty years, he quitted her side,
abandoned his property and his country, and took refuge at Lausanne,
where in time his wife and his two eldest children once more came to
him. Gibbon tells us how a swarm of emigrants, escaping from the public ruin,
was attracted by the vicinity, the manners, and the language of
Lausanne. 'They are entitled to our pity,' he reflected, 'and they may
claim our esteem, but they cannot in their present state of mind and
fortune contribute much to our amusement. Instead of looking down as
calm and idle spectators on the theatre of Europe, our domestic harmony
is somewhat embittered by the infusion of party spirit.' Gibbon died in
London almost at the very moment that De Maistre arrived at Lausanne,
but his account of things remained true, and political feuds continued
to run as high as ever. Among the people with whom De Maistre was thrown
was Madame de Stael. 'As we had not been to the same school,' he says,
'either in theology or in politics, we had some scenes enough to make
one die of laughter; still without quarrelling. Her father, who was then
alive, was the friend and relative of people that I love with all my
heart, and that I would not vex for all the world. So I allowed the
_emigres_ who surrounded us to cry out as they would, without ever
drawing the sword.' De Maistre thought he never came across a head so
completely turned wrong as Madame de Stael's, the infallible
consequence, as he took it to be, of modern philosophy operating upon a
woman's nature. if Madame de Stael had been
Catholic, she would have been adorable, instead of famous.' We can
believe that his position among the French _emigres_ was not
particularly congenial. For though they hated the Revolution, they had
all drunk of the waters of the eighteenth century philosophy, and De
Maistre hated this philosophy worse than he hated the Revolution itself. Then again, they would naturally vapour about the necessities of strong
government. 'Yes,' said the Savoyard exile, 'but be quite sure that, to
make the monarchy strong, you must rest it on the laws, avoiding
everything arbitrary, too frequent commissions, and all ministerial
jobberies.' We may well believe how unsavoury this rational and just
talk was to people who meant by strong government a system that should
restore to them their old prerogatives of anti-social oppression and
selfish corruption. The order that De Maistre vindicated was a very
different thing from the deadly and poisonous order which was the object
of the prayers of the incorrigible royalists around him. After staying three years at Lausanne, De Maistre went to Turin, but
shortly afterwards the Sardinian king, at the end of a long struggle,
was forced to succumb to the power of the French, then in the full tide
of success. Bonaparte's brilliant Italian campaign needs no words here. The French entered Turin, and De Maistre, being an _emigre_, had to
leave it. Furnished with a false passport, and undergoing a thousand
hardships and dangers, he made his way, once more in the depth of a
severe winter (1797), to Venice. He went part of the way down the Po in
a small trading ship, crowded with ladies, priests, monks, soldiers, and
a bishop. There was only one small fire on board, at which all the
cooking had to be done, and where the unhappy passengers had to keep
themselves warm as they could. At night they were confined each to a
space about three planks broad, separated from neighbours by pieces of
canvas hanging from a rope above. Each bank of the river was lined by
military posts--the left by the Austrians, and the right by the French;
and the danger of being fired into was constantly present to aggravate
the misery of overcrowding, scanty food, and bitter cold. Even this
wretchedness was surpassed by the hardships which confronted the exiles
at Venice. The physical distress endured here by De Maistre and his
unfortunate family exceeded that of any other period of their
wanderings. He was cut off from the court, and from all his relations
and friends, and reduced for the means of existence to a few fragments
of silver plate, which had somehow been saved from the universal wreck. This slender resource grew less day by day, and when that was exhausted
the prospect was a blank. The student of De Maistre's philosophy may see
in what crushing personal anguish some of its most sinister growths had
their roots. When the cares of beggary come suddenly upon a man in
middle life, they burn very deep. Alone, and starving for a cause that
is dear to him, he might encounter the grimness of fate with a fortitude
in which there should be many elevating and consoling elements. But the
destiny is intolerably hard which condemns a man of humane mould, as De
Maistre certainly was, to look helplessly on the physical pains of a
tender woman and famishing little ones. The anxieties that press upon
his heart in such calamity as this are too sharp, too tightened, and too
sordid for him to draw a single free breath, or to raise his eyes for a
single moment of relief from the monstrous perplexity that chokes him. The hour of bereavement has its bitterness, but the bitterness is
gradually suffused with soft reminiscence. The grip of beggary leaves a
mark on such a character as De Maistre's which no prosperity of after
days effaces. The seeming inhumanity of his theory of life, which is so
revolting to comfortable people like M. Villemain, was in truth the only
explanation of his own cruel sufferings in which he could find any
solace. It was not that he hated mankind, but that his destiny looked as
if God hated him, and this was a horrible moral complexity out of which
he could only extricate himself by a theory in which pain and torment
seem to stand out as the main facts in human existence. Hope smiled on him momentarily,
but, in his own words: 'It was only a flash in the night.' While he was
in Venice, the armies of Austria and Russia reconquered the north of
Italy, and Charles Emanuel IV., in the natural anticipation that the
allies would at once restore his dominions, hastened forward. Austria,
however, as De Maistre had seen long before, was indifferent or even
absolutely hostile to Sardinian interests, and she successfully opposed
Charles Emanuel's restoration. The king received the news of the perfidy
of his nominal ally at Florence, but not until after he had made
arrangements for rewarding the fidelity of some of his most loyal
adherents. It was from Florence that De Maistre received the king's nomination to
the chief place in the government of the island of Sardinia. Through the
short time of his administration here, he was overwhelmed with vexations
only a little more endurable than the physical distresses which had
weighed him down at Venice. During the war, justice had been
administered in a grossly irregular manner. Hence, people had taken the
law into their own hands, and retaliation had completed the round of
wrong-doing. The higher
class exhibited an invincible repugnance to paying their debts. Some of
these difficulties in the way of firm and orderly government were
insuperable, and De Maistre vexed his soul in an unequal and only
partially successful contest. In after years, amid the miseries of his
life in Russia, he wrote to his brother thus: 'Sometimes in moments of
solitude that I multiply as much as I possibly can, I throw my head back
on the cushion of my sofa, and there with my four walls around me, far
from all that is dear to me, confronted by a sombre and impenetrable
future, I recall the days when in a little town that you know well'--he
meant Cagliari--'with my head resting on another sofa, and only seeing
around our own exclusive circle (good heavens, what an impertinence!) little men and little things, I used to ask myself: "Am I then condemned
to live and die in this place, like a limpet on a rock?" I suffered
bitterly; my head was overloaded, wearied, flattened, by the enormous
weight of Nothing.' In 1802 he received an order
from the king to proceed to St. Petersburg as envoy extraordinary and
minister plenipotentiary at the court of Russia. Even from this bitter
proof of devotion to his sovereign he did not shrink. He had to tear
himself from his wife and children, without any certainty when so cruel
a separation would be likely to end; to take up new functions which the
circumstances of the time rendered excessively difficult; while the
petty importance of the power he represented, and its mendicant attitude
in Europe, robbed his position of that public distinction and dignity
which may richly console a man for the severest private sacrifice. It is
a kind destiny which veils their future from mortal men. Fifteen years
passed before De Maistre's exile came to a close. From 1802 to 1817 he
did not quit the inhospitable latitudes of northern Russia. De Maistre's letters during this desolate period furnish a striking
picture of his manner of life and his mental state. We see in them his
most prominent characteristics strongly marked. Not even the
painfulness of the writer's situation ever clouds his intrepid and
vigorous spirit. Lively and gallant sallies of humour to his female
friends, sagacious judgments on the position of Europe to political
people, bits of learned criticism for erudite people, tender and playful
chat with his two daughters, all these alternate with one another with
the most delightful effect. Whether he is writing to his little girl
whom he has never known, or to the king of Sardinia, or to some author
who sends him a book, or to a minister who has found fault with his
diplomacy, there is in all alike the same constant and remarkable play
of a bright and penetrating intellectual light, coloured by a humour
that is now and then a little sardonic, but more often is genial and
lambent. There is a certain semi-latent quality of hardness lying at the
bottom of De Maistre's style, both in his letters and in his more
elaborate compositions. His writings seem to recall the flavour and
bouquet of some of the fortifying and stimulating wines of Burgundy,
from which time and warmth have not yet drawn out a certain native
roughness that lingers on the palate. This hardness, if one must give
the quality a name that only imperfectly describes it, sprang not from
any original want of impressionableness or sensibility of nature, but
partly from the relentless buffetings which he had to endure at the
hands of fortune, and partly from the preponderance which had been given
to the rational side of his mind by long habits of sedulous and accurate
study. Few men knew so perfectly as he knew how to be touching without
ceasing to be masculine, nor how to go down into the dark pits of human
life without forgetting the broad sunlight, nor how to keep habitually
close to visible and palpable fact while eagerly addicted to
speculation. His contemplations were perhaps somewhat too near the
ground; they led him into none of those sublimer regions of subtle
feeling where the rarest human spirits have loved to travel; we do not
think of his mind among those who have gone

    Voyaging through strange seas of thought alone. If this kind of temper, strong, keen, frank, and a little hard and
mordent, brought him too near a mischievous disbelief in the dignity of
men and their lives, at least it kept him well away from morbid weakness
in ethics, and from beating the winds in metaphysics. But of this we
shall see more in considering his public pieces than can be gathered
from his letters. The discomforts of De Maistre's life at St. The
dignity of his official style and title was an aggravation of the
exceeding straitness of his means. The ruined master could do little to
mitigate the ruin of his servant. He had to keep up the appearance of an
ambassador on the salary of a clerk. 'This is the second winter,' he
writes to his brother in 1810, 'that I have gone through without a
pelisse, which is exactly like going without a shirt at Cagliari. When I
come from court a very sorry lackey throws a common cloak over my
shoulders.' The climate suited him better than he had expected; and in
one letter he vows that he was the only living being in Russia who had
passed two winters without fur boots and a fur hat. It was considered
indispensable that he should keep a couple of servants; so, for his
second, De Maistre was obliged to put up with a thief, whom he rescued
under the shelter of ambassadorial privilege from the hands of justice,
on condition that he would turn honest. The Austrian ambassador, with
whom he was on good terms, would often call to take him out to some
entertainment. 'His fine servants mount my staircase groping their way
in the dark, and we descend preceded by a servant carrying _luminare
minus quam ut praeesset nocti_.' 'I am certain,' he adds pleasantly,
'that they make songs about me in their Austrian patois. Sometimes he was reduced so far as to share the soup of his valet, for
lack of richer and more independent fare. Then he was constantly fretted
by enemies at home, who disliked his trenchant diplomacy, and distrusted
the strength and independence of a mind which was too vigorous to please
the old-fashioned ministers of the Sardinian court. These chagrins he
took as a wise man should. They disturbed him less than his separation
from his family. 'Six hundred leagues away from you all,' he writes to
his brother, 'the thoughts of my family, the reminiscences of childhood,
transport me with sadness.' Visions of his mother's saintly face
haunted his chamber; almost gloomier still was the recollection of old
intimates with whom he had played, lived, argued, and worked for years,
and yet who now no longer bore him in mind. There are not many glimpses
of this melancholy in the letters meant for the eye of his beloved
_trinite feminine_, as he playfully called his wife and two daughters. '_A quoi bon vous attrister_,' he asked bravely, '_sans raison et sans
profit?_' Occasionally he cannot help letting out to them how far his
mind is removed from composure. 'Every day as I return home I found my
house as desolate as if it was yesterday you left me. In society the
same fancy pursues me, and scarcely ever quits me.' Music, as might be
surmised in so sensitive a nature, drove him almost beside himself with
its mysterious power of intensifying the dominant emotion. 'Whenever by
any chance I hear the harpsichord,' he says,'melancholy seizes me. The
sound of the violin gives me such a heavy heart, that I am fain to leave
the company and hasten home.' He tossed in his bed at night, thinking he
heard the sound of weeping at Turin, making a thousand efforts to
picture to himself the looks of that 'orphan child of a living father'
whom he had never known, wondering if ever he should know her, and
battling with a myriad of black phantoms that seemed to rustle in his
curtains. 'But you, M. de Chevalier,' he said apologetically to the
correspondent to whom he told these dismal things, 'you are a father,
you know the cruel dreams of a waking man; if you were not of the
profession I would not allow my pen to write you this jeremiad.' As De
Maistre was accustomed to think himself happy if he got three hours'
sound sleep in the night, these sombre and terrible vigils were ample
enough to excuse him if he had allowed them to overshadow all other
things. But the vigour of his intellect was too strenuous, and his
curiosity and interest in every object of knowledge too
inextinguishable. 'After all,' he said, 'the only thing to do is to put
on a good face, and to march to the place of torture with a few friends
to console you on the way. This is the charming image under which I
picture my present situation. Mark you,' he added, 'I always count books
among one's consoling friends.' In one of the most gay and charming of his letters, apologising to a
lady for the remissness of his correspondence, he explains that
diplomacy and books occupy every moment. 'You will admit, madam, there
is no possibility of one's shutting up books entirely. Nay, more than
ever, I feel myself burning with the feverish thirst for knowledge. I
have had an access of it which I cannot describe to you. The most
curious books literally run after me, and hurry voluntarily to place
themselves in my hands. As soon as diplomacy gives me a moment of
breathing-time I rush headlong to that favourite pasture, to that
ambrosia of which the mind can never have enough--

    _Et voila ce qui fait que votre ami est muet._'

He thinks himself happy if, by refusing invitations to dinner, he can
pass a whole day without stirring from his house. 'I read, I write, I
study; for after all one must know something.' In his hours of
depression he fancied that he only read and worked, not for the sake of
the knowledge, but to stupefy and tire himself out, if that were
possible. As a student De Maistre was indefatigable. He never belonged to that
languid band who hoped to learn difficult things by easy methods. The
only way, he warned his son, is to shut your door, to say that you are
not within, and to work. 'Since they have set themselves to teach us how
we ought to learn the dead languages, you can find nobody who knows
them; and it is amusing enough that people who don't know them, should
be so obstinately bent on demonstrating the vices of the methods
employed by us who do know them.' He was one of those wise and laborious
students who do not read without a pen in their hands. He never shrank
from the useful toil of transcribing abundantly from all the books he
read everything that could by any possibility eventually be of service
to him in his inquiries. As soon as one of
them was filled, he carefully made up an index of its contents, numbered
it, and placed it on a shelf with its unforgotten predecessors. In one
place he accidentally mentions that he had some thirty of these folios
over the head of his writing-table. 'If I am a pedant at home,' he said, 'at least I am as little as
possible a pedant out of doors.' In the evening he would occasionally
seek the society of ladies, by way of recovering some of that native
gaiety of heart which had hitherto kept him alive. 'I blow on this
spark,' to use his own words, 'just as an old woman blows among the
ashes to get a light for her lamp.' A student and a thinker, De Maistre
was also a man of the world, and he may be added to the long list of
writers who have shown that to take an active part in public affairs and
mix in society give a peculiar life, reality, and force to both
scholarship and speculation. It was computed at that time that the
author of a philosophic piece could not safely count upon more than a
hundred and fifty readers in Russia; and hence, we might be sure, even
if we had not De Maistre's word for it, that away from his own house he
left his philosophy behind. The vehemence of his own convictions did not
prevent him from being socially tolerant to others who hated them. 'If I
had the good fortune to be among his acquaintances,' he wrote of a
heretical assailant, 'he would see that among the people with
convictions it would be hard to find one so free from prejudice as I am. I have many friends among the Protestants, and now that their system is
tottering, they are all the dearer to me.' In spite of his scanty means,
his shabby valet, his threadbare cloak, and the humbleness of his
diplomatic position, the fire and honesty of his character combined with
his known ability to place him high in the esteem of the society of St. His fidelity, devotion, and fortitude, mellowed by many
years and by meditative habits, and tinged perhaps by the patrician
consciousness of birth, formed in him a modest dignity of manner which
men respected. They perceived it to be no artificial assumption, but the
outward image of a lofty and self-respecting spirit. His brother
diplomatists, even the representatives of France, appear to have treated
him with marked consideration. His letters prove him to have been a
favourite among ladies. The Emperor Alexander showed him considerable
kindness of the cheap royal sort. He conferred on his brother, Xavier de
Maistre, a post in one of the public museums, while to the Sardinian
envoy's son he gave a commission in the Russian service. The first departure of this son for the campaign of 1807 occasioned some
of the most charming passages in De Maistre's letters, both to the young
soldier himself and to others. For though without a touch of morbid
expansiveness, he never denied himself the solace of opening his heart
to a trusted friend, and a just reserve with strangers did not hinder a
humane and manly confidence with intimates. 'This morning,' he wrote to
his stripling, soon after he had joined the army, 'I felt a tightening
at my heart when a pet dog came running in and jumped upon your bed,
where he finds you no more. He soon perceived his mistake, and said
clearly enough, after his own fashion: _I am mistaken; where can he be
then?_ As for me I have felt all that you will feel, if ever you pursue
this mighty trade of being a father.' And then he begs of his son if he
should find himself with a tape line in his hand, that he will take his
exact measure and forward it. Soon came the news of the battle of
Friedland, and the unhappy father thought he read the fate of his son in
the face of every acquaintance he met. And so it was in later campaigns,
as De Maistre records in correspondence that glows with tender and
healthy solicitude. All this is worth dwelling upon, for two reasons. First, because De Maistre has been too much regarded and spoken of as a
man of cold sensibility, and little moved by the hardships which fill
the destiny of our unfortunate race. And, secondly, because his own keen
acquaintance with mental anguish helps us to understand the zeal with
which he attempts to reconcile the blind cruelty and pain and torture
endured by mortals with the benignity and wisdom of the immortal. 'After
all,' he used to say, 'there are only two real evils--remorse and
disease.' This is true enough for an apophthegm, but as a matter of fact
it never for an instant dulled his sensibility to far less supreme forms
of agony than the recollection of irreparable pain struck into the lives
of others. It is interesting and suggestive to recall how a later
publicist viewed the ills that dwarf our little lives. 'If I were asked
to class human miseries,' said Tocqueville, 'I would do so in this
order: first, Disease; second, Death; third, Doubt.' At a later date, he
altered the order, and deliberately declared doubt to be the most
insupportable of all evils, worse than death itself. But Tocqueville was
an aristocrat, as Guizot once told him, who accepted his defeat. He
stood on the brink of the great torrent of democracy, and shivered. De
Maistre was an aristocrat too, but he was incapable of knowing what
doubt or hesitation meant. He never dreamt that his cause was lost, and
he mocked and defied the Revolution to the end. We easily see how
natures of this sort, ardent, impetuous, unflinching, find themselves in
the triumphant paths that lead to remorse at their close, and how they
thus come to feel remorse rather than doubt as the consummate agony of
the human mind. Having had this glimpse of De Maistre's character away from his books,
we need not linger long over the remaining events of his life. In 1814
his wife and two daughters joined him in the Russian capital. Two years
later an outburst of religious fanaticism caused the sudden expulsion of
the Jesuits from Russia, to De Maistre's deep mortification. Several
conversions had taken place from the Orthodox to the Western faith, and
these inflamed the Orthodox party, headed by the Prince de Galitzin, the
minister of public worship, with violent theological fury. De Maistre,
whose intense attachment to his own creed was well known, fell under
suspicion of having connived at these conversions, and the Emperor
himself went so far as to question him. 'I told him,' De Maistre says,
'that I had never changed the faith of any of his subjects, but that if
any of them had by chance made me a sharer of their confidence, neither
honour nor conscience would have allowed me to tell them that they were
wrong.' This kind of dialogue between a sovereign and an ambassador
implied a situation plainly unfavourable to effective diplomacy. The
envoy obtained his recall, and after twenty-five years' absence returned
to his native country (1817). On his way home, it may be noticed, De
Maistre passed a few days in Paris, and thus, for the first and last
time, one of the most eminent of modern French writers found himself on
French soil. The king accorded De Maistre an honourable reception, conferred upon him
a high office and a small sum of money, and lent his ear to other
counsellors. The philosopher, though insisting on declaring his
political opinions, then, as ever, unwaveringly anti-revolutionary,
threw himself mainly upon that literary composition which had been his
solace in yet more evil days than these. It was at this time that he
gave to the world the supreme fruit of nearly half a century of study,
meditation, and contact with the world, in _Du Pape_, _Les Soirees de
Saint Petersbourg_, and _L'Eglise Gallicane_. Their author did not live
long to enjoy the vast discussion which they occasioned, nor the
reputation that they have since conferred upon his name. He died in
February 1821 after such a life as we have seen. FOOTNOTE:

[2] The facts of De Maistre's life I have drawn from a very meagre
biography by his son, Count Rodolphe de Maistre, supplemented by two
volumes of _Lettres et Opuscules_ (Fourth edition. 1865),
and a volume of his _Diplomatic Correspondence_, edited by M. Albert
Blanc. It is not at all surprising that they upon whom the revolutionary deluge
came should have looked with indiscriminating horror and affright on all
the influences which in their view had united first to gather up, and
then to release the destructive flood. The eighteenth century to men
like De Maistre seemed an infamous parenthesis, mysteriously interposed
between the glorious age of Bossuet and Fenelon, and that yet brighter
era for faith and the Church which was still to come in the good time of
Divine Providence. The philosophy of the last century, he says on more
than one occasion, will form one of the most shameful epochs of the
human mind: it never praised even good men except for what was bad in
them. He looked upon the gods whom that century had worshipped as the
direct authors of the bloodshed and ruin in which their epoch had
closed. The memory of mild and humane philosophers was covered with the
kind of black execration that prophets of old had hurled at Baal or
Moloch; Locke and Hume, Voltaire and Rousseau, were habitually spoken of
as very scourges of God. From this temper two consequences naturally
flowed. In the first place, while it lasted there was no hope of an
honest philosophic discussion of the great questions which divide
speculative minds. Moderation and impartiality were virtues of almost
superhuman difficulty for controversialists who had made up their minds
that it was their opponents who had erected the guillotine, confiscated
the sacred property of the church, slaughtered and banished her
children, and filled the land with terror and confusion. It is hard amid
the smoking ruins of the homestead to do full justice to the theoretical
arguments of the supposed authors of the conflagration. Hence De
Maistre, though, as has been already said, intimately acquainted with
the works of his foes in the letter, was prevented by the vehemence of
his antipathy to the effects which he attributed to them, from having
any just critical estimate of their value and true spirit. 'I do not
know one of these men,' he says of the philosophers of the eighteenth
century, 'to whom the sacred title of honest man is quite suitable.' Their very names '_me dechirent la
bouche_.' To admire Voltaire is the sign of a corrupt soul; and if
anybody is drawn to the works of Voltaire, then be sure that God does
not love such an one. The divine anathema is written on the very face of
this arch-blasphemer; on his shameless brow, in the two extinct craters
still sparkling with sensuality and hate, in that frightful _rictus_
running from ear to ear, in those lips tightened by cruel malice, like a
spring ready to fly back and launch forth blasphemy and sarcasm; he
plunges into the mud, rolls in it, drinks of it; he surrenders his
imagination to the enthusiasm of hell, which lends him all its forces;
Paris crowned him, Sodom would have banished him. [3] Locke, again, did
not understand himself. His distinguishing characteristics are
feebleness and precipitancy of judgment. Vagueness and irresolution
reign in his expressions as they do in his thoughts. He constantly
exhibits that most decisive sign of mediocrity--he passes close by the
greatest questions without perceiving them. In the study of philosophy,
contempt for Locke is the beginning of knowledge. [4] Condillac was even
more vigilantly than anybody else on his guard against his own
conscience. But Hume was perhaps the most dangerous and the most guilty
of all those mournful writers who will for ever accuse the last century
before posterity--the one who employed the most talent with the most
coolness to do most harm. [5] To Bacon De Maistre paid the compliment of
composing a long refutation of his main ideas, in which Bacon's
blindness, presumption, profanity, and scientific charlatanry are
denounced in vehement and almost coarse terms, and treated as the
natural outcome of a low morality. It has long been the inglorious speciality of the theological school to
insist in this way upon moral depravity as an antecedent condition of
intellectual error. De Maistre in this respect was not unworthy of his
fellows. He believed that his opponents were even worse citizens than
they were bad philosophers, and it was his horror of them in the former
capacity that made him so bitter and resentful against them in the
latter. He could think of no more fitting image for opinions that he did
not happen to believe than counterfeit money, 'which is struck in the
first instance by great criminals, and is afterwards passed on by honest
folk who perpetuate the crime without knowing what they do.' A
philosopher of the highest class, we may be sure, does not permit
himself to be drawn down from the true object of his meditations by
these sinister emotions. But De Maistre belonged emphatically to minds
of the second order, whose eagerness to find truth is never intense and
pure enough to raise them above perturbing antipathies to persons. His
whole attitude was fatal to his claim to be heard as a truth-seeker in
any right sense of the term. He was not only persuaded of the general
justice and inexpugnableness of the orthodox system, but he refused to
believe that it was capable of being improved or supplemented by
anything which a temperate and fair examination of other doctrines might
peradventure be found to yield. With De Maistre there was no
peradventure. Again, no speculative mind of the highest order ever
mistakes, or ever moves systematically apart from, the main current of
the social movement of its time. It is implied in the very definition of
a thinker of supreme quality that he should detect, and be in a certain
accord with, the most forward and central of the ruling tendencies of
his epoch. Three-quarters of a century have elapsed since De Maistre was
driven to attempt to explain the world to himself, and this interval
has sufficed to show that the central conditions at that time for the
permanent reorganisation of the society which had just been so violently
rent in pieces, were assuredly not theological, military, nor
ultramontane, but the very opposite of all these. There was a second consequence of the conditions of the time. The
catastrophe of Europe affected the matter as well as the manner of
contemporary speculation. The French Revolution has become to us no more
than a term, though the strangest term in a historic series. To some of
the best of those who were confronted on every side by its tumult and
agitation, it was the prevailing of the gates of hell, the moral
disruption of the universe, the absolute and total surrender of the
world to them that plough iniquity and sow wickedness. Even under
ordinary circumstances few men have gone through life without
encountering some triumphant iniquity, some gross and prolonged cruelty,
which makes them wonder how God should allow such things to be. If we
remember the aspect which the Revolution wore in the eyes of those who
seeing it yet did not understand, we can imagine what dimensions this
eternal enigma must have assumed in their sight. It was inevitable that
the first problem to press on men with resistless urgency should be the
ancient question of the method of the Creator's temporal government. What is the law of the distribution of good and evil fortune? How can we
vindicate with regard to the conditions of this life, the different
destinies that fall to men? How can we defend the moral ordering of a
world in which the wicked and godless constantly triumph, while the
virtuous and upright who retain their integrity are as frequently
buffeted and put to shame? This tremendous question has never been presented with such sublimity of
expression, such noble simplicity and force of thought, as in the
majestic and touching legend of Job. But its completeness, as a
presentation of the human tragedy, is impaired by the excessive
prosperity which is finally supposed to reward the patient hero for his
fortitude. Job received twice as much as he had before, and his latter
end was blessed more than his beginning. In the chronicles of actual
history men fare not so. There is a terribly logical finish about some
of the dealings of fate, and in life the working of a curse is seldom
stayed by any dramatic necessity for a smooth consummation. No statement of
the case is adequate which maintains, by ever so delicate an
implication, that in the long run and somehow it is well in temporal
things with the just, and ill with the unjust. Until we have firmly
looked in the face the grim truth that temporal rewards and punishments
do not follow the possession or the want of spiritual or moral virtue,
so long we are still ignorant what that enigma is, which speculative
men, from the author of the book of Job downwards, have striven to
resolve. We can readily imagine the fulness with which the question
would grow up in the mind of a royalist and Catholic exile at the end of
the eighteenth century. Nothing can be more clearly put than De Maistre's answers to the
question which the circumstances of the time placed before him to solve. What is the law of the distribution of good and evil fortune in this
life? Do prosperity and adversity fall respectively
to the just and the unjust, either individually or collectively? Has the
ancient covenant been faithfully kept, that whoso hearkens diligently to
the divine voice, and observes all the commandments to do them, shall be
blessed in his basket and his store and in all the work of his hand? Or
is God a God that hideth himself? De Maistre perceived that the optimistic conception of the deity as
benign, merciful, infinitely forgiving, was very far indeed from
covering the facts. So he insisted on seeing in human destiny the
ever-present hand of a stern and terrible judge, administering a
Draconian code with blind and pitiless severity. God created men under
conditions which left them free to choose between good and evil. All the
physical evil that exists in the world is a penalty for the moral evil
that has resulted from the abuse by men of this freedom of choice. For
these physical calamities God is only responsible in the way in which a
criminal judge is responsible for a hanging. Men cannot blame the judge
for the gallows; the fault is their own in committing those offences for
which hanging is prescribed beforehand as the penalty. These curses
which dominate human life are not the result of the cruelty of the
divine ruler, but of the folly and wickedness of mankind, who, seeing
the better course, yet deliberately choose the worse. The order of the
world is overthrown by the iniquities of men; it is we who have provoked
the exercise of the divine justice, and called down the tokens of his
vengeance. The misery and disaster that surround us like a cloak are the
penalty of our crimes and the price of our expiation. Thomas has said: _Deus est auctor mali quod est poena, non autem mali
quod est culpa._ There is a certain quantity of wrong done over the face
of the world; therefore the great Judge exacts a proportionate quantity
of punishment. The total amount of evil suffered makes nice equation
with the total amount of evil done; the extent of human suffering
tallies precisely with the extent of human guilt. Of course you must
take original sin into account, 'which explains all, and without which
you can explain nothing.' 'In virtue of this primitive degradation we
are subject to all sorts of physical sufferings _in general_; just as in
virtue of this same degradation we are subject to all sorts of vices _in
general_. This original malady therefore [which is the correlative of
original sin] has no other name. It is only the capacity of suffering
all evils, as original sin is only the capacity of committing all
crimes. '[6] Hence all calamity is either the punishment of sins actually
committed by the sufferers, or else it is the general penalty exacted
for general sinfulness. Sometimes an innocent being is stricken, and a
guilty being appears to escape. But is it not the same in the
transactions of earthly tribunals? And yet we do not say that they are
conducted without regard to justice and righteousness. 'When God
punishes any society for the crimes that it has committed, he does
justice as we do justice ourselves in these sorts of circumstance. A
city revolts; it massacres the representatives of the sovereign; it
shuts its gates against him; it defends itself against his arms; it is
taken. The prince has it dismantled and deprived of all its privileges;
nobody will find fault with this decision on the ground that there are
innocent persons shut up in the city. '[7]

De Maistre's deity is thus a colossal Septembriseur, enthroned high in
the peaceful heavens, demanding ever-renewed holocausts in the name of
the public safety. It is true, as a general rule of the human mind, that the objects which
men have worshipped have improved in morality and wisdom as men
themselves have improved. The quiet gods, without effort of their own,
have grown holier and purer by the agitations and toil which civilise
their worshippers. In other words, the same influences which elevate and
widen our sense of human duty give corresponding height and nobleness to
our ideas of the divine character. The history of the civilisation of
the earth is the history of the civilisation of Olympus also. It will be
seen that the deity whom De Maistre sets up is below the moral level of
the time in respect of Punishment. In intellectual matters he vehemently
proclaimed the superiority of the tenth or the twelfth over the
eighteenth century, but it is surely carrying admiration for those loyal
times indecently far, to seek in the vindictive sackings of revolted
towns, and the miscellaneous butcheries of men, women, and babes, which
then marked the vengeance of outraged sovereignty, the most apt parallel
and analogy for the systematic administration of human society by its
Creator. Such punishment can no longer be regarded as moral in any deep
or permanent sense; it implies a gross, harsh, and revengeful character
in the executioner, that is eminently perplexing and incredible to those
who expect to find an idea of justice in the government of the world, at
least not materially below what is attained in the clumsy efforts of
uninspired publicists. In mere point of administration, the criminal code which De Maistre put
into the hands of the Supreme Being works in a more arbitrary and
capricious manner than any device of an Italian Bourbon. As Voltaire
asks--

    _Lisbonne, qui n'est plus, eut-elle plus de vices
    Que Londres, que Paris, plonges dans les delices? Lisbonne est abimee, et l'on danse a Paris._


Stay, De Maistre replies, look at Paris thirty years later, not dancing,
but red with blood. This kind of thing is often said, even now; but it
is really time to abandon the prostitution of the name of Justice to a
process which brings Lewis XVI. to the block, and consigns De Maistre to
poverty and exile, because Lewis XIV., the Regent, and Lewis XV. had
been profligate men or injudicious rulers. The reader may remember how
the unhappy Emperor Maurice as his five innocent sons were in turn
murdered before his eyes, at each stroke piously ejaculated: 'Thou art
just, O Lord! '[8] Any name would befit
this kind of transaction better than that which, in the dealings of men
with one another at least, we reserve for the honourable anxiety that he
should reap who has sown, that the reward should be to him who has
toiled for it, and the pain to him who has deliberately incurred it. What is gained by attributing to the divine government a method tainted
with every quality that could vitiate the enactment of penalties by a
temporal sovereign? We need not labour this part of the discussion further. Though conducted
with much brilliance and vigour by De Maistre, it is not his most
important nor remarkable contribution to thought. Before passing on to
that, it is worth while to make one remark. It will be inferred from De
Maistre's general position that he was no friend to physical science. Just as moderns see in the advance of the methods and boundaries of
physical knowledge the most direct and sure means of displacing the
unfruitful subjective methods of old, and so of renovating the entire
field of human thought and activity, so did De Maistre see, as his
school has seen since, that here was the stronghold of his foes. 'Ah,
how dearly,' he exclaimed, 'has man paid for the natural sciences!' Not
but that Providence designed that man should know something about them;
only it must be in due order. The ancients were not permitted to attain
to much or even any sound knowledge of physics, indisputably above us as
they were in force of mind, a fact shown by the superiority of their
languages which ought to silence for ever the voice of our modern pride. Why did the ancients remain so ignorant of natural science? 'When all Europe was Christian, when the priests
were the universal teachers, when all the establishments of Europe were
Christianised, when theology had taken its place at the head of all
instruction, and the other faculties were ranged around her like maids
of honour round their queen, the human race being thus prepared, then
the natural sciences were given to it.' Science must be kept in its
place, for it resembles fire which, when confined in the grates prepared
for it, is the most useful and powerful of man's servants; scattered
about anyhow, it is the most terrible of scourges. Whence the marked
supremacy of the seventeenth century, especially in France? From the
happy accord of religion, science, and chivalry, and from the supremacy
conceded to the first. The more perfect theology is in a country the
more fruitful it is in true science; and that is why Christian nations
have surpassed all others in the sciences, and that is why the Indians
and Chinese will never reach us, so long as we remain respectively as we
are. The more theology is cultivated, honoured, and supreme, then, other
things being equal, the more perfect will human science be: that is to
say, it will have the greater force and expansion, and will be the more
free from every mischievous and perilous connection. [9]

Little would be gained here by serious criticism of a view of this kind
from a positive point. How little, the reader will understand from De
Maistre's own explanations of his principles of Proof and Evidence. 'They have called to witness against Moses,' he says, 'history,
chronology, astronomy, geology, etc. The objections have disappeared
before true science; but those were profoundly wise who despised them
before any inquiry, or who only examined them in order to discover a
refutation, but without ever doubting that there was one. Even a
mathematical objection ought to be despised, for though it may be a
demonstrated truth, still you will never be able to demonstrate that it
contradicts a truth that has been demonstrated before.' His final
formula he boldly announced in these words: '_Que toutes les fois qu'une
proposition sera prouvee par le genre de preuve qui lui appartient,
l'objection quelconque,_ MEME INSOLUBLE, _ne doit plus etre ecoutee._'
Suppose, for example, that by a consensus of testimony it were perfectly
proved that Archimedes set fire to the fleet of Marcellus by a
burning-glass; then all the objections of geometry disappear. Prove if
you can, and if you choose, that by certain laws a glass, in order to be
capable of setting fire to the Roman fleet, must have been as big as the
whole city of Syracuse, and ask me what answer I have to make to that. '_J'ai a vous repondre qu'Archimede brula la flotte romaine avec un
miroir ardent._'

The interesting thing about such opinions as these is not the exact
height and depth of their falseness, but the considerations which could
recommend them to a man of so much knowledge, both of books and of the
outer facts of life, and of so much natural acuteness as De Maistre. Persons who have accustomed themselves to ascertained methods of proof,
are apt to look on a man who vows that if a thing has been declared
true by some authority whom he respects, then that constitutes proof to
him, as either the victim of a preposterous and barely credible
infatuation, or else as a flat impostor. Yet De Maistre was no ignorant
monk. He had no selfish or official interest in taking away the
keys of knowledge, entering not in himself, and them that would
enter in hindering. The true reasons for his detestation of the
eighteenth-century philosophers, science, and literature, are simple
enough. Like every wise man, he felt that the end of all philosophy and
science is emphatically social, the construction and maintenance and
improvement of a fabric under which the communities of men may find
shelter, and may secure all the conditions for living their lives with
dignity and service. Then he held that no truth can be harmful to
society. If he found any system of opinions, any given attitude of the
mind, injurious to tranquillity and the public order, he instantly
concluded that, however plausible they might seem when tested by logic
and demonstration, they were fundamentally untrue and deceptive. What is
logic compared with eternal salvation in the next world, and the
practice of virtue in this? The recommendation of such a mind as De
Maistre's is the intensity of its appreciation of order and social
happiness. The obvious weakness of such a mind, and the curse inherent
in its influence, is that it overlooks the prime condition of all; that
social order can never be established on a durable basis so long as the
discoveries of scientific truth in all its departments are suppressed,
or incorrectly appreciated, or socially misapplied. De Maistre did not
perceive that the cause which he supported was no longer the cause of
peace and tranquillity and right living, but was in a state of absolute
and final decomposition, and therefore was the cause of disorder and
blind wrong living. FOOTNOTES:

[3] _Soirees de Saint Petersbourg_ (8th ed. [4] _Soirees de Saint Petersbourg, 6ieme entretien_, i. [5] _Ib._ (8th ed. [6] _Soirees_, i. 76

[7] De Maistre found a curiously characteristic kind of support for this
view in the fact that evils are called _fleaux_: flails are things to
beat with: so evils must be things with which men are beaten; and as we
should not be beaten if we did not deserve it, _argal_, suffering is a
merited punishment. Apart from that common infirmity which leads people
after they have discovered an analogy between two things, to argue from
the properties of the one to those of the other, as if, instead of being
analogous, they were identical, De Maistre was particularly fond of
inferring moral truths from etymologies. He has an argument for the
deterioration of man, drawn from the fact that the Romans expressed in
the same word, _supplicium_, the two ideas of prayer and punishment
(_Soirees, 2ieme entretien_, i. p. His profundity as an
etymologist may be gathered from his analysis of _cadaver_: _ca_-ro,
_da_-ta, _ver_-mibus. [8] _Gibbon_, c. xlvi. [9] See the _Examen de la Philosophie de Bacon_, vol. 58 _et seq._




III. When the waters of the deluge of '89 began to assuage, the best minds
soon satisfied themselves that the event which Bonaparte's restoration
of order enabled them to look back upon with a certain tranquillity and
a certain completeness, had been neither more nor less than a new
irruption of barbarians into the European world. The monarchy, the
nobles, and the Church, with all the ideas that gave each of them life
and power, had fallen before atheists and Jacobins, as the ancient
empire of Rome had fallen before Huns and Goths, Vandals and Lombards. The leaders of the revolution had succeeded one another, as Attila had
come after Alaric, and as Genseric had been followed by Odoacer. The
problem which presented itself was not new in the history of western
civilisation; the same dissolution of old bonds which perplexed the
foremost men at the beginning of the nineteenth century, had distracted
their predecessors from the fifth to the eighth, though their conditions
and circumstances were widely different. The practical question in both
cases was just the same--how to establish a stable social order which,
resting on principles that should command the assent of all, might
secure the co-operation of all for its harmonious and efficient
maintenance, and might offer a firm basis for the highest and best life
that the moral and intellectual state of the time allowed. There were
two courses open, or which seemed to be open, in this gigantic
enterprise of reconstructing a society. One of them was to treat the
case of the eighteenth century as if it were not merely similar to, but
exactly identical with, the case of the fifth, and as if exactly the
same forces which had knit Western Europe together into a compact
civilisation a thousand years before, would again suffice for a second
consolidation. Christianity, rising with the zeal and strength of youth
out of the ruins of the Empire, and feudalism by the need of
self-preservation imposing a form upon the unshapen associations of the
barbarians, had between them compacted the foundations and reared the
fabric of mediaeval life. Why, many men asked themselves, should not
Christian and feudal ideas repeat their great achievement, and be the
means of reorganising the system which a blind rebellion against them
had thrown into deplorable and fatal confusion? Let the century which
had come to such an end be regarded as a mysteriously intercalated
episode, and no more, in the long drama of faith and sovereign order. Let it pass as a sombre and pestilent stream, whose fountains no man
should discover, whose waters had for a season mingled with the mightier
current of the divinely allotted destiny of the race, and had then
gathered themselves apart and flowed off, to end as they had begun, in
the stagnation and barrenness of the desert. Philosophers and men of
letters, astronomers and chemists, atheists and republicans, had shown
that they were only powerful to destroy, as the Goths and the Vandals
had been. They had shown that they were impotent, as the Goths and the
Vandals had been, in building up again. Let men turn their faces, then,
once more to that system by which in the ancient times Europe had been
delivered from a relapse into eternal night. The minds to whom it
commended itself were cast in a different mould and drew their
inspiration from other traditions. In their view the system which the
Church had been the main agency in organising, had fallen quite as much
from its own irremediable weakness as from the direct onslaughts of
assailants within and without. The barbarians had rushed in, it was
true, in 1793; but this time it was the Church and feudalism which were
in the position of the old empire on whose ruins they had built. What
had once restored order and belief to the West, was now in its own turn
overtaken by decay and dissolution. To look to them to unite these new
barbarians in a stable and vigorous civilisation, because they had
organised Europe of old, was as infatuated as it would have been to
expect the later emperors to equal the exploits of the Republic and
their greatest predecessors in the purple. To despise philosophers and
men of science was only to play over again in a new dress the very part
which Julian had enacted in the face of nascent Christianity. The
eighteenth century, instead of being that home of malaria which the
Catholic and Royalist party represented, was in truth the seed-ground of
a new and better future. Its ideas were to furnish the material and the
implements by which should be repaired the terrible breaches and chasms
in European order that had been made alike by despots and Jacobins, by
priests and atheists, by aristocrats and sans-culottes. Amidst all the
demolition upon which its leading minds had been so zealously bent, they
had been animated by the warmest love of social justice, of human
freedom, of equal rights, and by the most fervent and sincere longing to
make a nobler happiness more universally attainable by all the children
of men. It was to these great principles that we ought eagerly to turn,
to liberty, to equality, to brotherhood, if we wished to achieve before
the new invaders a work of civilisation and social reconstruction, such
as Catholicism and feudalism had achieved for the multitudinous invaders
of old. Such was the difference which divided opinion when men took heart to
survey the appalling scene of moral desolation that the cataclysm of '93
had left behind. For if the
conscience of the Liberals was oppressed by the sanguinary tragedy in
which freedom and brotherhood and justice had been consummated, the
Catholic and the Royalist were just as sorely burdened with the weight
of kingly basenesses and priestly hypocrisies. If the one had some
difficulty in interpreting Jacobinism and the Terror, the other was
still more severely pressed to interpret the fact and origin and meaning
of the Revolution; if the Liberal had Marat and Hebert, the Royalist had
Lewis XV., and the Catholic had Dubois and De Rohan. Each school could
intrepidly hurl back the taunts of its enemy, and neither of them did
full justice to the strong side of the other. Yet we who are, in England
at all events, removed a little aside from the centre of this great
battle, may perceive that at that time both of the contending hosts
fought under honourable banners, and could inscribe upon their shields a
rational and intelligible device. Indeed, unless the modern Liberal
admits the strength inherent in the cause of his enemies, it is
impossible for him to explain to himself the duration and obstinacy of
the conflict, the slow advance and occasional repulse of the host in
which he has enlisted, and the tardy progress that Liberalism has made
in that stupendous reconstruction which the Revolution has forced the
modern political thinker to meditate upon, and the modern statesman to
further and control. De Maistre, from those general ideas as to the method of the government
of the world, of which we have already seen something, had formed what
he conceived to be a perfectly satisfactory way of accounting for the
eighteenth century and its terrific climax. The will of man is left
free; he acts contrary to the will of God; and then God exacts the
shedding of blood as the penalty. The only hope of
the future lay in an immediate return to the system which God himself
had established, and in the restoration of that spiritual power which
had presided over the reconstruction of Europe in darker and more
chaotic times than even these. Though, perhaps, he nowhere expresses
himself on this point in a distinct formula, De Maistre was firmly
impressed with the idea of historic unity and continuity. He looked upon
the history of the West in its integrity, and was entirely free from
anything like that disastrous kind of misconception which makes the
English Protestant treat the long period between St. Paul and Martin
Luther as a howling waste, or which makes some Americans omit from all
account the still longer period of human effort from the crucifixion of
Christ to the Declaration of Independence. The rise of the vast
structure of Western civilisation during and after the dissolution of
the Empire, presented itself to his mind as a single and uniform
process, though marked in portions by temporary, casual, parenthetical
interruptions, due to depraved will and disordered pride. All the
dangers to which this civilisation had been exposed in its infancy and
growth were before his eyes. First, there were the heresies with which
the subtle and debased ingenuity of the Greeks had stained and distorted
the great but simple mysteries of the faith. Then came the hordes of
invaders from the North, sweeping with irresistible force over regions
that the weakness or cowardice of the wearers of the purple left
defenceless before them. Before the northern tribes had settled in their
possessions, and had full time to assimilate the faith and the
institutions which they had found there, the growing organisation was
menaced by a more deadly peril in the incessant and steady advance of
the bloody and fanatical tribes from the East. And in this way De
Maistre's mind continued the picture down to the latest days of all,
when there had arisen men who, denying God and mocking at Christ, were
bent on the destruction of the very foundations of society, and had
nothing better to offer the human race than a miserable return to a
state of nature. As he thus reproduced this long drama, one benign and central figure was
ever present, changeless in the midst of ceaseless change; laboriously
building up with preterhuman patience and preterhuman sagacity, when
other powers, one after another in evil succession, were madly raging to
destroy and to pull down; thinking only of the great interests of order
and civilisation, of which it had been constituted the eternal
protector, and showing its divine origin and inspiration alike by its
unfailing wisdom and its unfailing benevolence. It is the Sovereign
Pontiff who thus stands forth throughout the history of Europe, as the
great Demiurgus of universal civilisation. If the Pope had filled only
such a position as the Patriarch held at Constantinople, or if there had
been no Pope, and Christianity had depended exclusively on the East for
its propagation, with no great spiritual organ in the West, what would
have become of Western development? It was the energy and resolution of
the Pontiffs which resisted the heresies of the East, and preserved to
the Christian religion that plainness and intelligibility, without which
it would never have made a way to the rude understanding and simple
hearts of the barbarians from the North. It was their wise patriotism
which protected Italy against Greek oppression, and by acting the part
of mayors of the palace to the decrepit Eastern emperors, it was they
who contrived to preserve the independence and maintain the fabric of
society until the appearance of the Carlovingians, in whom, with the
rapid instinct of true statesmen, they at once recognised the founders
of a new empire of the West. If the Popes, again, had possessed over the
Eastern empire the same authority that they had over the Western, they
would have repulsed not only the Saracens, but the Turks too, and none
of the evils which these nations have inflicted on us would ever have
taken place. [10] Even as it was, when the Saracens threatened the West,
the Popes were the chief agents in organising resistance, and giving
spirit and animation to the defenders of Europe. Their alert vision saw
that to crush for ever that formidable enemy, it was not enough to
defend ourselves against his assaults; we must attack him at home. The
Crusades, vulgarly treated as the wars of a blind and superstitious
piety, were in truth wars of high policy. From the Council of Clermont
down to the famous day of Lepanto, the hand and spirit of the Pontiff
were to be traced in every part of that tremendous struggle which
prevented Europe from being handed over to the tyranny, ignorance, and
barbarism that have always been the inevitable fruits of Mahometan
conquest, and had already stamped out civilisation in Asia Minor and
Palestine and Greece, once the very garden of the universe. This admirable and politic heroism of the Popes in the face of foes
pressing from without, De Maistre found more than equalled by their
wisdom, courage, and activity in organising and developing the elements
of a civilised system within. The maxim of old societies had been that
which Lucan puts into the mouth of Caesar--_humanum paucis vivit genus_. A vast population of slaves had been one of the inevitable social
conditions of the period: the Popes never rested from their endeavours
to banish servitude from among Christian nations. Women in old
societies had filled a mean and degraded place: it was reserved for the
new spiritual power to rescue the race from that vicious circle in which
men had debased the nature of women, and women had given back all the
weakness and perversity they had received from men, and to perceive that
'the most effectual way of perfecting the man is to ennoble and exalt
the woman.' The organisation of the priesthood, again, was a masterpiece
of practical wisdom. Such an order, removed from the fierce or selfish
interests of ordinary life by the holy regulation of celibacy, and by
the austere discipline of the Church, was indispensable in the midst of
such a society as that which it was the function of the Church to guide. Who but the members of an order thus set apart, acting in strict
subordination to the central power, and so presenting a front of
unbroken spiritual unity, could have held their way among tumultuous
tribes, half-barbarous nobles, and proud and unruly kings, protesting
against wrong, passionately inculcating new and higher ideas of right,
denouncing the darkness of the false gods, calling on all men to worship
the cross and adore the mysteries of the true God? Compare now the
impotency of the Protestant missionary, squatting in gross comfort with
wife and babes among the savages he has come to convert, preaching a
disputatious doctrine, wrangling openly with the rival sent by some
other sect--compare this impotency with the success that follows the
devoted sons of the Church, impressing their proselytes with the
mysterious virtue of their continence, the self-denial of their lives,
the unity of their dogma and their rites; and then recognise the wisdom
of these great churchmen who created a priesthood after this manner in
the days when every priest was as the missionary is now. Finally, it was
the occupants of the holy chair who prepared, softened, one might almost
say sweetened, the occupants of thrones; it was to them that Providence
had confided the education of the sovereigns of Europe. The Popes
brought up the youth of the European monarchy; they made it precisely in
the same way in which Fenelon made the Duke of Burgundy. In each case
the task consisted in eradicating from a fine character an element of
ferocity that would have ruined all. 'Everything that constrains a man
strengthens him. He cannot obey without perfecting himself; and by the
mere fact of overcoming himself he is better. Any man will vanquish the
most violent passion at thirty, because at five or six you have taught
him of his own will to give up a plaything or a sweetmeat. That came to
pass to the monarchy, which happens to an individual who has been well
brought up. The continued efforts of the Church, directed by the
Sovereign Pontiff, did what had never been seen before, and what will
never be seen again where that authority is not recognised. Insensibly,
without threats or laws or battles, without violence and without
resistance, the great European charter was proclaimed, not on paper nor
by the voice of public criers; but in all European hearts, then all
Catholic Kings surrender the power of judging by themselves, and nations
in return declare kings infallible and inviolable. Such is the
fundamental law of the European monarchy, and it is the work of the
Popes. '[11]

All this, however, is only the external development of De Maistre's
central idea, the historical corroboration of a truth to which he
conducts us in the first instance by general considerations. Assuming,
what it is less and less characteristic of the present century at any
rate to deny, that Christianity was the only actual force by which the
regeneration of Europe could be effected after the decline of the Roman
civilisation, he insists that, as he again and again expresses it,
'without the Pope there is no veritable Christianity.' What he meant by
this condensed form needs a little explanation, as is always the case
with such simple statements of the products of long and complex
reasoning. In saying that without the Pope there is no true
Christianity, what he considered himself as having established was, that
unless there be some supreme and independent possessor of authority to
settle doctrine, to regulate discipline, to give authentic counsel, to
apply accepted principles to disputed cases, then there can be no such
thing as a religious system which shall have power to bind the members
of a vast and not homogeneous body in the salutary bonds of a common
civilisation, nor to guide and inform an universal conscience. In each
individual state everybody admits the absolute necessity of having some
sovereign power which shall make, declare, and administer the laws, and
from whose action in any one of these aspects there shall be no appeal;
a power that shall be strong enough to protect the rights and enforce
the duties which it has authoritatively proclaimed and enjoined. In free
England, as in despotic Turkey, the privileges and obligations which the
law tolerates or imposes, and all the benefits which their existence
confers on the community, are the creatures and conditions of a supreme
authority from which there is no appeal, whether the instrument by which
this authority makes its will known be an act of parliament or a ukase. This conception of temporal sovereignty, especially familiarised to our
generation by the teaching of Austin, was carried by De Maistre into
discussions upon the limits of the Papal power with great ingenuity and
force, and, if we accept the premisses, with great success. It should be said here, that throughout his book on the Pope, De Maistre
talks of Christianity exclusively as a statesman or a publicist would
talk about it; not theologically nor spiritually, but politically and
socially. The question with which he concerns himself is the utilisation
of Christianity as a force to shape and organise a system of civilised
societies; a study of the conditions under which this utilisation had
taken place in the earlier centuries of the era; and a deduction from
them of the conditions under which we might ensure a repetition of the
process in changed modern circumstance. In the eighteenth century men
were accustomed to ask of Christianity, as Protestants always ask of so
much of Catholicism as they have dropped, whether or no it is true. But
after the Revolution the question changed, and became an inquiry whether
and how Christianity could contribute to the reconstruction of society. People asked less how true it was, than how strong it was; less how many
unquestioned dogmas, than how much social weight it had or could
develop; less as to the precise amount and form of belief that would
save a soul, than as to the way in which it might be expected to assist
the European community. It was the strength of this temper in him which led to his extraordinary
detestation and contempt for the Greeks. Their turn for pure speculation
excited all his anger. In a curious chapter, he exhausts invective in
denouncing them. [12] The sarcasm of Sallust delights him, that the
actions of Greece were very fine, _verum aliquanto minores quam fama
feruntur_. Their military glory was only a flash of about a hundred and
fourteen years from Marathon; compare this with the prolonged splendour
of Rome, France, and England. In philosophy they displayed decent
talent, but even here their true merit is to have brought the wisdom of
Asia into Europe, for they invented nothing. Greece was the home of
syllogism and of unreason. 'Read Plato: at every page you will draw a
striking distinction. As often as he is Greek, he wearies you. He is
only great, sublime, penetrating, when he is a theologian; in other
words, when he is announcing positive and everlasting dogmas, free from
all quibble, and which are so clearly marked with the eastern cast, that
not to perceive it one must never have had a glimpse of Asia.... There
was in him a sophist and a theologian, or, if you choose, a Greek and a
Chaldean.' The Athenians could never pardon one of their great leaders,
all of whom fell victims in one shape or another to a temper frivolous
as that of a child, ferocious as that of men,--'_espece de moutons
enrages, toujours menes par la nature, et toujours par nature devorant
leurs bergers_.' As for their oratory, 'the tribune of Athens would have
been the disgrace of mankind if Phocion and men like him, by
occasionally ascending it before drinking the hemlock or setting out for
their place of exile, had not in some sort balanced such a mass of
loquacity, extravagance, and cruelty. '[13]

It is very important to remember this constant solicitude for ideas that
should work well, in connection with that book of De Maistre's which
has had most influence in Europe, by supplying a base for the theories
of ultramontanism. Unless we perceive very clearly that throughout his
ardent speculations on the Papal power his mind was bent upon enforcing
the practical solution of a pressing social problem, we easily
misunderstand him and underrate what he had to say. A charge has been
forcibly urged against him by an eminent English critic, for example,
that he has confounded supremacy with infallibility, than which, as the
writer truly says, no two ideas can be more perfectly distinct, one
being superiority of force, and the other incapacity of error. [14] De
Maistre made logical blunders in abundance quite as bad as this, but he
was too acute, I think, deliberately to erect so elaborate a structure
upon a confusion so very obvious, and that must have stared him in the
face from the first page of his work to the last. If we look upon his
book as a mere general defence of the Papacy, designed to investigate
and fortify all its pretensions one by one, we should have great right
to complain against having two claims so essentially divergent, treated
as though they were the same thing, or could be held in their places by
the same supports. But let us regard the treatise on the Pope not as
meant to convince free-thinkers or Protestants that divine grace
inspires every decree of the Holy Father, though that would have been
the right view of it if it had been written fifty years earlier. It was
composed within the first twenty years of the present century, when the
universe, to men of De Maistre's stamp, seemed once more without form
and void. His object, as he tells us more than once, was to find a way
of restoring a religion and a morality in Europe; of giving to truth the
forces demanded for the conquests that she was meditating; of
strengthening the thrones of sovereigns, and of gently calming that
general fermentation of spirit which threatened mightier evils than any
that had yet overwhelmed society. From this point of view we shall see
that the distinction between supremacy and infallibility was not worth
recognising. Practically, he says, 'infallibility is only a consequence of supremacy,
or rather it is absolutely the same thing under two different names....
In effect it is the same thing, _in practice_, not to be subject to
error, and not to be liable to be accused of it. Thus, even if we should
agree that no divine promise was made to the Pope, he would not be less
infallible or deemed so, as the final tribunal; for every judgment from
which you cannot appeal is and must be (_est et doit etre_) held for
just in every human association, under any imaginable form of
government; and every true statesman will understand me perfectly, when
I say that the point is to ascertain not only if the Sovereign Pontiff
is, but if he must be, infallible. '[15] In another place he says
distinctly enough that the infallibility of the Church has two aspects;
in one of them it is the object of divine promise, in the other it is a
human implication, and that in the latter aspect infallibility is
supposed in the Church, just 'as we are absolutely bound to suppose it,
even in temporal sovereignties (where it does not really exist), under
pain of seeing society dissolved.' The Church only demands what other
sovereignties demand, though she has the immense superiority over them
of having her claim backed by direct promise from heaven. [16] Take away
the dogma, if you will, he says, and only consider the thing
politically, which is exactly what he really does all through the book. The pope, from this point of view, asks for no other infallibility than
that which is attributed to all sovereigns. [17] Without either
vindicating or surrendering the supernatural side of the Papal claims,
he only insists upon the political, social, or human side of it, as an
inseparable quality of an admitted supremacy. [18] In short, from
beginning to end of this speculation, from which the best kind of
ultramontanism has drawn its defence, he evinces a deprecatory
anxiety--a very rare temper with De Maistre--not to fight on the issue
of the dogma of infallibility over which Protestants and unbelievers
have won an infinite number of cheap victories; that he leaves as a
theme more fitted for the disputations of theologians. My position, he
seems to keep saying, is that if the Pope is spiritually supreme, then
he is virtually and practically _as if he were_ infallible, just in the
same sense in which the English Parliament and monarch, and the Russian
Czar, are as if they were infallible. But let us not argue so much about
this, which is only secondary. The main question is whether without the
Pope there can be a true Christianity, 'that is to say, a Christianity,
active, powerful, converting, regenerating, conquering, perfecting.' De Maistre was probably conducted to his theory by an analogy, which he
tacitly leaned upon more strongly than it could well bear, between
temporal organisation and spiritual organisation. In inchoate
communities, the momentary self-interest and the promptly stirred
passions of men would rend the growing society in pieces, unless they
were restrained by the strong hand of law in some shape or other,
written or unwritten, and administered by an authority, either
physically too strong to be resisted, or else set up by the common
consent seeking to further the general convenience. To divide this
authority, so that none should know where to look for a sovereign
decree, nor be able to ascertain the commands of sovereign law; to
embody it in the persons of many discordant expounders, each assuming
oracular weight and equal sanction; to leave individuals to administer
and interpret it for themselves, and to decide among themselves its
application to their own cases; what would this be but a deliberate
preparation for anarchy and dissolution? For it is one of the clear
conditions of the efficacy of the social union, that every member of it
should be able to know for certain the terms on which he belongs to it,
the compliances which it will insist upon in him, and the compliances
which it will in turn permit him to insist upon in others, and therefore
it is indispensable that there should be some definite and admitted
centre where this very essential knowledge should be accessible. Some such reflections as these must have been at the bottom of De
Maistre's great apology for the Papal supremacy, or at any rate they may
serve to bring before our minds with greater clearness the kind of
foundations on which his scheme rested. For law substitute Christianity,
for social union spiritual union, for legal obligations the obligations
of the faith. Instead of individuals bound together by allegiance to
common political institutions, conceive communities united in the bonds
of religious brotherhood into a sort of universal republic, under the
moderate supremacy of a supreme spiritual power. As a matter of fact, it
was the intervention of this spiritual power which restrained the
anarchy, internal and external, of the ferocious and imperfectly
organised sovereignties that figure in the early history of modern
Europe. And as a matter of theory, what could be more rational and
defensible than such an intervention made systematic, with its
rightfulness and disinterestedness universally recognised? Grant
Christianity as the spiritual basis of the life and action of modern
communities; supporting both the organised structure of each of them,
and the interdependent system composed of them all; accepted by the
individual members of each, and by the integral bodies forming the
whole. But who shall declare what the Christian doctrine is, and how its
maxims bear upon special cases, and what oracles they announce in
particular sets of circumstances? Amid the turbulence of popular
passion, in face of the crushing despotism of an insensate tyrant,
between the furious hatred of jealous nations or the violent ambition of
rival sovereigns, what likelihood would there be of either party to the
contention yielding tranquilly and promptly to any presentation of
Christian teaching made by the other, or by some suspected neutral as a
decisive authority between them? Obviously there must be some supreme
and indisputable interpreter, before whose final decree the tyrant
should quail, the flood of popular lawlessness flow back within its
accustomed banks, and contending sovereigns or jealous nations
fraternally embrace. Again, in those questions of faith and discipline,
which the ill-exercised ingenuity of men is for ever raising and
pressing upon the attention of Christendom, it is just as obvious that
there must be some tribunal to pronounce an authoritative judgment. Otherwise, each nation is torn into sects; and amid the throng of sects
where is unity? 'To maintain that a crowd of independent churches form a
church, one and universal, is to maintain in other terms that all the
political governments of Europe only form a single government, one and
universal.' There could no more be a kingdom of France without a king,
nor an empire of Russia without an emperor, than there could be one
universal church without an acknowledged head. That this head must be
the successor of St. Peter, is declared alike by the voice of tradition,
the explicit testimony of the early writers, the repeated utterances of
later theologians of all schools, and that general sentiment which
presses itself upon every conscientious reader of religious history. The argument that the voice of the Church is to be sought in general
councils is absurd. To maintain that a council has any other function
than to assure and certify the Pope, when he chooses to strengthen his
judgment or to satisfy his doubts, is to destroy visible unity. Suppose
there to be an equal division of votes, as happened in the famous case
of Fenelon, and might as well happen in a general council, the doubt
would after all be solved by the final vote of the Pope. And 'what is
doubtful for twenty selected men is doubtful for the whole human race. Those who suppose that by multiplying the deliberating voices doubt is
lessened, must have very little knowledge of men, and can never have sat
in a deliberative body.' Again, supposing there to present itself one of
those questions of divine metaphysics that it is absolutely necessary to
refer to the decision of the supreme tribunal. Then our interest is not
that it should be decided in such or such a manner, but that it should
be decided without delay and without appeal. Besides, the world is now
grown too vast for general councils, which seem to be made only for the
youth of Christianity. In fine, why pursue futile or mischievous
discussions as to whether the Pope is above the Council or the Council
above the Pope? In ordinary questions in which a king is conscious of
sufficient light, he decides them himself, while the others in which he
is not conscious of this light, he transfers to the States-General
presided over by himself, but he is equally sovereign in either case. Let us be content to know, in the words
of Thomassin,[19] that 'the Pope in the midst of his Council is above
himself, and that the Council decapitated of its chief is below him.' The point so constantly dwelt upon by Bossuet, the obligation of the
canons upon the Pope, was of very little worth in De Maistre's judgment,
and he almost speaks with disrespect of the great Catholic defender for
being so prolix and pertinacious in elaborating it. Here again he finds
in Thomassin the most concise statement of what he held to be the true
view, just as he does in the controversy as to the relative superiority
of the Pope or the Council. 'There is only an apparent contradiction,'
says Thomassin, 'between saying that the Pope is above the canons, and
that he is bound by them; that he is master of the canons, or that he is
not. Those who place him above the canons or make him their master, only
pretend that he _has a dispensing power over them_; while those who deny
that he is above the canons or is their master, mean no more than that
_he can only exercise a dispensing power for the convenience and in the
necessities of the Church_.' This is an excellent illustration of the
thoroughly political temper in which De Maistre treats the whole
subject. He looks at the power of the Pope over the canons much as a
modern English statesman looks at the question of the coronation oath,
and the extent to which it binds the monarch to the maintenance of the
laws existing at the time of its imposition. In the same spirit he
banishes from all account the crowd of nonsensical objections to Papal
supremacy, drawn from imaginary possibilities. Suppose a Pope, for
example, were to abolish all the canons at a single stroke; suppose him
to become an unbeliever; suppose him to go mad; and so forth. 'Why,' De
Maistre says, 'there is not in the whole world a single power in a
condition to bear all possible and arbitrary hypotheses of this sort;
and if you judge them by what they can do, without speaking of what they
have done, they will have to be abolished every one. '[20] This, it may
be worth noticing, is one of the many passages in De Maistre's writings
which, both in the solidity of their argument and the direct force of
their expression, recall his great predecessor in the anti-revolutionary
cause, the ever-illustrious Burke. The vigour with which De Maistre sums up all these pleas for supremacy
is very remarkable; and to the crowd of enemies and indifferents, and
especially to the statesmen who are among them, he appeals with
admirable energy. Do you mean that the nations
should live without any religion, and do you not begin to perceive that
a religion there must be? And does not Christianity, not only by its
intrinsic worth but because it is in possession, strike you as
preferable to every other? Have you been better contented with other
attempts in this way? Peradventure the twelve apostles might please you
better than the Theophilanthropists and Martinists? Does the Sermon on
the Mount seem to you a passable code of morals? And if the entire
people were to regulate their conduct on this model, should you be
content? I fancy that I hear you reply affirmatively. Well, since the
only object now is to maintain this religion for which you thus declare
your preference, how could you have, I do not say the stupidity, but the
cruelty, to turn it into a democracy, and to place this precious deposit
in the hands of the rabble? 'You attach too much importance to the dogmatic part of this religion. By what strange contradiction would you desire to agitate the universe
for some academic quibble, for miserable wranglings about mere words
(these are your own terms)? Will you
call the Bishop of Quebec and the Bishop of Lucon to interpret a line of
the Catechism? That believers should quarrel about infallibility is what
I know, for I see it; but that statesmen should quarrel in the same way
about this great privilege, is what I shall never be able to
conceive.... That all the bishops in the world should be convoked to
determine a divine truth necessary to salvation--nothing more natural,
if such a method is indispensable; for no effort, no trouble, ought to
be spared for so exalted an aim. But if the only point is the
establishment of one opinion in the place of another, then the
travelling expenses of even one single Infallible are sheer waste. If
you want to spare the two most valuable things on earth, time and money,
make all haste to write to Rome, in order to procure thence a lawful
decision which shall declare the unlawful doubt. Nothing more is needed;
policy asks no more. '[21]

Definitely, then, the influence of the Popes restored to their ancient
supremacy would be exercised in the renewal and consolidation of social
order resting on the Christian faith, somewhat after this manner. The
anarchic dogma of the sovereignty of peoples, having failed to do
anything beyond showing that the greatest evils resulting from obedience
do not equal the thousandth part of those which result from rebellion,
would be superseded by the practice of appeals to the authority of the
Holy See. Do not suppose that the Revolution is at an end, or that the
column is replaced because it is raised up from the ground. A man must
be blind not to see that all the sovereignties in Europe are growing
weak; on all sides confidence and affection are deserting them; sects
and the spirit of individualism are multiplying themselves in an
appalling manner. There are only two alternatives: you must either
purify the will of men, or else you must enchain it; the monarch who
will not do the first, must enslave his subjects or perish; servitude or
spiritual unity is the only choice open to nations. On the one hand is
the gross and unrestrained tyranny of what in modern phrase is styled
Imperialism, and on the other a wise and benevolent modification of
temporal sovereignty in the interests of all by an established and
accepted spiritual power. No middle path lies before the people of
Europe. Temporal absolutism we must have. The only question is whether
or no it shall be modified by the wise, disinterested, and moderating
counsels of the Church, as given by her consecrated chief. *       *       *       *       *

There can be very little doubt that the effective way in which De
Maistre propounded and vindicated this theory made a deep impression on
the mind of Comte. Very early in his career this eminent man had
declared: 'De Maistre has for me the peculiar property of helping me to
estimate the philosophic capacity of people, by the repute in which they
hold him.' Among his other reasons at that time for thinking well of M.
Guizot was that, notwithstanding his transcendent Protestantism, he
complied with the test of appreciating De Maistre. [22] Comte's rapidly
assimilative intelligence perceived that here at last there was a
definite, consistent, and intelligible scheme for the reorganisation of
European society, with him the great end of philosophic endeavour. Its
principle of the division of the spiritual and temporal powers, and of
the relation that ought to subsist between the two, was the base of
Comte's own scheme. In general form the plans of social reconstruction are identical; in
substance, it need scarcely be said, the differences are fundamental. The temporal power, according to Comte's design, is to reside with
industrial chiefs, and the spiritual power to rest upon a doctrine
scientifically established. De Maistre, on the other hand, believed that
the old authority of kings and Christian pontiffs was divine, and any
attempt to supersede it in either case would have seemed to him as
desperate as it seemed impious. In his strange speculation on _Le
Principe Generateur des Constitutions Politiques_, he contends that all
laws in the true sense of the word (which by the way happens to be
decidedly an arbitrary and exclusive sense) are of supernatural origin,
and that the only persons whom we have any right to call legislators,
are those half-divine men who appear mysteriously in the early history
of nations, and counterparts to whom we never meet in later days. Elsewhere he maintains to the same effect, that royal families in the
true sense of the word 'are growths of nature, and differ from others,
as a tree differs from a shrub.' People suppose a family to be royal because it reigns; on the contrary,
it reigns because it is royal, because it has more life, _plus d'esprit
royal_--surely as mysterious and occult a force as the _virtus
dormitiva_ of opium. The common life of man is about thirty years; the
average duration of the reigns of European sovereigns, being Christian,
is at the very lowest calculation twenty. How is it possible that 'lives
should be only thirty years, and reigns from twenty-two to twenty-five,
if princes had not more common life than other men?' Mark again, the
influence of religion in the duration of sovereignties. All the
Christian reigns are longer than all the non-Christian reigns, ancient
and modern, and Catholic reigns have been longer than Protestant reigns. The reigns in England, which averaged more than twenty-three years
before the Reformation, have only been seventeen years since that, and
those of Sweden, which were twenty-two, have fallen to the same figure
of seventeen. Denmark, however, for some unknown cause does not appear
to have undergone this law of abbreviation; so, says De Maistre with
rather unwonted restraint, let us abstain from generalising. As a matter
of fact, however, the generalisation was complete in his own mind, and
there was nothing inconsistent with his view of the government of the
universe in the fact that a Catholic prince should live longer than a
Protestant; indeed such a fact was the natural condition of his view
being true. Many differences among the people who hold to the
theological interpretation of the circumstances of life arise from the
different degrees of activity which they variously attribute to the
intervention of God, from those who explain the fall of a sparrow to the
ground by a special and direct energy of the divine will, up to those
at the opposite end of the scale, who think that direct participation
ended when the universe was once fairly launched. De Maistre was of
those who see the divine hand on every side and at all times. If, then,
Protestantism was a pernicious rebellion against the faith which God had
provided for the comfort and salvation of men, why should not God be
likely to visit princes, as offenders with the least excuse for their
backslidings, with the curse of shortness of days? In a trenchant passage De Maistre has expounded the Protestant
confession of faith, and shown what astounding gaps it leaves as an
interpretation of the dealings of God with man. 'By virtue of a terrible
anathema,' he supposes the Protestant to say, 'inexplicable no doubt,
but much less inexplicable than incontestable, the human race lost all
its rights. Plunged in mortal darkness, it was ignorant of all, since it
was ignorant of God; and, being ignorant of him, it could not pray to
him, so that it was spiritually dead without being able to ask for life. Arrived by rapid degradation at the last stage of debasement, it
outraged nature by its manners, its laws, even by its religions. It
consecrated all vices, it wallowed in filth, and its depravation was
such that the history of those times forms a dangerous picture, which it
is not good for all men so much as to look upon. God, however, _having
dissembled for forty centuries_, bethought him of his creation. At the
appointed moment announced from all time, he did not despise a virgin's
womb; he clothed himself in our unhappy nature, and appeared on the
earth; we saw him, we touched him, he spoke to us; he lived, he taught,
he suffered, he died for us. He arose from his tomb according to his
promise; he appeared again among us, solemnly to assure to his Church a
succour that would last as long as the world. 'But, alas, this effort of almighty benevolence was a long way from
securing all the success that had been foretold. For lack of knowledge,
or of strength, or by distraction maybe, God missed his aim, and could
not keep his word. Less sage than a chemist who should undertake to shut
up ether in canvas or paper, he only confided to men the truth that he
had brought upon the earth; it escaped, then, as one might have
foreseen, by all human pores; soon, this holy religion revealed to man
by the Man-God, became no more than an infamous idolatry, which would
remain to this very moment if Christianity after sixteen centuries had
not been suddenly brought back to its original purity by a couple of
sorry creatures. '[23]

Perhaps it would be easier than he supposed to present his own system in
an equally irrational aspect. If you measure the proceedings of
omnipotence by the uses to which a wise and benevolent man would put
such superhuman power, if we can imagine a man of this kind endowed with
it, De Maistre's theory of the extent to which a supreme being
interferes in human things, is after all only a degree less ridiculous
and illogical, less inadequate and abundantly assailable, than that
Protestantism which he so heartily despised. Would it be difficult,
after borrowing the account, which we have just read, of the tremendous
efforts made by a benign creator to shed moral and spiritual light upon
the world, to perplex the Catholic as bitterly as the Protestant, by
confronting him both with the comparatively scanty results of those
efforts, and with the too visible tendencies of all the foremost
agencies in modern civilisation to leave them out of account as forces
practically spent? *       *       *       *       *

De Maistre has been surpassed by no thinker that we know of as a
defender of the old order. If anybody could rationalise the idea of
supernatural intervention in human affairs, the idea of a Papal
supremacy, the idea of a spiritual unity, De Maistre's acuteness and
intellectual vigour, and, above all, his keen sense of the urgent social
need of such a thing being done, would assuredly have enabled him to do
it. In 1817, when he wrote the work in which this task is attempted, the
hopelessness of such an achievement was less obvious than it is now. The Revolution lay in a deep slumber that
many persons excusably took for the quiescence of extinction. Legitimacy
and the spiritual system that was its ally in the face of the
Revolution, though mostly its rival or foe when they were left alone
together, seemed to be restored to the fulness of their power. Fifty
years have elapsed since then, and each year has seen a progressive
decay in the principles which then were triumphant. It was not,
therefore, without reason that De Maistre warned people against
believing '_que la colonne est replacee, parcequ'elle est relevee_.' The
solution which he so elaborately recommended to Europe has shown itself
desperate and impossible. Catholicism may long remain a vital creed to
millions of men, a deep source of spiritual consolation and refreshment,
and a bright lamp in perplexities of conduct and morals; but resting on
dogmas which cannot by any amount of compromise be incorporated with the
daily increasing mass of knowledge, assuming as the condition of its
existence forms of the theological hypothesis which all the
preponderating influences of contemporary thought concur directly or
indirectly in discrediting, upheld by an organisation which its history
for the last five centuries has exposed to the distrust and hatred of
men as the sworn enemy of mental freedom and growth, the pretensions of
Catholicism to renovate society are among the most pitiable and impotent
that ever devout, high-minded, and benevolent persons deluded themselves
into maintaining or accepting. Over the modern invader it is as
powerless as paganism was over the invaders of old. The barbarians of
industrialism, grasping chiefs and mutinous men, give no ear to priest
or pontiff, who speak only dead words, who confront modern issues with
blind eyes, and who stretch out a palsied hand to help. Christianity,
according to a well-known saying, has been tried and failed; the
religion of Christ remains to be tried. One would prefer to qualify the
first clause, by admitting how much Christianity has done for Europe
even with its old organisation, and to restrict the charge of failure
within the limits of the modern time. Whether in changed forms and with new supplements the teaching of its
founder is destined to be the chief inspirer of that social and human
sentiment which seems to be the only spiritual bond capable of uniting
men together again in a common and effective faith, is a question which
it is unnecessary to discuss here. '_They talk about the first centuries
of Christianity_,' said De Maistre, '_I would not be sure that they are
over yet_.' Perhaps not; only if the first centuries are not yet over,
it is certain that the Christianity of the future will have to be so
different from the Christianity of the past, as to demand or deserve
another name. Even if Christianity, itself renewed, could successfully encounter the
achievement of renewing society, De Maistre's ideal of a spiritual power
controlling the temporal power, and conciliating peoples with their
rulers by persuasion and a coercion only moral, appears to have little
chance of being realised. The separation of the two powers is sealed,
with a completeness that is increasingly visible. The principles on
which the process of the emancipation of politics is being so rapidly
carried on, demonstrate that the most marked tendencies of modern
civilisation are strongly hostile to a renewal in any imaginable shape,
or at any future time, of a connection whether of virtual subordination
or nominal equality, which has laid such enormous burdens on the
consciences and understandings of men. If the Church has the uppermost
hand, except in primitive times, it destroys freedom; if the State is
supreme, it destroys spirituality. The free Church in the free State is
an idea that every day more fully recommends itself to the public
opinion of Europe, and the sovereignty of the Pope, like that of all
other spiritual potentates, can only be exercised over those who choose
of their own accord to submit to it; a sovereignty of a kind which De
Maistre thought not much above anarchy. To conclude, De Maistre's mind was of the highest type of those who fill
the air with the arbitrary assumptions of theology, and the abstractions
of the metaphysical stage of thought. At every point you meet the
peremptorily declared volition of a divine being, or the ontological
property of a natural object. The French Revolution is explained by the
will of God; and the kings reign because they have the _esprit royal_. Every truth is absolute, not relative; every explanation is universal,
not historic. These differences in method and point of view amply
explain his arrival at conclusions that seem so monstrous to men who
look upon all knowledge as relative, and insist that the only possible
road to true opinion lies away from volitions and abstractions in the
positive generalisations of experience. There can be no more
satisfactory proof of the rapidity with which we are leaving these
ancient methods, and the social results which they produced, than the
willingness with which every rightly instructed mind now admits how
indispensable were the first, and how beneficial the second. Those can
best appreciate De Maistre and his school, what excellence lay in their
aspirations, what wisdom in their system, who know most clearly why
their aspirations were hopeless, and what makes their system an
anachronism. FOOTNOTES:

[10] De Maistre forgot or underestimated the services of Leo the
Isaurian whose repulse of the Caliph's forces at Constantinople (A.D. 717) was perhaps as important for Europe as the more renowned victory of
Charles Martel. But then Leo was an Iconoclast and heretic. Finlay's
_Byzantine Empire_, pp. [11] _Du Pape_, bk. [12] _Du Pape_, bk. 'The Greeks,' he
says, 'had at times only a secondary share in the ecclesiastical
controversies in the Eastern Church, though the circumstance of these
controversies having been carried on in the Greek language has made the
natives of Western Europe attribute them to a philosophic, speculative,
and polemic spirit, inherent in the Hellenic mind. A very slight
examination of history is sufficient to prove that several of the
heresies which disturbed the Eastern Church had their origin in the more
profound religious ideas of the oriental nations, and that many of the
opinions called heretical were in a great measure expressions of the
mental nationality of the Syrians, Armenians, Egyptians, and Persians,
and had no conception whatever with the Greek mind.' --_Byzantine Empire,
from 716 to 1057_, p. 263) remarks very truly, that 'the religious or
theological portion of Popery, as a section of the Christian Church, is
really Greek; and it is only the ecclesiastical, political, and
theoretic peculiarities of the fabric which can be considered as the
work of the Latin Church.' [14] Sir J. Fitzjames Stephen in the _Saturday Review_, Sept. [15] _Du Pape_, bk. [16] _Ib._ bk. [17] _Ib._ bk. [18] '_Il n'y a point de souverainete qui pour le bonheur des hommes, et
pour le sien surtout, ne soit bornee de quelque maniere, mais dans
l'interieur de ces bornes, placees comme il plait a Dieu, elle est
toujours et partout absolue et tenue pour infaillible. Et quand je parle
de l'exercice legitime de la souverainete, je n'entends point ou je ne
dis point l'exercice_ juste, _ce qui produirait une amphibologie
dangereuse, a moins que par ce dernier mot on ne veuille dire que tout
ce qu'elle opine dans son cercle est_ juste ou tenu pour tel, _ce qui
est la verite. C'est ainsi qu'un tribunal supreme, tant qu'il ne sort
pas de ses attributions, est toujours juste_; car c'est la meme chose
DANS LA PRATIQUE, d'etre infaillible, ou de se tromper sans appel.'--Bk. [19] Thomassin, the eminent French theologian, flourished from the
middle to the end of the seventeenth century. The aim of his writings
generally was to reconcile conflicting opinions on discipline or
doctrine by exhibiting a true sense in all. In this spirit he wrote on
the Pope and the Councils, and on the never-ending question of Grace. Among other things, he insisted that all languages could be traced to
the Hebrew. He wrote a defence of the edict in which Lewis XIV. revoked
the Edict of Nantes, contending that it was less harsh than some of the
decrees of Theodosius and Justinian, which the holiest fathers of the
Church had not scrupled to approve--an argument which would now be
thought somewhat too dangerous for common use, as cutting both ways. Gibbon made use of his _Discipline de l'Eglise_ in the twentieth
chapter, and elsewhere. [20] _Du Pape_, bk. [22] Littre, _Auguste Comte et la Phil. [23] _Du Pape_, Conclusion, p. *       *       *       *       *

END OF VOL. *       *       *       *       *

_Printed by_ R. & R. Clark, Limited, _Edinburgh_. Transcribers' Notes:

Minor printer errors (omitted quotation marks) have been amended without
note. Other errors have been amended and are listed below. OE/oe ligatures have not been retained in this version. List of Amendments:

Page 305: lights amended to rights; "... freedom, of equal rights, and
by..."

Page 329: impressisn amended to impression; "... theory made a deep
impression on the mind..."





End of Project Gutenberg's Critical Miscellanies (Vol. Gertrude and Margaret both
understood that they were unnaturally alone in a world where lovers
met and mated, but they, too, hugged to their souls the flattering
unction that they were parents of a sort. Thus three sets of perfectly suitable and devoted young men and
women, of marriageable age, with dozens of interests and sympathies in
common, and one extraordinarily vital bond, continued to walk side by
side in a state of inhuman preoccupation, their gaze fixed inward
instead of upon one another; and no Divine Power, happening upon the
curious circumstance, believed the matter one for His intervention nor
stooped to take the respective puppets by the back of their
unconscious necks, and so knock their sluggish heads together. CHAPTER XVI

MARGARET LOUISA'S BIRTHRIGHT


"I am sixteen years and eight months old to-day," Eleanor wrote, "and
I have had the kind of experience that makes me feel as if I never
wanted to be any older. I know life is full of disillusionment and
pain, but I did not know that any one with whom you have broken bread,
and slept in the same room with, and told everything to for four long
years, could turn out to be an absolute traitor and villainess. For nearly a year now I have noticed that
Bertha Stephens avoided me, and presented the appearance of disliking
me. I don't like to have any one dislike me, and I have tried to do
little things for her that would win back her affection, but with no
success. As I was editing the Lantern I could print her essayettes (as
she called them) and do her lots of little favors in a literary way,
which she seemed to appreciate, but personally she avoided me like the
plague. "Of course Stevie has lots of faults, and since Margaret Louise and I
always talked everything over we used to talk about Stevie in the same
way. I remember that she used to try to draw me out about Stevie's
character. I've always thought Stevie was a kind of piker, that is
that she would say she was going to do a thing, and then from sheer
laziness not do it. She gummed it
all up with her nasty fudge and then wouldn't give it back to me or
get me another, but the reason she wouldn't give it back to me was
because her feelings were too fine to return a damaged article, and
not fine enough to make her hump herself and get me another. That's
only one kind of a piker and not the worst kind, but it was
_pikerish_. "All this I told quite frankly to Maggie--I mean Margaret Louise,
because I had no secrets from her and never thought there was any
reason why I shouldn't. Stevie has a horrid brother, also, who has
been up here to dances. All the girls hate him because he is so
spoony. He isn't as spoony as Margaret Louise's brother, but he's
quite a sloppy little spooner at that. Well, I told Margaret Louise
that I didn't like Stevie's brother, and then I made the damaging
remark that one reason I didn't like him was because he looked so much
like Stevie. I didn't bother to explain to Maggie--I will not call her
Maggie Lou any more, because that is a dear little name and sounds so
affectionate,--Margaret Louise--what I meant by this, because I
thought it was perfectly evident. Stevie is a peachy looking girl, a
snow white blonde with pinky cheeks and dimples. Well, her brother is
a snow white blond too, and he has pinky cheeks and dimples and his
name is Carlo! We, of course, at once named him Curlo. It is not a
good idea for a man to look too much like his sister, or to have too
many dimples in his chin and cheeks. I had only to think of him in the
same room with my three uncles to get his number exactly. I don't mean
to use slang in my diary, but I can't seem to help it. Professor
Mathews says that slang has a distinct function in the language--in
replenishing it, but Uncle Peter says about slang words, that'many
are called, and few are chosen,' and there is no need to try to
accommodate them all in one's vocabulary. "Well, I told Margaret Louise all these things about Curlo, and how
he tried to hold my hand coming from the station one day, when the
girls all went up to meet the boys that came up for the dance,--and I
told her everything else in the world that happened to come into my
head. "Then one day I got thinking about leaving Harmon--this is our senior
year, of course--and I thought that I should leave all the girls with
things just about right between us, excepting good old Stevie, who had
this queer sort of grouch against me. So I decided that I'd just go
around and have it out with her, and I did. I went into her room one
day when her roommate was out, and demanded a show down. Well, I found
out that Maggie--Margaret Louise had just repeated to Stevie every
living thing that I ever said about her, just as I said it, only
without the explanations and foot-notes that make any kind of
conversation more understandable. "Stevie told me all these things one after another, without stopping,
and when she was through I wished that the floor would open and
swallow me up, but nothing so comfortable happened. I was obliged to
gaze into Stevie's overflowing eyes and own up to the truth as well as
I could, and explain it. It was the most humiliating hour that I ever
spent, but I told Stevie exactly what I felt about her 'nothing
extenuate, and naught set down in malice,' and what I had said about
her to our mutual friend, who by the way, is not the mutual friend of
either of us any longer. We were both crying by the time I had
finished, but we understood each other. There were one or two things
that she said she didn't think she would ever forget that I had said
about her, but even those she could forgive. She said that my dislike
of her had rankled in her heart so long that it took away all the
bitterness to know that I wasn't really her enemy. She said that my
coming to her that way, and not lying had showed that I had lots of
character, and she thought in time that we could be quite intimate
friends if I wanted to as much as she did. "After my talk with Stevie I still hoped against hope that Margaret
Louise would turn out to have some reason or excuse for what she had
done. I knew she had done it, but when a thing like that happens that
upsets your whole trust in a person you simply can not believe the
evidence of your own senses. When you read of a situation like that
in a book you are all prepared for it by the author, who has taken the
trouble to explain the moral weakness or unpleasantness of the
character, and given you to understand that you are to expect a
betrayal from him or her; but when it happens in real life out of a
clear sky you have nothing to go upon that makes you even _believe_
what you know. "I won't even try to describe the scene that occurred between Margaret
Louise and me. She cried and she lied, and she accused me of trying to
curry favor with Stevie, and Stevie of being a backbiter, and she
argued and argued about all kinds of things but the truth, and when I
tried to pin her down to it, she ducked and crawled and sidestepped in
a way that was dreadful. I've seen her do something like it before
about different things, and I ought to have known then what she was
like inside of her soul, but I guess you have to be the object of such
a scene before you realize the full force of it. "All I said was, 'Margaret Louise, if that's all you've got to say
about the injury you have done me, then everything is over between us
from this minute;' and it was, too. "I feel as if I had been writing a beautiful story or poem on what I
thought was an enduring tablet of marble, and some one had come and
wiped it all off as if it were mere scribblings on a slate. I don't
know whether it would seem like telling tales to tell Uncle Peter or
not; I don't quite know whether I want to tell him. Sometimes I wish I
had a mother to tell such things to. It seems to me that a real mother
would know what to say that would help you. Disillusion is a very
strange thing--like death, only having people die seems more natural
somehow. When they die you can remember the happy hours that you spent
with them, but when disillusionment comes then you have lost even your
beautiful memories. "We had for the subject of our theme this week, 'What Life Means to
Me,' which of course was the object of many facetious remarks from the
girls, but I've been thinking that if I sat down seriously to state in
just so many words what life means to _me_, I hardly know what I would
transcribe. It means disillusionment and death for one thing. Since my
grandfather died last year I have had nobody left of my own in the
world,--no real blood relation. Of course, I am a good deal fonder of
my aunts and uncles than most people are of their own flesh and blood,
but own flesh and blood is a thing that it makes you feel shivery to
be without. If I had been Margaret Louise's own flesh and blood, she
would never have acted like that to me. Stevie stuck up for Carlo as
if he was really something to be proud of. Perhaps my uncles and aunts
feel that way about me, I don't know. I don't even know if I feel that
way about them. I certainly criticize them in my soul at times, and
feel tired of being dragged around from pillar to post. I don't feel
that way about Uncle Peter, but there is nobody else that I am
certain, positive sure that I love better than life itself. If there
is only one in the world that you feel that way about, I might not be
Uncle Peter's one. I wish Margaret Louise had not sold her birthright for a mess of
pottage. I wish I had a home that I had a perfect right to go and live
in forevermore. I wish my mother was here to comfort me to-night." CHAPTER XVII

A REAL KISS


At seventeen, Eleanor was through at Harmon. She was to have one year
of preparatory school and then it was the desire of Beulah's heart
that she should go to Rogers. The others contended that the higher
education should be optional and not obligatory. The decision was
finally to be left to Eleanor herself, after she had considered it in
all its bearings. "If she doesn't decide in favor of college," David said, "and she
makes her home with me here, as I hope she will do, of course, I don't
see what society we are going to be able to give her. Unfortunately
none of our contemporaries have growing daughters. She ought to meet
eligible young men and that sort of thing." The two were having a cozy cup of tea at
his apartment. "You're so terribly worldly, David, that you frighten
me sometimes." "You don't know where I will end, is that the idea?" "I don't know where Eleanor will end, if you're already thinking of
eligible young men for her." "Those things have got to be thought of," David answered gravely. "I don't want her to be
married. I want to take her off by myself and growl over her all alone
for a while. Then I want Prince Charming to come along and snatch her
up quickly, and set her behind his milk white charger and ride away
with her. If we've all got to get together and connive at marrying her
off there won't be any comfort in having her." "I don't know," David said thoughtfully; "I think that might be fun,
too. A vicarious love-affair that you can manipulate is one of the
most interesting games in the world." "That's not my idea of an interesting game," Margaret said. "I like
things very personal, David,--you ought to know that by this time." "I do know that," David said, "but it sometimes occurs to me that
except for a few obvious facts of that nature I really know very
little about you, Margaret." "There isn't much to know--except that I'm a woman." "That's a good deal," David answered slowly; "to a mere man that seems
to be considerable of an adventure." "It is about as much of an adventure sometimes as it would be to be a
field of clover in an insectless world.--This is wonderful tea, David,
but your cream is like butter and floats around in it in wudges. No,
don't get any more, I've got to go home. Grandmother still thinks it's
very improper for me to call upon you, in spite of Mademoiselle and
your ancient and honorable housekeeper." "Don't go," David said; "I apologize on my knees for the cream. I'll
send out and have it wet down, or whatever you do to cream in that
state. "About the cream, or the proprieties?" I'm a little bit tired of being
one, that's all, and I want to go home." "She wants to go home when she's being so truly delightful and
cryptic," David said. "Have you been seeing visions, Margaret, in my
hearth fire? She rose and stood absently fitting
her gloves to her fingers. "I don't know exactly what it was I saw,
but it was something that made me uncomfortable. It gives me the
creeps to talk about being a woman. David, do you know sometimes I
have a kind of queer hunch about Eleanor? I love her, you know,
dearly, dearly. I think that she is a very successful kind of
Frankenstein; but there are moments when I have the feeling that she's
going to be a storm center and bring some queer trouble upon us. I
wouldn't say this to anybody but you, David." As David tucked her in the car--he had arrived at the dignity of
owning one now--and watched her sweet silhouette disappear, he, too,
had his moment of clairvoyance. He felt that he was letting something
very precious slip out of sight, as if some radiant and delicate gift
had been laid lightly within his grasp and as lightly withdrawn again. As if when the door closed on his friend Margaret some stranger, more
silent creature who was dear to him had gone with her. As soon as he
was dressed for dinner he called Margaret on the telephone to know if
she had arrived home safely, and was informed not only that she had,
but that she was very wroth at him for getting her down three flights
of stairs in the midst of her own dinner toilet. "I had a kind of hunch, too," he told her, "and I felt as if I wanted
to hear your voice speaking." "If that's the way you feel about your chauffeur," she said, "you
ought to discharge him, but he brought me home beautifully." The difference between a man's moments of prescience and a woman's, is
that the man puts them out of his consciousness as quickly as he can,
while a woman clings to them fearfully and goes her way a little more
carefully for the momentary flash of foresight. David tried to see
Margaret once or twice during that week but failed to find her in when
he called or telephoned, and the special impulse to seek her alone
again died naturally. One Saturday a few weeks later Eleanor telegraphed him that she
wished to come to New York for the week-end to do some shopping. He went to the train to meet her, and when the slender chic figure in
the most correct of tailor made suits appeared at the gateway, with an
obsequious porter bearing her smart bag and ulster, he gave a sudden
gasp of surprise at the picture. He had been aware for some time of
the increase in her inches and the charm of the pure cameo-cut
profile, but he regarded her still as a child histrionically assuming
the airs and graces of womanhood, as small girl children masquerade in
the trailing skirts of their elders. He was accustomed to the idea
that she was growing up rapidly, but the fact that she was already
grown had never actually dawned on him until this moment. "You look as if you were surprised to see me, Uncle David,--are you?" she said, slipping a slim hand, warm through its immaculate glove,
into his. "You knew I was coming, and you came to meet me, and yet you
looked as surprised as if you hadn't expected me at all." "Surprised to see you just about expresses it, Eleanor. I was looking for a little girl in hair ribbons with her
skirts to her knees." "And a blue tam-o'-shanter?" "And a blue tam-o'-shanter. I had forgotten you had grown up any to
speak of." "You see me every vacation," Eleanor grumbled, as she stepped into the
waiting motor. "It isn't because you lack opportunity that you don't
notice what I look like. It's just because you're naturally
unobserving." "Peter and Jimmie have been making a good deal of fuss about your
being a young lady, now I think of it. Peter especially has been
rather a nuisance about it, breaking into my most precious moments of
triviality with the sweetly solemn thought that our little girl has
grown to be a woman now." "Oh, does _he_ think I'm grown up, does he really?" He's all the time wanting me to get you to
New York over the weekend, so that he can see if you are any taller
than you were the last time he saw you." "Are they coming to see me this evening?" "Jimmie is going to look in. You
know she's on here from China with her daughter. "She must be as grown up as I am," Eleanor said. "I used to have her
room, you know, when I stayed with Uncle Peter. "Not as much as he likes you, Miss Green-eyes. He says she looks like
a heathen Chinee but otherwise is passable. I didn't know that you
added jealousy to the list of your estimable vices." "I'm not jealous," Eleanor protested; "or if I am it's only because
she's blood relation,--and I'm not, you know." "It's a good deal more prosaic to be a blood relation, if anybody
should ask you," David smiled. "A blood relation is a good deal like
the famous primrose on the river's brim." "'A primrose by the river's brim a yellow primrose was to him,--and
nothing more,'" Eleanor quoted gaily. "Why, what more--" she broke off
suddenly and  slightly. "What more would anybody want to be than a yellow primrose by the
river's brim?" "I don't know, I'm sure. I'm a
mere man and such questions are too abstruse for me, as I told your
Aunt Margaret the other day. Now I think of it, though, you don't look
unlike a yellow primrose yourself to-day, daughter." "That's because I've got a yellow ribbon on my hat." It has something to do with
youth and fragrance and the flowers that bloom in the spring." "The flowers that bloom in the spring, tra la," Eleanor returned
saucily, "have nothing to do with the case." "She's learning that she has eyes, good Lord," David said to himself,
but aloud he remarked paternally, "I saw all your aunts yesterday. Gertrude gave a tea party and invited a great many famous tea party
types, and ourselves." Beulah was there, like the famous Queenie,
with her hair in a braid." She's gone in for dress reform now, you know, a kind
of middy blouse made out of a striped portiere with a kilted skirt of
the same material and a Scotch cap. Your Aunt Beulah presents a peculiar phenomenon these days. She's
growing better-looking and behaving worse every day of her life." "She's theory ridden and fad bitten. She'll come to a bad end if
something doesn't stop her." "Do you mean--stop her working for suffrage? I'm a suffragist, Uncle
David." "And quite right to remind me of it before I began slamming the cause. I mean the
way she's going after it. There are healthy ways of insisting on your
rights and unhealthy ways. Beulah's getting further and further off
key, that's all. Your poor old
cooperative father welcomes you to the associated hearthstone." "This front entrance looks more like my front entrance than any other
place does," Eleanor said. she asked the black elevator man, who beamed delightedly
upon her. I didn't know he had one," David chuckled. "It takes a
woman--"

Jimmie appeared in the evening, laden with violets and a five pound
box of the chocolates most in favor in the politest circles at the
moment. "What's devouring you, papa?" "Don't I always place
tributes at the feet of the offspring?" "Mirror candy and street corner violets, yes," David said. "It's only
the labels that surprised me." "She knows the difference, now," Jimmie answered, "what would you?" The night before her return to school it was decreed that she should
go to bed early. She had spent two busy days of shopping and "seeing
the family." She had her hours discussing her future with Peter, long
visits and talks with Margaret and Gertrude, and a cup of tea at
suffrage headquarters with Beulah, as well as long sessions in the
shops accompanied by Mademoiselle, who made her home now permanently
with David. She sat before the fire drowsily constructing pyramids out
of the embers and David stood with one arm on the mantel, smoking his
after-dinner cigar, and watching her. "I can't seem to make up my mind, Uncle David." "Yes, I'd love it,--if--"

"If what, daughter?" "If I thought I could spare the time." "I'm going to earn my own living, you know." I've got to--in order to--to feel right about things." "Don't you like the style of living to which your cooperative parents
have accustomed you?" "I love everything you've ever done for me, but I can't go on letting
you do things for me forever." It doesn't seem--right, that's all." "It's your New England conscience, Eleanor; one of the most specious
varieties of consciences in the world. It will always be tempting you
to do good that better may come. I don't know whether I would be better
fitted to earn my living if I went to business college or real
college. "I can't think,--I'm stupefied." "Uncle Peter couldn't think, either." "Have you mentioned this brilliant idea to Peter?" "He talked it over with me, but I think he thinks I'll change my
mind." Eleanor, we're all
able to afford you--the little we spend on you is nothing divided
among six of us. When did you come to
this extraordinary decision?" There are things she said that I've never forgotten. I told Uncle
Peter to think about it and then help me to decide which to do, and I
want you to think, Uncle David, and tell me truly what you believe
the best preparation for a business life would be. I thought perhaps I
might be a stenographer in an editorial office, and my training there
would be more use to me than four years at college, but I don't
know." "You're an extraordinary young woman," David said, staring at her. "I'm glad you broached this subject, if only that I might realize how
extraordinary, but I don't think anything will come of it, my dear. I
don't want you to go to college unless you really want to, but if you
do want to, I hope you will take up the pursuit of learning as a
pursuit and not as a means to an end. "Then let's have no more of this nonsense of earning your own
living." "Are you really displeased, Uncle David?" "I should be if I thought you were serious,--but it's bedtime. If
you're going to get your beauty sleep, my dear, you ought to begin on
it immediately." Eleanor rose obediently, her brow clouded a little, and her head held
high. David watched the color coming and going in the sweet face and
the tender breast rising and falling with her quickening breath. "I thought perhaps you would understand," she said. She had always kissed him "good night" until this visit, and he had
refrained from commenting on the omission before, but now he put out
his hand to her. "There is only one way
for a daughter to say good night to her parent." She put up her face, and as she did so he caught the glint of tears in
her eyes. "Why, Eleanor, dear," he said, "did you care?" With his arms still about her shoulder he stood looking down at her. A
hot tide of crimson made its way slowly to her brow and then receded,
accentuating the clear pallor of her face. "That was a real kiss, dear," he said slowly. "We mustn't get such
things confused. I won't bother you with talking about it to-night, or
until you are ready. Until then we'll pretend that it didn't happen,
but if the thought of it should ever disturb you the least bit, dear,
you are to remember that the time is coming when I shall have
something to say about it; will you remember?" "Yes, Uncle David," Eleanor said uncertainly, "but I--I--"

David took her unceremoniously by the shoulders. "Go now," he said, and she obeyed him without further question. CHAPTER XVIII

BEULAH'S PROBLEM


Peter was shaving for the evening. His sister was giving a dinner
party for two of her husband's fellow bankers and their wives. After
that they were going to see the latest Belasco production, and from
there to some one of the new dancing "clubs,"--the smart cabarets that
were forced to organize in the guise of private enterprises to evade
the two o'clock closing law. Peter enjoyed dancing, but he did not as
a usual thing enjoy bankers' wives. He was deliberating on the
possibility of excusing himself gracefully after the theater, on the
plea of having some work to do, and finally decided that his sister's
feelings would be hurt if she realized he was trying to escape the
climax of the hospitality she had provided so carefully. He gazed at himself intently over the drifts of lather and twisted his
shaving mirror to the most propitious angle from time to time. In the
room across the hall--Eleanor's room, he always called it to
himself--his young niece was singing bits of the Mascagni intermezzo
interspersed with bits of the latest musical comedy, in a rather
uncertain contralto. "My last girl came from Vassar, and I don't know where to class her." "My last girl--" and
began at the beginning of the chorus again. "My last girl came from
Vassar," which brought him by natural stages to the consideration of
the higher education and of Beulah, and a conversation concerning her
that he had had with Jimmie and David the night before. "She's off her nut," Jimmie said succinctly. "It's not exactly that
there's nobody home," he rapped his curly pate significantly, "but
there's too much of a crowd there. She's not the same old girl at all. She used to be a good fellow, high-brow propaganda and all. Now she's
got nothing else in her head. "It's what hasn't happened to her that's addled her," David explained. "It's these highly charged, hypersensitive young women that go to
pieces under the modern pressure. They're the ones that need licking
into shape by all the natural processes." "By which you mean a drunken husband and a howling family?" "Feminism isn't the answer to
Beulah's problem." "It is the problem," David said; "she's poisoning herself with it. My cousin Jack
married a girl with a sister a great deal like Beulah, looks,
temperament, and everything else, though she wasn't half so nice. She
got going the militant pace and couldn't stop herself. I never met her
at a dinner party that she wasn't tackling somebody on the subject of
man's inhumanity to woman. She ended in a sanitorium; in fact, they're
thinking now of taking her to the--"

"--bug house," Jimmie finished cheerfully. "And in the beginning she was a perfectly good girl that needed
nothing in the world but a chance to develop along legitimate lines." "The frustrate matron," David agreed gravely. "I wonder you haven't
realized this yourself, Gram. You're keener about such things than I
am. Beulah is more your job than mine." "You're the only one she listens to or looks up to. Go up and tackle
her some day and see what you can do. "Give her the once over and throw out the lifeline," Jimmie said. "I thought all this stuff was a phase, a part of her taking herself
seriously as she always has. I had no idea it was anything to worry
about," Peter persisted. "Are you sure she's in bad shape--that she's
got anything more than a bad attack of Feminism of the Species in its
most virulent form? They come out of _that_, you know." "She's batty," Jimmie nodded gravely. "Go up and look her over," David persisted; "you'll see what we mean,
then. Peter reviewed this conversation while he shaved the right side of his
face, and frowned prodigiously through the lather. He wished that he
had an engagement that evening that he could break in order to get to
see Beulah at once, and discover for himself the harm that had come to
his friend. He had always felt that he saw
a little more clearly than the others the virtue that was in the girl. He admired the pluck with which she made her attack on life and the
energy with which she accomplished her ends. There was to him
something alluring and quaint about her earnestness. The fact that her
soundness could be questioned came to him with something like a shock. As soon as he was dressed he was called to the telephone to talk to
David. "Margaret has just told me that Doctor Penrose has been up to see
Beulah and pronounces it a case of nervous breakdown. He wants her to
try out <DW43>-analysis, and that sort of thing. He seems to feel that
it's serious. So'm I, to tell
the truth." "And so am I," Peter acknowledged to himself as he hung up the
receiver. He was so absorbed during the evening that one of the
ladies--the wife of the fat banker--found him extremely dull and
decided against asking him to dinner with his sister. The wife of the
thin banker, who was in his charge at the theater, got the benefit of
his effort to rouse himself and grace the occasion creditably, and
found him delightful. By the time the evening was over he had decided
that Beulah should be pulled out of whatever dim world of dismay and
delusion she might be wandering in, at whatever cost. It was
unthinkable that she should be wasted, or that her youth and splendid
vitality should go for naught. He found her eager to talk to him the next night when he went to see
her. "Peter," she said, "I want you to go to my aunt and my mother, and
tell them that I've got to go on with my work,--that I can't be
stopped and interrupted by this foolishness of doctors and nurses. I
never felt better in my life, except for not being able to sleep, and
I think that is due to the way they have worried me. I live in a world
they don't know anything about, that's all. Even if they were right,
if I am wearing myself out soul and body for the sake of the cause,
what business is it of theirs to interfere? I'm working for the souls
and bodies of women for ages to come. What difference does it make if
my soul and body suffer? Peter
observed the unnatural light in them, the apparent dryness of her
lips, the two bright spots burning below her cheek-bones. "Because," he answered her slowly, "I don't think it was the original
intention of Him who put us here that we should sacrifice everything
we are to the business of emphasizing the superiority of a sex." "That isn't the point at all, Peter. No man understands, no man can
understand. It's woman's equality we want emphasized, just literally
that and nothing more. You've pauperized and degraded us long
enough--"

"Thou canst not say I--" Peter began. "Yes, you and every other man, every man in the world is a party to
it." "I had to get her going," Peter apologized to himself, "in order to
get a point of departure. Not if I vote for women, Beulah, dear," he
added aloud. "If you throw your influence with us instead of against us," she
conceded, "you're helping to right the wrong that you have permitted
for so long." "Well, granting your premise, granting all your premises, Beulah--and
I admit that most of them have sound reasoning behind them--your
battle now is all over but the shouting. There's no reason that you
personally should sacrifice your last drop of energy to a campaign
that's practically won already." "If you think the mere franchise is all I have been working for,
Peter,--"

"I don't. I know the thousand and one activities you women are
concerned with. I know how much better church and state always have
been and are bound to be, when the women get behind and push, if they
throw their strength right." Beulah rose enthusiastically to this bait and talked rationally and
well for some time. Just as Peter was beginning to feel that David and
Jimmie had been guilty of the most unsympathetic exaggeration of her
state of mind--unquestionably she was not as fit physically as
usual--she startled him with an abrupt change into almost hysterical
incoherence. "I have a right to live my own life," she concluded, "and
nobody--nobody shall stop me." "We are all living our own lives, aren't we?" "No woman lives her own life to-day," Beulah cried, still excitedly. "Every woman is living the life of some man, who has the legal right
to treat her as an imbecile." How about the suffrage states, how about the women
who are already in the proud possession of their rights and
privileges? They are not technical imbeciles any longer according to
your theory. Every woman will be a super-woman in
two shakes,--so what's devouring you, as Jimmie says?" "It's after all the states have suffrage that the big fight will
really begin," Beulah answered wearily. "It's the habit of wearing the
yoke we'll have to fight then." "The anti-feminists," Peter said, "I see. Beulah, can't you give
yourself any rest, or is the nature of the cause actually suicidal?" To his surprise her tense face quivered at this and she tried to
steady a tremulous lower lip. "I am tired," she said, a little piteously, "dreadfully tired, but
nobody cares." "They only want to stop me doing something they have no sympathy with. What do Gertrude and Margaret know of the real purpose of my life or
my failure or success? They take a sentimental interest in my health,
that's all. Do you suppose it made any difference to Jeanne d'Arc how
many people took a sympathetic interest in her health if they didn't
believe in what she believed in?" "I thought Eleanor would grow up to take an interest in the position
of women, and to care about the things I cared about, but she's not
going to." "Not as fond as she is of Margaret." Peter longed to dispute this, but he could not in honesty. "She's so lukewarm she might just as well be an anti. They drag us back like
so much dead weight." "I suppose Eleanor has been a disappointment to you," Peter mused,
"but she tries pretty hard to be all things to all parents, Beulah. You'll find she won't fail you if you need her." "I shan't need her," Beulah said, prophetically. "I hoped she'd stand
beside me in the work, but she's not that kind. She'll marry early and
have a family, and that will be the end of her." "I wonder if she will," Peter said, "I hope so. She still seems such
a child to me. I believe in marriage, Beulah, don't you?" I made a vow once that I would never
marry and I've always believed that it would be hampering and limiting
to a woman, but now I see that the fight has got to go on. If there
are going to be women to carry on the fight they will have to be born
of the women who are fighting to-day." "It doesn't make any difference why
you believe it, if you do believe it." "It makes all the difference," Beulah said, but her voice softened. "What I believe is more to me than anything else in the world,
Peter." I understand your point of view, Beulah. You
carry it a little bit too far, that's all that's wrong with it from my
way of thinking." "Will you help me to go on, Peter?" Tell them that they're all wrong in
their treatment of me." "I think I could undertake to do that"--Peter was convinced that a
less antagonistic attitude on the part of her relatives would be more
successful--"and I will." "You're the only one who comes anywhere near knowing," she said, "or
who ever will, I guess. I try so hard, Peter, and now when I don't
seem to be accomplishing as much as I want to, as much as it's
necessary for me to accomplish if I am to go on respecting myself,
every one enters into a conspiracy to stop my doing anything at all. The only thing that makes me nervous is the way I am thwarted and
opposed at every turn. "Perhaps not, but you have something remarkably like _idee fixe_,"
Peter said to himself compassionately. He found her actual condition less dangerous but much more difficult
than he had anticipated. She was living wrong, that was the sum and
substance of her malady. Her life was spent confronting theories and
discounting conditions. She did not realize that it is only the
interest of our investment in life that we can sanely contribute to
the cause of living. Our capital strength and energy must be used for
the struggle for existence itself if we are to have a world of
balanced individuals. There is an arrogance involved in assuming
ourselves more humane than human that reacts insidiously on our health
and morals. Peter, looking into the twitching hectic face before him
with the telltale glint of mania in the eyes, felt himself becoming
helpless with pity for a mind gone so far askew. He felt curiously
responsible for Beulah's condition. "She wouldn't have run herself so far aground," he thought, "if I had
been on the job a little more. I could have helped her to steer
straighter. A word here and a lift there and she would have come
through all right. Now something's got to stop her or she can't be
stopped. She'll preach once too often out of the tail of a cart on the
subject of equal guardianship,--and--"

Beulah put her hands to her face suddenly, and, sinking back into the
depths of the big cushioned chair on the edge of which she had been
tensely poised during most of the conversation, burst into tears. "You're the only one that knows," she sobbed over and over again. "I'm so tired, Peter, but I've got to go on and on and on. If they
stop me, I'll kill myself." Peter crossed the room to her side and sat down on her chair-arm. "Don't cry, dear," he said, with a hand on her head. "You're too tired
to think things out now,--but I'll help you." She lifted a piteous face, for the moment so startlingly like that of
the dead girl he had loved that his senses were confused by the
resemblance. "I think I see the way," he said slowly. He slipped to his knees and gathered her close in his arms. "I think this will be the way, dear," he said very gently. "Does this mean that you want me to marry you?" she whispered, when
she was calmer. "If you will, dear," he said. "I will,--if I can, if I can make it seem right to after I've thought
it all out.--Oh! "I had no idea of that," he said gravely, "but it's wonderful that
you do. I'll put everything I've got into trying to make you happy,
Beulah." Her arms closed around his neck and
tightened there. He made her comfortable and she relaxed like a tired child, almost
asleep under his soothing hand, and the quiet spell of his
tenderness. "I didn't know it could be like this," she whispered. In his heart he was saying, "This is best. It
is the right and normal way for her--and for me." In her tri-cornered dormitory room at the new school which she was not
sharing with any one this year Eleanor, enveloped in a big brown and
yellow wadded bathrobe, was writing a letter to Peter. Her hair hung
in two golden brown braids over her shoulders and her pure profile was
bent intently over the paper. At the moment when Beulah made her
confession of love and closed her eyes against the breast of the man
who had just asked her to marry him, two big tears forced their way
between Eleanor's lids and splashed down upon her letter. CHAPTER XIX

MOSTLY UNCLE PETER


"Dear Uncle Peter," the letter ran, "I am very, very homesick and
lonely for you to-day. It seems to me that I would gladly give a whole
year of my life just for the privilege of being with you, and talking
instead of writing,--but since that can not be, I am going to try and
write you about the thing that is troubling me. I can't bear it alone
any longer, and still I don't know whether it is the kind of thing
that it is honorable to tell or not. So you see I am very much
troubled and puzzled, and this trouble involves some one else in a way
that it is terrible to think of. "Uncle Peter, dear, I do not want to be married. Not until I have
grown up, and seen something of the world. You know it is one of my
dearest wishes to be self-supporting, not because I am a Feminist or a
new woman, or have 'the unnatural belief of an antipathy to man' that
you're always talking about, but just because it will prove to me once
and for all that I belong to myself, and that my _soul_ isn't, and
never has been cooperative. You know what I mean by this, and you are
not hurt by my feeling so. You, I am sure, would not want me to be
married, or to have to think of myself as engaged, especially not to
anybody that we all knew and loved, and who is very close to me and
you in quite another way. Please don't try to imagine what I mean,
Uncle Peter--even if you know, you must tell yourself that you don't
know. Please, please pretend even to yourself that I haven't written
you this letter. I know people do tell things like this, but I don't
know quite how they bring themselves to do it, even if they have
somebody like you who understands everything--everything. "Uncle Peter, dear, I am supposed to be going to be married by and by
when the one who wants it feels that it can be spoken of, and until
that happens, I've got to wait for him to speak, unless I can find
some way to tell him that I do not want it ever to be. I don't know
how to tell him. I don't know how to make him feel that I do not
belong to him. It is only myself I belong to, and I belong to you, but
I don't know how to make that plain to any one who does not know it
already. I can't say it unless perhaps you can help me to. I know every girl always thinks
there is something different about her, but I think there are ways in
which I truly am different. When I want anything I know more clearly
what it is, and why I want it than most other girls do, and not only
that, but I know now, that I want to keep myself, and everything I
think and feel and am,--_sacred_. There is an inner shrine in a
woman's soul that she must keep inviolate. "A liberty that you haven't known how, or had the strength to prevent,
is a terrible thing. Uncle Peter, dear, twice in
my life things have happened that drive me almost desperate when I
think of them. If these things should happen again when I know that I
don't want them to, I don't think there would be any way of my bearing
it. Perhaps you can tell me something that will make me find a way out
of this tangle. I don't see what it could be, but lots of times you
have shown me the way out of endless mazes that were not grown up
troubles like this, but seemed very real to me just the same. "Uncle Peter, dear, dear, dear,--you are all I have. I wish you were
here to-night, though you wouldn't be let in, even if you beat on the
gate ever so hard, for it's long after bedtime. I am up in my tower
room all alone. *       *       *       *       *

Eleanor read her letter over and addressed a tear splotched envelope
to Peter. Then she slowly tore letter and envelope into little bits. "He would know," she said to herself. "I haven't any real right to
tell him. It would be just as bad as any kind of tattling." She began another letter to him but found she could not write without
saying what was in her heart, and so went to bed uncomforted. There
was nothing in her experience to help her in her relation to David. His kiss on her lips had taught her the nature of such kisses: had
made her understand suddenly the ease with which the strange, sweet
spell of sex is cast. She related it to the episode of the unwelcome
caress bestowed upon her by the brother of Maggie Lou, and that half
forgotten incident took on an almost terrible significance. She
understood now how she should have repelled that unconscionable boy,
but that understanding did not help her with the problem of her Uncle
David. Though the thought of it thrilled through her with a strange
incredible delight, she did not want another kiss of his upon her
lips. "It's--it's--like that," she said to herself. "I want it to be from
somebody--else. Somebody that would make it
seem right." She felt that she
must get upon her own feet quickly and be under no obligation to any
man. Vaguely her stern New England rearing was beginning to indicate
the way that she should tread. No man or woman who did not understand
"the value of a dollar," was properly equipped to do battle with the
realities of life. The value of a dollar, and a clear title to
it--these were the principles upon which her integrity must be founded
if she were to survive her own self-respect. Her Puritan fathers had
bestowed this heritage upon her. She had always felt the irregularity
of her economic position; now that the complication of her relation
with David had arisen, it was beginning to make her truly
uncomfortable. David had been very considerate of her, but his consideration
frightened her. He had been so afraid that she might be hurt or
troubled by his attitude toward her that he had explained again, and
almost in so many words that he was only waiting for her to grow
accustomed to the idea before he asked her to become his wife. She had
looked forward with considerable trepidation to the Easter vacation
following the establishment of their one-sided understanding, but
David relieved her apprehension by putting up at his club and leaving
her in undisturbed possession of his quarters. There, with
Mademoiselle still treating her as a little girl, and the other five
of her heterogeneous foster family to pet and divert her at intervals,
she soon began to feel her life swing back into a more accustomed and
normal perspective. David's attitude to her was as simple as ever, and
when she was with the devoted sextet she was almost able to forget the
matter that was at issue between them--almost but not quite. She took quite a new kind of delight in her association with the
group. She found herself suddenly on terms of grown up equality with
them. Her consciousness of the fact that David was tacitly waiting
for her to become a woman, had made a woman of her already, and she
looked on her guardians with the eyes of a woman, even though a very
newly fledged and timorous one. She was a trifle self-conscious with the others, but with Jimmie she
was soon on her old familiar footing. *       *       *       *       *

"Uncle Jimmie is still a great deal of fun," she wrote in her diary. "He does just the same old things he used to do with me, and a good
many new ones in addition. He brings me flowers, and gets me taxi-cabs
as if I were really a grown up young lady, and he pinches my nose and
teases me as if I were still the little girl that kept house in a
studio for him. I never realized before what a good-looking man he is. I used to think that Uncle Peter was the only handsome man of the
three, but now I realize that they are all exceptionally good-looking. Uncle David has a great deal of distinction, of course, but Uncle
Jimmie is merry and radiant and vital, and tall and athletic looking
into the bargain. The ladies on the Avenue all turn to look at him
when we go walking. He says that the gentlemen all turn to look at
me, and I think perhaps they do when I have my best clothes on, but in
my school clothes I am quite certain that nothing like that happens. "I have been out with Uncle Jimmie Tuesday and Wednesday and Thursday
and Friday,--four days of my vacation. We've been to the Hippodrome
and Chinatown, and we've dined at Sherry's, and one night we went down
to the little Italian restaurant where I had my first introduction to
_eau rougie_, and was so distressed about it. I shall never forget
that night, and I don't think Uncle Jimmie will ever be done teasing
me about it. It is nice to be with Uncle Jimmie so much, but I never
seem to see Uncle Peter any more. Alphonse is very careful about
taking messages, I know, but it does seem to me that Uncle Peter must
have telephoned more times than I know of. It does seem as if he
would, at least, try to see me long enough to have one of our old time
talks again. To see him with all the others about is only a very
little better than not seeing him at all. He isn't like himself,
someway. There is a shadow over him that I do not understand." *       *       *       *       *

"Don't you think that Uncle Peter has changed?" she asked Jimmie,
when the need of speaking of him became too strong to withstand. "He is a little pale about the ears," Jimmie conceded, "but I think
that's the result of hard work and not enough exercise. He spends all
his spare time trying to patch up Beulah instead of tramping and
getting out on his horse the way he used to. He's doing a good job on
the old dear, but it's some job, nevertheless and notwithstanding--"

"Is Aunt Beulah feeling better than she was?" Eleanor's lips were dry,
but she did her best to make her voice sound natural. It seemed
strange that Jimmie could speak so casually of a condition of affairs
that made her very heart stand still. "I didn't know that Uncle Peter
had been taking care of her." "Taking care of her isn't a circumstance to what Peter has been doing
for Beulah. You know she hasn't been right for some time. She got
burning wrong, like the flame on our old gas stove in the studio when
there was air in it." "Uncle David thought so the last time I was here," Eleanor said, "but
I didn't know that Uncle Peter--"

"Peter, curiously enough, was the last one to tumble. Dave and I got
alarmed about the girl and held a consultation, with the result that
Doctor Gramercy was called. If we'd believed he would go into it quite
so heavily we might have thought again before we sicked him on. It's
very nice for Mary Ann, but rather tough on Abraham as they said when
the lady was deposited on that already overcrowded bosom. Now Beulah's
got suffrage mania, and Peter's got Beulah mania, and it's a merry
mess all around." You haven't seen much of him since you came, have
you?--Well, the reason is that every afternoon as soon as he can get
away from the office, he puts on a broad sash marked 'Votes for
Women,' and trundles Beulah around in her little white and green
perambulator, trying to distract her mind from suffrage while he talks
to her gently and persuasively upon the subject. Suffrage is the only
subject on her mind, he explains, so all he can do is to try to cuckoo
gently under it day by day. It's a very complicated process but he's
making headway." "I'm glad of that," Eleanor said faintly. "How--how is Aunt Gertrude? I don't see her very often, either." It was Jimmie's turn to look self-conscious. "She never has time for me any more; I'm not high-brow enough for her. She's getting on like a streak, you know, exhibiting everywhere." She gave me a cast of her faun's head. "She is, I guess, but don't let's waste all our valuable time talking
about the family. Let's talk about us--you and me. You ask me how I'm
feeling and then I'll tell you. Then I'll ask you how you're feeling
and you'll tell me. Then I'll tell you how I imagine you must be
feeling from the way you're looking,--and that will give me a chance
to expatiate on the delectability of your appearance. I'll work up
delicately to the point where you will begin to compare me favorably
with all the other nice young men you know,--and then we'll be off." Eleanor asked, beginning to sparkle a little. "We shall indeed," he assured her solemnly. No, on second
thoughts, I'll begin. I'll begin at the place where I start telling
you how excessively well you're looking. I don't know, considering its
source, whether it would interest you or not, but you have the biggest
blue eyes that I've, ever seen in all my life,--and I'm rather a judge
of them." "All the better to eat you with, my dear," Eleanor chanted. He shot her a queer glance from under his eyebrows. "I don't feel very safe when I look into them, my child. It would be a
funny joke on me if they did prove fatal to me, wouldn't
it?--well,--but away with such nonsense. I mustn't blither to the very
babe whose cradle I am rocking, must I?" "I'm not a babe, Uncle Jimmie. Peter says
that you even disconcert him at times, when you take to remembering
things out of your previous experience." "'When he was a King in Babylon and I was a Christian Slave?'" Only I'd prefer to play the part of the King of Babylon, if
it's all the same to you, niecelet. How does the rest of it go, 'yet
not for a--' something or other 'would I wish undone that deed beyond
the grave.' Gosh, my dear, if things were otherwise, I think I could
understand how that feller felt. Get on your hat, and let's get out
into the open. My soul is cramped with big potentialities this
afternoon. I wish you hadn't grown up, Eleanor. You are taking my
breath away in a peculiar manner. No man likes to have his breath
taken away so suddint like. Let's get out into the rolling prairie of
Central Park." But the rest of the afternoon was rather a failure. The Park had that
peculiar bleakness that foreruns the first promise of spring. The
children, that six weeks before were playing in the snow and six weeks
later would be searching the turf for dandelions, were in the listless
between seasons state of comparative inactivity. There was a deceptive
balminess in the air that seemed merely to overlay a penetrating
chilliness. "I'm sorry I'm not more entertaining this afternoon," Jimmie
apologized on the way home. "It isn't that I am not happy, or that I
don't feel the occasion to be more than ordinarily propitious; I'm
silent upon a peak in Darien,--that's all." "I was thinking of something else, too," Eleanor said. "I didn't say I was thinking of something else." "People are always thinking of something else when they aren't talking
to each other, aren't they?" "Something else, or each other, Eleanor. I wasn't thinking of
something else, I was thinking--well, I won't tell you exactly--at
present. "A penny is a good deal of money. "I'm afraid I couldn't--buy joy, even if you gave me your penny, Uncle
Jimmie." My penny might not be like other pennies. On the other
hand, your thoughts might be worth a fortune to me." "I'm afraid they wouldn't be worth anything to anybody." "You simply don't know what I am capable of making out of them." "I wish I could make something out of them," Eleanor said so
miserably that Jimmie was filled with compunction for having tired her
out, and hailed a passing taxi in which to whiz her home again. *       *       *       *       *

"I have found out that Uncle Peter is spending all his time with Aunt
Beulah," she wrote in her diary that evening. "It is beautiful of him
to try to help her through this period of nervous collapse, and just
like him, but I don't understand why it is that he doesn't come and
tell me about it, especially since he is getting so tired. He ought to
know that I love him so dearly and deeply that I could help him even
in helping her. It isn't like him not to share his anxieties with me. Aunt Beulah is a grown up woman, and has friends and doctors and
nurses, and every one knows her need. It seems to me that he might
think that I have no one but him, and that whatever might lie heavy on
my heart I could only confide in him. Why doesn't it occur to him that I might have something to
tell him now? He needs a good deal of exercise to
keep in form. If he doesn't have a certain amount of muscular
activity his digestion is not so good. There are two little creases
between his eyes that I never remember seeing there before. I asked
him the other night when he was here with Aunt Beulah if his head
ached, and he said 'no,' but Aunt Beulah said her head ached almost
all the time. Of course, Aunt Beulah is important, and if Uncle Peter
is trying to bring her back to normality again she is important to
him, and that makes her important to me for his sake also, but nobody
in the world is worth the sacrifice of Uncle Peter. "I suppose it's a part of his great beauty that he should think so
disparagingly of himself. I might not love him so well if he knew just
how dear and sweet and great his personality is. It isn't so much what
he says or does, or even the way he looks that constitutes his charm,
it's the simple power and radiance behind his slightest move. He doesn't think he is especially fine or beautiful. He doesn't know what a waste it is when he spends his strength upon
somebody who isn't as noble in character as he is,--but I know, and it
makes me wild to think of it. My
vacation is almost over, and I don't see how I could bear going back
to school without one comforting hour of him alone. "I intended to write a detailed account of my vacation, but I can not. Uncle Jimmie has certainly tried to make me happy. I could have so much fun with him if I were not worried about
Uncle Peter! "Uncle David says he wants to spend my last evening with me. We are
going to dine here, and then go to the theater together. I am going to
try to tell him how I feel about things, but I am afraid he won't give
me the chance. Life is a strange mixture of things you want and can't
have, and things you can have and don't want. It seems almost disloyal
to put that down on paper about Uncle David. I do want him and love
him, but oh!--not in that way. There is only one
person in a woman's life that she can feel that way about. Why--why--why doesn't my Uncle Peter come to me?" CHAPTER XX

THE MAKINGS OF A TRIPLE WEDDING


"Just by way of formality," David said, "and not because I think any
one present"--he smiled on the five friends grouped about his dinner
table--"still takes our old resolution seriously, I should like to be
released from the anti-matrimonial pledge that I signed eight years
ago this November. I have no announcement to make as yet, but when I
do wish to make an announcement--and I trust to have the permission
granted very shortly--I want to be sure of my technical right to do
so." Jimmie exclaimed in a tone of such genuine
confusion that it raised a shout of laughter. "I never signed any pledge to that effect." "We left you out of it, Old Horse, regarding you as a congenital
celibate anyway," Jimmie answered. "Some day soon you will understand how much you wronged me," Peter
said with a covert glance at Beulah. "I wish I could say as much," Jimmie sighed, "since this is the hour
of confession I don't mind adding that I hope I may be able to soon." Gertrude clapped her hands softly. "We've the makings of a triple
wedding in our midst. Look into the blushing faces before us and hear
the voice that breathed o'er Eden echoing in our ears. This is the
most exciting moment of my life! Girls, get on your feet and drink to
the health of these about-to-be Benedicts. Up in your chairs,--one
slipper on the table. Gertrude had seen Margaret's sudden pallor and heard the convulsive
catching of her breath,--Margaret rising Undine-like out of a filmy,
pale green frock, with her eyes set a little more deeply in the
shadows than usual. Her quick instinct to the rescue was her own
salvation. "On behalf of my coadjutors," he said, "I thank you. All this is
extremely premature for me, and I imagine from the confusion of the
other gentlemen present it is as much, if not more so, for them. Personally I regret exceedingly being unable to take you more fully
into my confidence. The only reason for this partial revelation is
that I wished to be sure that I was honorably released from my oath of
abstinence. You fellows say something," he concluded,
sinking abruptly into his chair. "Your style always was distinctly mid-Victorian," Jimmie murmured. "I've got nothing to say, except that I wish I had something to say
and that if I _do_ have something to say in the near future I'll
create a real sensation! When Miss Van Astorbilt permits David to link
her name with his in the caption under a double column cut in our
leading journals, you'll get nothing like the thrill that I expect to
create with my modest announcement. I've got a real romance up my
sleeve." There is no Van Astorbilt in mine." "The lady won't give me her permission to speak," Peter said. "She
knows how proud and happy I shall be when I am able to do so." "It is better we should marry," she said. "I didn't realize that when
I exacted that oath from you. It is from the intellectual type that
the brains to carry on the great work of the world must be
inherited." I'll destroy it to-night and then we may all consider
ourselves free to take any step that we see fit. It was really only as
a further protection to Eleanor that we signed it." "Eleanor will be surprised, won't she?" Three
self-conscious masculine faces met her innocent interrogation. "_Eleanor_," Margaret breathed, "_Eleanor_." "I rather think she will," Jimmie chuckled irresistibly, but David
said nothing, and Peter stared unseeingly into the glass he was still
twirling on its stem. "Eleanor will be taken care of just the same," Beulah said decisively. "I don't think we need even go through the formality of a vote on
that." "Eleanor will be taken care of," David said softly. The Hutchinsons' limousine--old Grandmother Hutchinson had a motor
nowadays--was calling for Margaret, and she was to take the two other
girls home. David and Jimmie--such is the nature of men--were
disappointed in not being able to take Margaret and Gertrude
respectively under their accustomed protection. "I wanted to talk to you, Gertrude," Jimmie said reproachfully as she
slipped away from his ingratiating hand on her arm. "I thought I should take you home to-night, Margaret," David said;
"you never gave me the slip before." "The old order changeth," Gertrude replied lightly to them both, as
she preceded Margaret into the luxurious interior. "It's Eleanor," Gertrude announced as the big car swung into Fifth
Avenue. "Jimmie or David--or--or both are going to marry Eleanor. Didn't you
see their faces when Beulah spoke of her?" "David wants to marry Eleanor," Margaret said quietly. "I've known it
all winter--without realizing what it was I knew." "Well, who is Jimmy going to marry then?" "Who is Peter going to marry for that matter?" it doesn't make any difference,--we're losing them just the same." "No matter what combinations come
about, we shall still have an indestructible friendship." "Indestructible friendship--shucks," Gertrude cried. "The boys are
going to be married--married--married! Marriage is the one thing that
indestructible friendships don't survive--except as ghosts." "It should be Peter who is going to marry Eleanor," Margaret said. "It's Peter who has always loved her best. "As a friend," Beulah said, "as her dearest friend." "Not as a friend," Margaret answered softly, "she loves him. "I believe it," Gertrude said. Of
course, it must be Peter who is going to marry her." "If it isn't we've succeeded in working out a rather tragic
experiment," Margaret said, "haven't we?" "Life is a tragic experiment for any woman," Gertrude said
sententiously. "Peter doesn't intend to marry Eleanor," Beulah persisted. "Do you happen to know who he is going to marry?" "Yes, I do know, but I--I can't tell you yet." "Whoever it is, it's a mistake," Margaret said. "It's our little
Eleanor he wants. I suppose he doesn't realize it himself yet, and
when he does it will be too late. He's probably gone and tied himself
up with somebody entirely unsuitable, hasn't he, Beulah?" "I don't know," Beulah said; "perhaps he has. I hadn't thought of it
that way." "It's the way to think of it, I know." Margaret's eyes filled with
sudden tears. "But whatever he's done it's past mending now. There'll
be no question of Peter's backing out of a bargain--bad or good, and
our poor little kiddie's got to suffer." "Beulah took it hard," Gertrude commented, as they turned up-town
again after dropping their friend at her door. The two girls were
spending the night together at Margaret's. I think besides being devoted to Eleanor, she feels terrifically
responsible for her. I can't pretend to think of anything else,--who--who--who--are
our boys going to marry?" "I don't know, Gertrude." "I always thought that you and David--"

Margaret met her eyes bravely but she did not answer the implicit
question. "I always thought that you and Jimmie--" she said presently. Gertrude, you would have been so good for him." it's all over now," Gertrude said, "but I didn't know that a
living soul suspected me." Gertrude whispered as they clung to each
other. I've never seen any one else whom I thought that of. I--I was so
used to him." "That's the rub," Gertrude said, "we're so used to them. They're
so--so preposterously necessary to us." Late that night clasped in each other's arms they admitted the extent
of their desolation. Life had been robbed of a magic,--a mystery. The
solid friendship of years of mutual trust and understanding was the
background of so much lovely folly, so many unrealized possibilities,
so many nebulous desires and dreams that the sudden dissolution of
their circle was an unthinkable calamity. "We ought to have put out our hands and taken them if we wanted them,"
Gertrude said, out of the darkness. They need to be firmly
turned in the right direction instead of being given their heads. "I wouldn't pay that price for love," Margaret said. By
the time I had made it happen I wouldn't want it." "That's my trouble too," Gertrude said. Then she turned over on her
pillow and sobbed helplessly. "Jimmie had such ducky little curls,"
she explained incoherently. "I do this sometimes when I think of them. Margaret put out a hand to her; but long after Gertrude's breath began
to rise and fall regularly, she lay staring wide-eyed into the
darkness. CHAPTER XXI

ELEANOR HEARS THE NEWS


"Dear Uncle Jimmie:

"I said I would write you, but now that I have taken this hour in
which to do it, I find it is a very, very hard letter that I have got
to write. In the first place I can't believe that the things you said
to me that night were real, or that you were awake and in the world of
realities when you said them. I felt as if we were both dreaming; that
you were talking as a man does sometimes in delirium when he believes
the woman he loves to be by his side, and I was listening the same
way. It made me very happy, as dreams sometimes do. I can't help
feeling that your idea of me is a dream idea, and the pain that you
said this kind of a letter would give you will be merely dream pain. It is a shock to wake up in the morning and find that all the lovely
ways we felt, and delicately beautiful things we had, were only dream
things that we wouldn't even understand if we were thoroughly awake. "In the second place, you can't want to marry your little niecelet,
the funny little 'kiddo,' that used to burn her fingers and the
beefsteak over that old studio gas stove. We had such lovely kinds of
make-believe together. That's what our association always ought to
mean to us,--just chumship, and wonderful and preposterous _pretends_. I couldn't think of myself being married to you any more than I could
Jack the giant killer, or Robinson Crusoe. You're my truly best and
dearest childhood's playmate, and that is a great deal to be, Uncle
Jimmie. I don't think a little girl ever grows up quite _whole_ unless
she has somewhere, somehow, what I had in you. You wouldn't want to
marry Alice in Wonderland, now would you? There are some kinds of
playmates that can't marry each other. I think that you and I are that
kind, Uncle Jimmie. "My dear, my dear, don't let this hurt you. How can it hurt you, when
I am only your little adopted foster child that you have helped
support and comfort and make a beautiful, glad life for? I love you so
much,--you are so precious to me that you _must_ wake up out of this
distorted, though lovely dream that I was present at! Nobody can break our hearts if we are strong
enough to withhold them. Nobody can hurt us too much if we can find
the way to be our bravest all the time. I know that what you are
feeling now is not real. I can't tell you how I know, but I do know
the difference. They could be pulled up
without too terrible a havoc. "Uncle Jimmie, dear, believe me, believe me. I said this would be a
hard letter to write, and it has been. If you could see my poor
inkstained, weeping face, you would realize that I am only your funny
little Eleanor after all, and not to be taken seriously at all. I hope
you will come up for my graduation. When you see me with all the other
lumps and frumps that are here, you will know that I am not worth
considering except as a kind of human joke. "Good-by, dear, my dear, and God bless you. *       *       *       *       *

It was less than a week after this letter to Jimmie that Margaret
spending a week-end in a town in Connecticut adjoining that in which
Eleanor's school was located, telephoned Eleanor to join her
overnight at the inn where she was staying. She had really planned the
entire expedition for the purpose of seeing Eleanor and preparing her
for the revelations that were in store for her, though she was
ostensibly meeting a motoring party, with which she was going on into
the Berkshires. She started in abruptly, as was her way, over the salad and cheese in
the low studded Arts and Crafts dining-room of the fashionable road
house, contrived to look as self-conscious as a pretty woman in new
sporting clothes. "Your Uncle David and your Uncle Jimmie are going to be married," she
told her. "No, I didn't," Eleanor said faintly, but she grew suddenly very
white. David gave a dinner party one night last
week in his studio, and announced his intentions, but we don't know
the name of the lady yet, and we can't guess it. He says it is not a
society girl." "Who do you think it is, Eleanor?" "I--I can't think, Aunt Margaret." "We don't know who Jimmie is marrying either. The facts were merely
insinuated, but he said we should have the shock of our lives when we
knew." "Perhaps he has changed his mind by now," Eleanor said. Don't you think it might be that they both just
thought they were going to marry somebody--that really doesn't want to
marry them? It might be all a mistake, you know." "I don't think it's a mistake. Margaret found the rest of her story harder to tell than she had
anticipated. Eleanor, wrapped in the formidable aloofness of the
sensitive young, was already suffering from the tale she had come to
tell,--why, it was not so easy to determine. It might be merely from
the pang of being shut out from confidences that she felt should have
been shared with her at once. She waited until they were both ready for bed (their rooms were
connecting)--Eleanor in the straight folds of her white dimity
nightgown, and her two golden braids making a picture that lingered in
Margaret's memory for many years. "It would have been easier to tell
her in her street clothes," she thought. "I wish her profile were not
so perfect, or her eyes were shallower. How can I hurt such a lovely
thing?" "Are the ten Hutchinsons all right?" "The ten Hutchinsons are very much all right. They like me better now
that I have grown a nice hard Hutchinson shell that doesn't show my
feelings through. Haven't you noticed how much more like other people
I've grown, Eleanor?" "You've grown nicer, and dearer and sweeter, but I don't think you're
very much like anybody else, Aunt Margaret." "I have though,--every one notices it. You haven't asked me anything
about Peter yet," she added suddenly. The lovely color glowed in Eleanor's cheeks for an instant. "I haven't heard from him for a
long time." "Yes, he's well," Margaret said. "He's looking better than he was for
a while. He had some news to tell us too, Eleanor." He
said that he hadn't the consent of the lady to mention her name yet. We're as much puzzled about him as we are about the other two." "It's Aunt Beulah," Eleanor said. She sat upright on the edge of the bed and stared straight ahead of
her. Margaret watched the light and life and youth die out of the face
and a pitiful ashen pallor overspread it. "I don't think it's Beulah," Margaret said. "Beulah knows who it is,
but I never thought of it's being Beulah herself." "If she knows--then she's the one. He wouldn't have told her first if
she hadn't been." "Don't let it hurt you too much, dear. Gertrude--and me, too, Eleanor. It's--it's pain to us all." "Do you mean--Uncle David, Aunt Margaret?" "Yes, dear," Margaret smiled at her bravely. "And does Aunt Gertrude care about Uncle Jimmie?" "She has for a good many years, I think." "I didn't know that," she said. She
pushed Margaret's arm away from her gently, but her breath came hard. "Don't touch me," she cried, "I can't bear it. You might not want
to--if you knew. As Margaret closed the door gently between them, she saw Eleanor throw
her head back, and push the back of her hand hard against her mouth,
as if to stifle the rising cry of her anguish. *       *       *       *       *

The next morning Eleanor was gone. Margaret had listened for hours in
the night but had heard not so much as the rustle of a garment from
the room beyond. Toward morning she had fallen into the sleep of
exhaustion. It was then that the stricken child had made her escape. "Miss Hamlin had found that she must take the early train," the clerk
said, "and left this note for Miss Hutchinson." It was like Eleanor to
do things decently and in order. *       *       *       *       *

"Dear Aunt Margaret," her letter ran. "My grandmother used to say that
some people were trouble breeders. On thinking it over I am afraid
that is just about what I am,--a trouble breeder. "I've been a worry and bother and care to you all since the beginning,
and I have repaid all your kindness by bringing trouble upon you. I don't think I have any right to
tell you exactly in this letter. I can only pray that it will be found
to be all a mistake, and come out right in the end. Surely such
beautiful people as you and Uncle David can find the way to each
other, and can help Uncle Jimmie and Aunt Gertrude, who are a little
blinder about life. Surely, when the stumbling block is out of the
way, you four will walk together beautifully. Please try, Aunt
Margaret, to make things as right as if I had never helped them to go
wrong. I was so young, I didn't know how to manage. I shall never be
that kind of young again. "You know the other reason why I am going. Please do not let any one
else know. If the others could think I had met with some accident,
don't you think that would be the wisest way? I would like to arrange
it so they wouldn't try to find me at all, but would just mourn for me
naturally for a little while. I thought of sticking my old cap in the
river, but I was afraid that would be too hard for you. There won't be
any use in trying to find me. I couldn't
ever bear seeing one of your faces again. Don't let Uncle Peter _know_, please, Aunt Margaret. I don't want him
to know,--I don't want to hurt him, and I don't want him to know. Good-by, my dears, my dearests. I
have taken all of my allowance money. CHAPTER XXII

THE SEARCH


Eleanor had not bought a ticket at the station, Margaret ascertained,
but the ticket agent had tried to persuade her to. She had thanked him
and told him that she preferred to buy it of the conductor. He was a
lank, saturnine individual and had been seriously smitten with
Eleanor's charms, it appeared, and the extreme solicitousness of his
attitude at the suggestion of any mystery connected with her departure
made Margaret realize the caution with which it would be politic to
proceed. She had very little hope of finding Eleanor back at the
school, but it was still rather a shock when she telephoned the school
office and found that there was no news of her there. She concocted a
somewhat lame story to account for Eleanor's absence and promised the
authorities that she would be sent back to them within the week,--a
promise she was subsequently obliged to acknowledge that she could not
keep. Then she fled to New York to break the disastrous news to the
others. She told Gertrude the truth and showed her the pitiful letter Eleanor
had left behind her, and together they wept over it. Also together,
they faced David and Jimmie. "She went away," Margaret told them, "both because she felt she was
hurting those that she loved and because she herself was hurt." "I mean--that she belonged body and soul to Peter and to nobody else,"
Margaret answered deliberately. "If that is true," he said, "then I am largely responsible for her
going." "It is I who am responsible," Jimmie groaned aloud. "I asked her to
marry me and she refused me." "I asked her to marry me and didn't give her the chance to refuse,"
David said; "it is that she is running away from." "It was Peter's engagement that was the last straw," Margaret said. "The poor baby withered and shrank like a flower in the blast when I
told her that." "The damned hound--" Jimmie said feelingly and without apology. "Eleanor says it's Beulah, and the more I think of it the more I think
that she's probably right." "That would be a nice mess, wouldn't it?" "Remember how frank we were with her about his probable lack of
judgment, Margaret? I don't covet the sweet job of breaking it to
either one of them." Nevertheless she assisted Margaret to break it to them both late that
same afternoon at Beulah's apartment. "I'll find her," Peter said briefly. And in response to the halting
explanation of her disappearance that Margaret and Gertrude had done
their best to try to make plausible, despite its elliptical nature, he
only said, "I don't see that it makes any difference why she's gone. She's gone, that's the thing that's important. No matter how hard we
try we can't really figure out her reason till we find her." "Are you sure it's going to be so easy?" She's a pretty determined little person when she
makes up her mind. "I'll find her if she's anywhere in the world," Peter said. "I'll find
her and bring her back." "I believe that you will," she said. "Find out the reason that she
went away, too, Peter." Beulah pulled Gertrude aside. "She had some one else
on her mind, hadn't she?" "She had something else on her mind," Gertrude answered gravely, "but
she had Peter on her mind, too." "She didn't--she couldn't have known about us--Peter and me. We--we
haven't told any one." It's
just one of God's most satirical mix-ups." "I was to blame," Beulah said slowly. "I don't believe in shifting
responsibility. I got her here in the first place and I've been
instrumental in guiding her life ever since. Now, I've sacrificed her
to my own happiness." "It isn't so simple as that," Gertrude said; "the things we start
going soon pass out of our hands. Somebody a good deal higher up has
been directing Eleanor's affairs for a long time,--and ours too, for
that matter." "Don't worry, Beulah," Peter said, making his way to her side from the
other corner of the room where he had been talking to Margaret. "You
mustn't let this worry you. We've all got to be--soldiers now,--but
we'll soon have her back again, I promise you." "And I promise you," Beulah said chokingly, "that if you'll get her
back again, I--I will be a soldier." *       *       *       *       *

Peter began by visiting the business schools in New York and finding
out the names of the pupils registered there. Eleanor had clung firmly
to her idea of becoming an editorial stenographer in some magazine
office, no matter how hard he had worked to dissuade her. He felt
almost certain she would follow out that purpose now. There was a fund
in her name started some years before for the defraying of her college
expenses. She would use that, he argued, to get herself started, even
though she felt constrained to pay it back later on. He worked on this
theory for some time, even making a trip to Boston in search for her
in the stenography classes there, but nothing came of it. Among Eleanor's effects sent on from the school was a little red
address book containing the names and addresses of many of her former
schoolmates at Harmon. Peter wrote all the girls he remembered hearing
her speak affectionately of, but not one of them was able to give him
any news of her. He wrote to Colhassett to Albertina's aunt, who had
served in the capacity of housekeeper to Eleanor's grandfather in his
last days, and got in reply a pious letter from Albertina herself, who
intimated that she had always suspected that Eleanor would come to
some bad end, and that now she was highly soothed and gratified by the
apparent fulfillment of her sinister prognostications. Later he tried private detectives, and, not content with their
efforts, he followed them over the ground that they covered, searching
through boarding houses, and public classes of all kinds; canvassing
the editorial offices of the various magazines Eleanor had admired in
the hope of discovering that she had applied for some small position
there; following every clue that his imagination, and the acumen of
the professionals in his service, could supply;--but his patient
search was unrewarded. Eleanor had apparently vanished from the
surface of the earth. The quest which had seemed to him so simple a
matter when he first undertook it, now began to assume terrible and
abortive proportions. It was unthinkable that one little slip of a
girl untraveled and inexperienced should be able permanently to elude
six determined and worldly adult New Yorkers, who were prepared to tax
their resources to the utmost in the effort to find her,--but the fact
remained that she was missing and continued to be missing, and the
cruel month went by and brought them no news of her. Apart from the emotions
that had been precipitated by her developing charms, they loved her
dearly as the child they had taken to their hearts and bestowed all
their young enthusiasm and energy and tenderness upon. She was the
living clay, as Gertrude had said so many years before, that they had
molded as nearly as possible to their hearts' desire. They loved her
for herself, but one and all they loved her for what they had made of
her--an exquisite, lovely young creature, at ease in a world that
might so easily have crushed her utterly if they had not intervened
for her. They kept up the search unremittingly, following false leads and
meeting with heartbreaking discouragements and disappointments. Only
Margaret had any sense of peace about her. "I'm sure she's all right," she said; "I feel it. It's hard having her
gone, but I'm not afraid for her. She'll work it out better than we
could help her to. It's a beautiful thing to be young and strong and
free, and she'll get the beauty out of it." "I think perhaps you're right, Margaret," David said. It's the bread and butter end of the problem that worries
me." "He'll provide for our ewe lamb, I'm
sure." "You speak as if you had it on direct authority." "I think perhaps I have," she said gravely. Jimmie and Gertrude grew closer together as the weeks passed, and the
strain of their fruitless quest continued. One day Jimmie showed her
the letter that Eleanor had written him. he said, as Gertrude returned it to him, smiling
through her tears. "She's a darling," Gertrude said fervently. "Did she hurt you so much,
Jimmie dear?" "I wanted her," Jimmie answered slowly, "but I think it was because I
thought she was mine,--that I could make her mine. When I found she
was Peter's,--had been Peter's all the time, the thought somehow cured
me. I made it up out of the stuff that
dreams are made of. God knows I love her, but--but that personal thing
has gone out of it. She's my little lost child,--or my sister. A man
wants his own to be his own, Gertrude." "My--my real trouble is that I'm at sea again. I thought that I
cared,--that I was anchored for good. It's the drifting that plays the
deuce with me. If the thought of that sweet child and the grief at her
loss can't hold me, what can? "I don't know," Gertrude laughed. You've always been on to me, Gertrude, too much so
to have any respect for me, I guess. You've got your work," he waved
his arm at the huge cast under the shadow of which they were sitting,
"and all this. You can put all your human longings into it. I'm a poor
rudderless creature without any hope or direction." "You don't know it," he said, with an effort to conceal
the fact that his shoulders were shaking, "but you see before you a
human soul in the actual process of dissolution." Gertrude crossed her studio floor to kneel down beside him. She drew
the boyish head, rumpled into an irresistible state of curliness, to
her breast. "Put it here where it belongs," she said softly. "I snitched him," Gertrude confided to Margaret some days later,--her
whole being radiant and transfigured with happiness. CHAPTER XXIII

THE YOUNG NURSE


The local hospital of the village of Harmonville, which was ten miles
from Harmon proper, where the famous boarding-school for young ladies
was located, presented an aspect so far from institutional that but
for the sign board tacked modestly to an elm tree just beyond the
break in the hedge that constituted the main entrance, the gracious,
old colonial structure might have been taken for the private residence
for which it had served so many years. It was a crisp day in late September, and a pale yellow sun was spread
thin over the carpet of yellow leaves with which the wide lawn was
covered. In the upper corridor of the west wing, grouped about the
window-seat with their embroidery or knitting, the young nurses were
talking together in low tones during the hour of the patients'
siestas. The two graduates, dark-eyed efficient girls, with skilled
delicate fingers taking precise stitches in the needlework before
them, were in full uniform, but the younger girls clustered about
them, beginners for the most part, but a few months in training, were
dressed in the simple blue print, and little white caps and aprons, of
the probationary period. A light breeze blew in at
the window and stirred a straying lock or two that escaped the
starched band of a confining cap. Outside the stinging whistle of the
insect world was interrupted now and then by the cough of a passing
motor. From the doors opening on the corridor an occasional restless
moan indicated the inability of some sufferer to take his dose of
oblivion according to schedule. Presently a bell tinkled a summons to
the patient in the first room on the right--a gentle little old lady
who had just had her appendix removed. "Will you take that, Miss Hamlin?" the nurse in charge of the case
asked the tallest and fairest of the young assistants. Eleanor, demure in cap and kerchief as the most ravishing
of young Priscillas, rose obediently at the request. "May I read to
her a little if she wants me to?" "Yes, if you keep the door closed. I think most of the others are
sleeping." The little old lady who had just had her appendix out, smiled weakly
up at Eleanor. "I hoped 'twould be you," she said, "and then after I'd rung I lay in
fear and trembling lest one o' them young flipperti-gibbets should
come, and get me all worked up while she was trying to shift me. I
want to be turned the least little mite on my left side." "I dunno whether that's better, or whether it just seems better to me,
because 'twas you that fixed me," the little old lady said. "You
certainly have got a soothin' and comfortin' way with you." "I used to take care of my grandmother years ago, and the more
hospital work I do, the more it comes back to me,--and the better I
remember the things that she liked to have done for her." "There's nobody like your own kith and kin," the little old lady
sighed. That other nurse--that black
haired one--she said you was an orphan, alone in the world. Well, I
pity a young girl alone in the world." "It's all right to be alone in the world--if you just keep busy
enough," Eleanor said. "But you mustn't talk any more. I'm going to
give you your medicine and then sit here and read to you." *       *       *       *       *

On the morning of her flight from the inn, after a night spent staring
motionless into the darkness, Eleanor took the train to the town some
dozen miles beyond Harmonville, where her old friend Bertha Stephens
lived. To "Stevie," to whom the duplicity of Maggie Lou had served to
draw her very close in the ensuing year, she told a part of her story. Stephens, whose husband was on
the board of directors of the Harmonville hospital, that Eleanor had
been admitted there. She had resolutely put all her old life behind
her. The plan to take up a course in stenography and enter an
editorial office was to have been, as a matter of course, a part of
her life closely associated with Peter. Losing him, there was nothing
left of her dream of high adventure and conquest. There was merely the
hurt desire to hide herself where she need never trouble him again,
and where she could be independent and useful. Having no idea of her
own value to her guardians, or the integral tenderness in which she
was held, she sincerely believed that her disappearance must have
relieved them of much chagrin and embarrassment. She had the
temperament that finds a virtue in the day's work, and a balm in its
mere iterative quality. Her sympathy and intelligence made her a good
nurse and her adaptability, combined with her loveliness, a general
favorite. She spent her days off at the Stephens' home. Bertha Stephens had been
the one girl that Peter had failed to write to, when he began to
circulate his letters of inquiry. Her name had been set down in the
little red book, but he remembered the trouble that Maggie Lou had
precipitated, and arrived at the conclusion that the intimacy existing
between Eleanor and Bertha had not survived it. Except that Carlo
Stephens persisted in trying to make love to her, and Mrs. Stephens
covertly encouraged his doing so, Eleanor found the Stephens' home a
very comforting haven. Bertha had developed into a full breasted,
motherly looking girl, passionately interested in all vicarious
love-affairs, though quickly intimidated at the thought of having any
of her own. She was devoted to Eleanor, and mothered her clumsily. It was still to her diary that Eleanor turned for the relief and
solace of self-expression. *       *       *       *       *

"It is five months to-day," she wrote, "since I came to the hospital. I like it, but I feel like the little old
woman on the King's Highway. I doubt more every minute if this can be
I. Sometimes I wonder what 'being I' consists of, anyway. I used to
feel as if I were divided up into six parts as separate as
protoplasmic cells, and that each one was looked out for by a
different cooperative parent. I thought that I would truly be I when I
got them all together, and looked out for them myself, but I find I am
no more of an entity than I ever was. The puzzling question of 'what
am I?' still persists, and I am farther away from the right answer
than ever. Would a sound be a sound if there were no one to hear it? If the waves of vibration struck no human ear, would the sound be in
existence at all? This is the problem propounded by one of the nurses
yesterday. "How much of us lives when we are entirely shut out of the
consciousness of those whom we love? If there is no one to _realize_
us day by day,--if all that love has made of us is taken away, what is
left? I look in the glass, and see
the same face,--Eleanor Hamlin, almost nineteen, with the same bow
shaped eyebrows, and the same double ridge leading up from her nose to
her mouth, making her look still very babyish. I pinch myself, and
find that it hurts just the same as it used to six months ago, but
there the resemblance to what I used to be, stops. I'm a young nurse
now in hospital training, and very good at it, too, if I do say it as
shouldn't; but that's all I am. Otherwise, I'm not anybody _to_
anybody,--except a figure of romance to good old Stevie, who doesn't
count in this kind of reckoning. I take naturally to nursing they tell
me. A nurse is a kind of maternal automaton. I'm glad I'm that, but
there used to be a lot more of me than that. There ought to be some
heart and brain and soul left over, but there doesn't seem to be. Perhaps I am like the Princess in the fairy story whose heart was an
auk's egg. Nobody had power to make her feel unless they reached it
and squeezed it. "I feel sometimes as if I were dead. I wish I could know whether Uncle
Peter and Aunt Beulah were married yet. There is a woman in this hospital whose suitor married some one else,
and she has nervous prostration, and melancholia. All she does all day
is to moan and wring her hands and call out his name. They seem to think that it is disgraceful to
love a man so much that your whole life stops as soon as he goes out
of it. What of Juliet and Ophelia and Francesca de Rimini? They loved
so they could not tear their love out of their hearts without
lacerating them forever. There is that kind of love in the
world,--bigger than life itself. All the big tragedies of literature
were made from it,--why haven't people more sympathy for it? Why isn't
there more dignity about it in the eyes of the world? "It is very unlucky to love, and to lose that which you cherish, but
it is unluckier still never to know the meaning of love, or to find
'Him whom your soul loveth.' I try to be kind to that poor forsaken
woman. I am sorry for his sake that she calls out his name, but she
seems to be in such torture of mind and body that she is unable to
help it. "They are trying to cut down expenses here, so they have no regular
cook, the housekeeper and her helper are supposed to do it all. I said
I would make the desserts, so now I have got to go down-stairs and
make some fruit gelatin. It is best that I should not write any more
to-day, anyway." *       *       *       *       *

Later, after the Thanksgiving holiday, she wrote:

                  *       *       *       *       *

"I saw a little boy butchered to-day, and I shall never forget it. It
is wicked to speak of Doctor Blake's clean cut work as butchery, but
when you actually see a child's leg severed from its body, what else
can you call it? "The reason that I am able to go through operations without fainting
or crying is just this: _other people do_. The first time I stood by
the operating table to pass the sterilized instruments to the
assisting nurse, and saw the half naked doctors hung in rubber
standing there preparing to carve their way through the naked flesh of
the unconscious creature before them, I felt the kind of pang pass
through my heart that seems to kill as it comes. I thought I died, or
was dying,--and then I looked up and saw that every one else was ready
for their work. So I drew a deep breath and became ready too. I don't
think there is anything in the world too hard to do if you look at it
that way. "The little boy loved me and I loved him. We had hoped against hope
that we would be able to save his poor little leg, but it had to go. I
held his hand while they gave him the chloroform. At his head sat
Doctor Hathaway with his Christlike face, draped in the robe of the
anesthetist. 'Take long breaths, Benny,' I said, and he breathed in
bravely. To-morrow, when he is really out of the
ether, I have got to tell him what was done to him. Something happened
to me while that operation was going on. I think
the spirit of the one who was his mother passed into me, and I knew
what it would be like to be the mother of a son. Benny was not without
what his mother would have felt for him if she had been at his side. I can't explain it, but that is what I felt. "To-night it is as black as ink outside. I feel as
if there should be no stars. If there were, there might be some
strange little bit of comfort in them that I could cling to. I do not
want any comfort from outside to shine upon me to-night. I have got to
draw all my strength from a source within, and I feel it welling up
within me even now. "I wonder if I have been selfish to leave the people I love so long
without any word of me. I think Aunt Gertrude and Aunt Beulah and Aunt
Margaret all had a mother feeling for me. I am remembering to-night
how anxious they used to be for me to have warm clothing, and to keep
my feet dry, and not to work too hard at school. All those things that
I took as a matter of course, I realize now were very significant and
beautiful. If I had a child and did not know to-night where it would
lie down to sleep, or on what pillow it would put its head, I know my
own rest would be troubled. I wonder if I have caused any one of my
dear mothers to feel like that. If I have, it has been very wicked and
cruel of me." CHAPTER XXIV

CHRISTMAS AGAIN


The ten Hutchinsons having left the library entirely alone in the hour
before dinner, David and Margaret had appropriated it and were sitting
companionably together on the big couch drawn up before the fireplace,
where a log was trying to consume itself unscientifically head first. "I would stay to dinner if urged," David suggested. "You stay," Margaret agreed laconically. She moved away from him, relaxing rather limply in the corner of the
couch, with a hand dangling over the farther edge of it. "You're an inconsistent being," David said. "You buoy all the rest of
us up with your faith in the well-being of our child, and then you
pine yourself sick over her absence." We always had such a beautiful time on
Christmas. It isn't like
Christmas at all with her gone from us." "Do you remember how crazy she was over the ivory set?" David's eyes kindled at the
reminiscence. Margaret drew her feet up on the couch suddenly, and clasped her hands
about her knees. "I haven't seen you do that for years," he said. "I was just wondering--" but she stopped
herself suddenly. David was watching her narrowly, and perceiving it,
she flushed. "This is not my idea of an interesting conversation," she said; "it's
getting too personal." "I can remember the time when you told me that you didn't find things
interesting unless they were personal. 'I like things very personal,'
you said--in those words." "The chill wind of the world, I guess; the most personal part of me is
frozen stiff." "I never saw a warmer creature in my life," David protested. "On that
same occasion you said that being a woman was about like being a field
of clover in an insectless world. You don't feel that way nowadays,
surely,--at the rate the insects have been buzzing around you this
winter. I've counted at least seven, three bees, one or two beetles, a
butterfly and a worm." "I didn't know you paid that much attention to my poor affairs." If you hadn't put your foot down firmly on the worm, I
had every intention of doing so." "On that occasion to which you refer I remember I also said that I had
a queer hunch about Eleanor." "Margaret, are you deliberately changing the subject?" "Then I shall bring the butterfly up later." "I said," Margaret ignored his interruption, "that I had the feeling
that she was going to be a storm center and bring some kind of queer
trouble upon us." "I'm not so sure that's the way to put it," David said gravely. "We
brought queer trouble on her." "She gave my vanity the worst blow it has ever had in its life," David
corrected her. "Look here, Margaret, I want you to know the truth
about that. I--I stumbled into that, you know. She was so sweet, and
before I knew it I had--I found myself in the attitude of making love
to her. Well, there was nothing to do but go through with it. I felt like Pygmalion--but it was all potential,
unrealized--and ass that I was, I assumed that she would have no other
idea in the matter. I was going to marry her because I--I had started
things going, you know. I had no choice even if I had wanted one. It
never occurred to me that she might have a choice, and so I went on
trying to make things easy for her, and getting them more tangled at
every turn." With characteristic idiocy I was
keeping out of the picture until the time was ripe. She really ran
away to get away from the situation I created and she was quite right
too. If I weren't haunted by these continual pictures of our offspring
in the bread line, I should be rather glad than otherwise that she's
shaken us all till we get our breath back. Poor Peter is the one who
is smashed, though. "You wouldn't smile if you were engaged to Beulah." "Beulah has her ring, but I notice she doesn't wear it often." "Jimmie and Gertrude seem happy." "That leaves only us two," David suggested. "Margaret, dear, do you
think the time will ever come when I shall get you back again?" Margaret turned a little pale, but she met his look steadily. "The answer to that is 'yes,' as you very well know. Time was when we
were very close--you and I, then somehow we lost the way to each
other. I'm beginning to realize that it hasn't been the same world
since and isn't likely to be unless you come back to me." "It was I; but it was you who put the bars up and have kept them
there." "Was I to let the bars down and wait at the gate?" It should be that way between us, Margaret, shouldn't
it?" "I don't know," Margaret said, "I don't know." She flashed a sudden
odd look at him. "If--when I put the bars down, I shall run for my
life. "Warning is all I want," David said contentedly. He could barely reach
her hand across the intervening expanse of leather couch, but he
accomplished it,--he was too wise to move closer to her. "You're a
lovely, lovely being," he said reverently. "God grant I may reach you
and hold you." "To tell you the truth, she spoke of it the other day. I told her the
Eleanor story, and that rather brought her to her senses. She wouldn't
have liked that, you know; but now all the eligible buds are plucked,
and she wants me to settle down." "Does she think I'm a settling kind of person?" "She wouldn't if she knew the way you go to my head," David murmured. "Oh, she thinks that you'll do. "Maybe I'd like them better considered as connections of yours,"
Margaret said abstractedly. David lifted the warm little finger to his lips and kissed it
swiftly. he asked, as she slipped away from him and
stood poised in the doorway. "I'm going to put on something appropriate to the occasion," she
answered. When she came back to him she was wearing the most delicate and
cobwebby of muslins with a design of pale purple passion flowers
trellised all over it, and she gave him no chance for a moment alone
with her all the rest of the evening. Sometime later she showed him Eleanor's parting letter, and he was
profoundly touched by the pathetic little document. As the holidays approached Eleanor's absence became an almost
unendurable distress to them all. The annual Christmas dinner party, a
function that had never been omitted since the acquisition of David's
studio, was decided on conditionally, given up, and again decided on. "We do want to see one another on Christmas day,--we've got presents
for one another, and Eleanor would hate it if she thought that her
going away had settled that big a cloud on us. She slipped out of our
lives in order to bring us closer together. We'll get closer together
for her sake," Margaret decided. But the ordeal of the dinner itself was almost more than they had
reckoned on. Every detail of traditional ceremony was observed even to
the mound of presents marked with each name piled on the same spot on
the couch, to be opened with the serving of the coffee. "I got something for Eleanor," Jimmie remarked shamefacedly as he
added his contributions to the collection. "Thought we could keep it
for her, or throw it into the waste-basket or something. "I guess everybody else got her something, too," Margaret said. "Of
course we will keep them for her. I got her a little French party
coat. It will be just as good next year as this. Anyhow as Jimmie
says, I had to get it." "I got her slipper buckles," Gertrude admitted. "I got her the Temple _Shakespeare_," Beulah added. "She was always
carrying around those big volumes." "You're looking better, Beulah," Margaret said. "Jimmie says I'm looking more human. I guess perhaps that's it,--I'm
feeling more--human. I needed humanizing--even at the expense of
some--some heartbreak," she said bravely. Margaret crossed the room to take a seat on Beulah's chair-arm, and
slipped an arm around her. "You're all right if you know that," she whispered softly. "I thought I was going to bring you Eleanor herself," Peter said. "I
got on the trail of a girl working in a candy shop out in Yonkers. My
faithful sleuth was sure it was Eleanor and I was ass enough to
believe he knew what he was talking about. When I got out there I
found a strawberry blonde with gold teeth." "Gosh, you don't think she's doing anything like that," Jimmie
exclaimed. "I don't know," Peter said miserably. He was looking ill and unlike
himself. His deep set gray eyes were sunken far in his head, his brow
was too white, and the skin drawn too tightly over his jaws. "As a
de-tec-i-tive, I'm afraid I'm a failure." "We're all failures for that matter," David said. Eleanor's empty place, set with the liqueur glass she always drank her
thimbleful of champagne in, and the throne chair from the drawing-room
in which she presided over the feasts given in her honor, was almost
too much for them. Peter shaded
his eyes with his hand, and Gertrude and Jimmie groped for each
other's hands under the shelter of the table-cloth. "This--this won't do," David said. He turned to Beulah on his left,
sitting immovable, with her eyes staring unseeingly into the
centerpiece of holly and mistletoe arranged by Alphonse so lovingly. "We must either turn this into a kind of a wake, and kneel as we
feast, or we must try to rise above it somehow." "I don't see why," Jimmie argued. "I'm in favor of each man howling
informally as he listeth." "Let's drink her health anyhow," David insisted. "I cut out the
Sauterne and the claret, so we could begin on the wine at once in this
contingency. Here's to our beloved and dear absent daughter." "Long may she wave," Jimmie cried, stumbling to his feet an instant
after the others. While they were still standing with their glasses uplifted, the bell
rang. "Don't let anybody in, Alphonse," David admonished him. They all turned in the direction of the hall, but there was no sound
of parley at the front door. Eleanor had put a warning finger to her
lips, as Alphonse opened it to find her standing there. She stripped
off her hat and her coat as she passed through the drawing-room, and
stood in her little blue cloth traveling dress between the portieres
that separated it from the dining-room. The six stood transfixed at
the sight of her, not believing the vision of their eyes. "You're drinking my health," she cried, as she stretched out her arms
to them. my dears, and my dearests, will you forgive me for
running away from you?" CHAPTER XXV

THE LOVER


They left her alone with Peter in the drawing room in the interval
before the coffee, seeing that he had barely spoken to her though his
eyes had not left her face since the moment of her spectacular
appearance between the portieres. "I'm not going to marry you, Peter," Beulah whispered, as she slipped
by him to the door, "don't think of me. But Peter was almost past coherent thought or speech as they stood
facing each other on the hearth-rug,--Eleanor's little head up and her
breath coming lightly between her sweet, parted lips. "How could you, dear--how could
you,--how could you?" "I'm back all safe, now, Uncle Peter. "I'm sorry I made you all that trouble," Eleanor said, "but I thought
it would be the best thing to do." "Tell me why," Peter said, "tell me why, I've suffered so
much--wondering--wondering." "I thought it was only I who did the
suffering." She moved a step nearer to him, and Peter gripped her hard by the
shoulders. Then his lips met hers dumbly,
beseechingly. *       *       *       *       *

"It was all a mistake,--my going away," she wrote some days after. "I
ought to have stayed at the school, and graduated, and then come down
to New York, and faced things. I have my lesson now about facing
things. If any other crisis comes into my life, I hope I shall be as
strong as Dante was, when he'showed himself more furnished with
breath than he was,' and said, 'Go on, for I am strong and resolute.' I think we always have more strength than we understand ourselves to
have. "I am so wonderfully happy about Uncle David and Aunt Margaret, and I
know Uncle Jimmie needs Aunt Gertrude and has always needed her. Did
my going away help those things to their fruition? "I can not bear to think of Aunt Beulah, but I know that I must bear
to think of her, and face the pain of having hurt her as I must face
every other thing that comes into my life from this hour. I would give
her back Peter, if I could,--but I can not. He is mine, and I am his,
and we have been that way from the beginning. I have thought of him
always as stronger and wiser than any one in the world, but I don't
think he is. He has suffered and stumbled along, trying blindly to do
right, hurting Aunt Beulah and mixing up his life like any man, just
the way Uncle Jimmie and Uncle David did. "Don't men know who it is they love? They seem so often to be
struggling hungrily after the wrong thing, trying to get, or to make
themselves take, some woman that they do not really want. When women
love it is not like that with them. I think I have loved Peter from the first minute I
saw him, so beautiful and dear and sweet, with that _anxious_ look in
his eyes,--that look of consideration for the other person that is
always so much a part of him. He had it the first night I saw him,
when Uncle David brought me to show me to my foster parents for the
first time. It was the thing I grew up by, and measured men and their
attitude to women by--just that look in his eyes, that tender warm
look of consideration. "It means a good many things, I think,--a gentle generous nature, and
a tender chivalrous heart. It means being a
good man, and one who _protects_ by sheer unselfish instinct. I don't
know how I shall ever heal him of the hurt he has done Aunt Beulah. Aunt Margaret tells me that Aunt Beulah's experience with him has been
the thing that has made her whole, that she needed to live through the
human cycle of emotion--of love and possession and renunciation before
she could be quite real and sound. This may be true, but it is not the
kind of reasoning for Peter and me to comfort ourselves with. If a
surgeon makes a mistake in cutting that afterwards does more good than
harm, he must not let that result absolve him from his mistake. Nothing can efface the mistake itself, and Peter and I must go on
feeling that way about it. "I want to write something down about my love before I close this book
to-night. Something that I can turn to some day and read, or show to
my children when love comes to them. 'This is the way I felt,' I want
to say to them, 'the first week of my love--this is what it meant to
me.' "It means being a greater, graver, and more beautiful person than you
ever thought you could be. It means knowing what you are, and what you
were meant to be all at once, and I think it means your chance to be
purified for the life you are to live, and the things you are to do in
it. Experience teaches, but I think love forecasts and points the way,
and shows you what you can be. Even if the light it sheds should grow
dim after a while, the path it has shown you should be clear to your
inner eye forever and ever. Having been in a great temple is a thing
to be better for all your life. "It means that the soul and the things of the soul are
everlasting,--that they have got to be everlasting if love is like
this. Love between two people is more than the simple fact of their
being drawn together and standing hand in hand. It is the holy truth
about the universe. It is the rainbow of God's promise set over the
land. There comes with it the soul's certainty of living on and on
through time and space. "Just my loving Peter and Peter's loving me isn't the important
thing,--the important thing is the way it has started the truth going;
my knowing and understanding mysterious laws that were sealed to me
before; Peter taking my life in his hands and making it consecrated
and true,--so true that I will not falter or suffer from any
misunderstandings or mistaken pain. "It means warmth and light and tenderness, our love does, and all the
poetry in the world, and all the motherliness, (I feel so much like
his mother). When I say that he is not stronger or
wiser than any one in the world I mean--in living. I mean in the way
he behaves like a little bewildered boy sometimes. In loving he is
stronger and wiser than any living being. He takes my two hands in his
and gives me all the strength and all the wisdom and virtue there is
in the world. "I haven't written down anything, after all, that any one could read. My children can't look over my shoulder on to this page, for they
would not understand it. It means nothing to any one in the world but
me. I shall have to translate for them or I shall have to say to them,
'Children, on looking into this book, I find I can't tell you what
love meant to me, because the words I have put down would mean nothing
to you. They were only meant to inform me, whenever I should turn back
to them, of the great glory and holiness that fell upon me like a
garment when love came.' "And if there should be any doubt in my heart as to the reality of the
feeling that has come to them in their turn, I should only have to
turn their faces up to the light, and look into their eyes and
_know_. "I shall not die as my own mother did. I know that Peter
will be by my side until we both are old. These facts are established
in my consciousness I hardly know how, and I know that they are
there,--but if such a thing could be that I should die and leave my
little children, I would not be afraid to leave them alone in a world
that has been so good to me, under the protection of a Power that
provided me with the best and kindest guardians that a little orphan
ever had. God bless and keep them all, and make them happy." E----considered grave, and, towards the last of her stay, moody. It is
remembered now that her manner was always peculiar, and that she was
more or less shunned by her cousin. However, in the opinion of one girl still to be found at the hotel, she
was the sweetest lady that ever breathed. Uncle, ladies, and servants left R---- for New York, August 7,
1875. H. C. arrived at the hotel in R----July 6, 1875, in-company with Mr. Left July 19, two weeks from
day of arrival. Remembered as the
handsome gentleman who was in the party with the L. girls, and that is
all. F----, a small town, some sixteen or seventeen miles from R----, had
for its Methodist minister, in July of last year, a man who has since
died, Samuel Stebbins by name. Name of man in employ of S. S. at that time is Timothy Cook. He
has been absent, but returned to P---- two days ago. I cried aloud at this point, in my sudden surprise and
satisfaction; "now we have something to work upon!" And sitting down I
penned the following reply:

"T. C. wanted by all means. Also any evidence going to prove that H.
C. and E. L. were married at the house of Mr. S. on any day of July or
August last." Next morning came the following telegram:

"T. C. on the road. Will be with you by 2 p.m." At three o'clock of that same day, I stood before Mr. "I am here
to make my report," I announced. The flicker of a smile passed over his face, and he gazed for the first
time at his bound-up finger-ends with a softening aspect which must have
done them good. Gryce," I began, "do you remember the conclusion we came to at our
first interview in this house?" "I remember the _one you_ came to." "Well, well," I acknowledged a little peevishly, "the one I came to,
then. It was this: that if we could find to whom Eleanore Leavenworth
felt she owed her best duty and love, we should discover the man who
murdered her uncle." "And do you imagine you have done this?" "When I undertook this business of clearing Eleanore Leavenworth from
suspicion," I resumed, "it was with the premonition that this person
would prove to be her lover; but I had no idea he would prove to be her
husband." Gryce's gaze flashed like lightning to the ceiling. "The lover of Eleanore Leavenworth is likewise her husband," I repeated. Clavering holds no lesser connection to her than that." Gryce, in a harsh tone that
argued disappointment or displeasure. "That I will not take time to state. The question is not how I became
acquainted with a certain thing, but is what I assert in regard to it
true. If you will cast your eye over this summary of events gleaned by
me from the lives of these two persons, I think you will agree with me
that it is." And I held up before his eyes the following:

"During the two weeks commencing July 6, of the year 1875, and ending
July 19, of the same year, Henry R. Clavering, of London, and Eleanore
Leavenworth, of New York, were guests of the same hotel. _ Fact proved
by Visitor Book of the Hotel Union at R_----, _New York._

"They were not only guests of the same hotel, but are known to have
held more or less communication with each other. _Fact proved by such
servants now employed in R---- as were in the hotel at that time._

"July 19. Clavering left R---- abruptly, a circumstance that would
not be considered remarkable if Mr. Leavenworth, whose violent antipathy
to Englishmen as husbands is publicly known, had not just returned from
a journey. Clavering was seen in the parlor of Mr. Stebbins, the
Methodist minister at F----, a town about sixteen miles from R----,
where he was married to a lady of great beauty. _Proved by Timothy Cook,
a man in the employ of Mr. Stebbins, who was called in from the garden
to witness the ceremony and sign a paper supposed to be a certificate._

"July 31. _Proved by
newspapers of that date._

"September. Eleanore Leavenworth in her uncle's house in New York,
conducting herself as usual, but pale of face and preoccupied in manner. _Proved by servants then in her service._ Mr. Clavering in London;
watches the United States mails with eagerness, but receives no letters. Fits up room elegantly, as for a lady. _Proved by secret communication
from London._

"November. Miss Leavenworth still in uncle's house. Clavering in London; shows signs of
uneasiness; the room prepared for lady closed. _Proved as above._

"January 17, 1876. Clavering, having returned to America, engages
room at Hoffman House, New York. Leavenworth receives a letter signed by Henry
Clavering, in which he complains of having been ill-used by one of that
gentleman's nieces. A manifest shade falls over the family at this time. Clavering under a false name inquires at the door of Mr. Leavenworth's house for Miss Eleanore Leavenworth. '"_

"March 4th?" "That was the night of
the murder.-"

"Yes; the Mr. Le Roy Robbins said to have called that evening was none
other than Mr. Miss Mary Leavenworth, in a conversation with me,
acknowledges that there is a secret in the family, and is just upon the
point of revealing its nature, when Mr. Upon
his departure she declares her unwillingness ever to mention the subject
again." "And from these facts you draw
the inference that Eleanore Leavenworth is the wife of Mr. "And that, being his wife----"

"It would be natural for her to conceal anything she knew likely to
criminate him." "Always supposing Clavering himself had done anything criminal!" "Which latter supposition you now propose to justify!" "Which latter supposition it is left for _us_ to justify." "Then you have no new evidence against Mr. "I should think the fact just given, of his standing in the relation of
unacknowledged husband to the suspected party was something." "No positive evidence as to his being the assassin of Mr. I was obliged to admit I had none which he would consider positive. "But
I can show the existence of motive; and I can likewise show it was not
only possible, but probable, he was in the house at the time of the
murder." Gryce, rousing a little from his abstraction. "The motive was the usual one of self-interest. Leavenworth stood
in the way of Eleanore's acknowledging him as a husband, and he must
therefore be put out of the way." Too much calculation was shown for the arm
to have been nerved by anything short of the most deliberate intention,
founded upon the deadliest necessity of passion or avarice." "One should never deliberate upon the causes which have led to the
destruction of a rich man without taking into account that most common
passion of the human race." "But----"

"Let us hear what you have to say of Mr. Clavering's presence in the
house at the time of the murder." I related what Thomas the butler had told me in regard to Mr. Clavering's call upon Miss Leavenworth that night, and the lack of proof
which existed as to his having left the house when supposed to do so. "Valueless as direct evidence, it might prove of great value as
corroborative." Then, in a graver tone, he went on to say: "Mr. Raymond,
are you aware that in all this you have been strengthening the case
against Eleanore Leavenworth instead of weakening it?" I could only ejaculate, in my sudden wonder and dismay. "You have shown her to be secret, sly, and unprincipled; capable of
wronging those to whom she was most bound, her uncle and her husband." "You put it very strongly," said I, conscious of a shocking discrepancy
between this description of Eleanore's character and all that I had
preconceived in regard to it. "No more so than your own conclusions from this story warrant me in
doing." Then, as I sat silent, murmured low, and as if to himself:
"If the case was dark against her before, it is doubly so with this
supposition established of her being the woman secretly married to Mr. "And yet," I protested, unable to give up my hope without a struggle;
"you do not, cannot, believe the noble-looking Eleanore guilty of this
horrible crime?" "No," he slowly said; "you might as well know right here what I think
about that. I believe Eleanore Leavenworth to be an innocent woman." Then what," I cried, swaying between joy at this admission and
doubt as to the meaning of his former expressions, "remains to be done?" Gryce quietly responded: "Why, nothing but to prove your supposition
a false one." TIMOTHY COOK


    "Look here upon this picture and on this." "I doubt if it will be so very difficult,"
said he. Then, in a sudden burst, "Where is the man Cook?" "That was a wise move; let us see the boys; have them up." "I expected, of course, you would want to question them," said I, coming
back. In another moment the spruce Q and the shock-headed Cook entered the
room. Gryce, directing his attention at the latter in his own
whimsical, non-committal way; "this is the deceased Mr. Stebbins' hired
man, is it? Well, you look as though you could tell the truth." "I usually calculate to do that thing, sir; at all events, I was never
called a liar as I can remember." "Of course not, of course not," returned the affable detective. Then,
without any further introduction: "What was the first name of the lady
you saw married in your master's house last summer?" "As well as if she was my own mother. No disrespect to the lady, sir, if
you know her," he made haste to add, glancing hurriedly at me. "What I
mean is, she was so handsome, I could never forget the look of her sweet
face if I lived a hundred years." "I don't know, sirs; she was tall and grand-looking, had the brightest
eyes and the whitest hand, and smiled in a way to make even a common man
like me wish he had never seen her." "Very well; now tell us all you can about that marriage." "Well, sirs, it was something like this. Stebbins'
employ about a year, when one morning as I was hoeing in the garden
I saw a gentleman walk rapidly up the road to our gate and come in. I
noticed him particularly, because he was so fine-looking; unlike anybody
in F----, and, indeed, unlike anybody I had ever seen, for that matter;
but I shouldn't have thought much about that if there hadn't come along,
not five minutes after, a buggy with two ladies in it, which stopped at
our gate, too. I saw they wanted to get out, so I went and held their
horse for them, and they got down and went into the house." "I hadn't been to work long, before I heard some one calling my name,
and looking up, saw Mr. Stebbins standing in the doorway beckoning. I
went to him, and he said, 'I want you, Tim; wash your hands and come
into the parlor.' I had never been asked to do that before, and it
struck me all of a heap; but I did what he asked, and was so taken
aback at the looks of the lady I saw standing up on the floor with
the handsome gentleman, that I stumbled over a stool and made a great
racket, and didn't know much where I was or what was going on, till I
heard Mr. Stebbins say'man and wife'; and then it came over me in a hot
kind of way that it was a marriage I was seeing." Timothy Cook stopped to wipe his forehead, as if overcome with the very
recollection, and Mr. Gryce took the opportunity to remark:

"You say there were two ladies; now where was the other one at this
time?" "She was there, sir; but I didn't mind much about her, I was so taken up
with the handsome one and the way she had of smiling when any one looked
at her. "Can you remember the color of her hair or eyes?" "No, sir; I had a feeling as if she wasn't dark, and that is all I
know." Gryce here whispered me to procure two pictures which I would find
in a certain drawer in his desk, and set them up in different parts of
the room unbeknown to the man. Gryce, "that you have no remembrance
of her name. Weren't you called upon to sign the
certificate?" "Yes, sir; but I am most ashamed to say it; I was in a sort of maze,
and didn't hear much, and only remember it was a Mr. Clavering she was
married to, and that some one called some one else Elner, or something
like that. I wish I hadn't been so stupid, sir, if it would have done
you any good." "Tell us about the signing of the certificate," said Mr. "Well, sir, there isn't much to tell. Stebbins asked me to put my
name down in a certain place on a piece of paper he pushed towards me,
and I put it down there; that is all." "Was there no other name there when you wrote yours?" Stebbins turned towards the other lady, who now
came forward, and asked her if she wouldn't please sign it, too; and she
said,' yes,' and came very quickly and did so." "And didn't you see her face then?" "No, sir; her back was to me when she threw by her veil, and I only saw
Mr. Stebbins staring at her as she stooped, with a kind of wonder on his
face, which made me think she might have been something worth looking at
too; but I didn't see her myself." I went stumbling out of the room, and didn't see
anything more." "Where were you when the ladies went away?" "No, sir; that was the queer part of it all. They went back as they
came, and so did he; and in a few minutes Mr. Stebbins came out where I
was, and told me I was to say nothing about what I had seen, for it was
a secret." "Were you the only one in the house who knew anything about it? "No, sir; Miss Stebbins had gone to the sewing circle." I had by this time some faint impression of what Mr. Gryce's suspicions
were, and in arranging the pictures had placed one, that of Eleanore, on
the mantel-piece, and the other, which was an uncommonly fine photograph
of Mary, in plain view on the desk. Cook's back was as yet
towards that part of the room, and, taking advantage of the moment,
I returned and asked him if that was all he had to tell us about this
matter. Gryce, with a glance at Q, "isn't there something you
can give Mr. Q nodded, and moved towards a cupboard in the wall at the side of the
mantel-piece; Mr. Cook following him with his eyes, as was natural,
when, with a sudden start, he crossed the room and, pausing before the
mantelpiece, looked at the picture of Eleanore which I had put there,
gave a low grunt of satisfaction or pleasure, looked at it again, and
walked away. I felt my heart leap into my throat, and, moved by what
impulse of dread or hope I cannot say, turned my back, when suddenly I
heard him give vent to a startled exclamation, followed by the words:
"Why! here she is; this is her, sirs," and turning around saw him
hurrying towards us with Mary's picture in his hands. I do not know as I was greatly surprised. I was powerfully excited, as
well as conscious of a certain whirl of thought, and an unsettling of
old conclusions that was very confusing; but surprised? Gryce's
manner had too well prepared me. "This the lady who was married to Mr. I guess
you are mistaken," cried the detective, in a very incredulous tone. Didn't I say I would know her anywhere? This is the lady, if
she is the president's wife herself." Cook leaned over it with a
devouring look that was not without its element of homage. Gryce went on, winking at me in a slow,
diabolical way which in another mood would have aroused my fiercest
anger. "Now, if you had said the other lady was the one"--pointing to
the picture on the mantelpiece," I shouldn't have wondered." I never saw that lady before; but this one--would you mind telling
me her name, sirs?" "If what you say is true, her name is Mrs. "And a very lovely lady," said Mr. "Morris, haven't you found
anything yet?" Q, for answer, brought forward glasses and a bottle. I think he was struck with
remorse; for, looking from the picture to Q, and from Q to the picture,
he said:

"If I have done this lady wrong by my talk, I'll never forgive myself. You told me I would help her to get her rights; if you have deceived me
----"

"Oh, I haven't deceived you," broke in Q, in his short, sharp way. "Ask
that gentleman there if we are not all interested in Mrs. He had designated me; but I was in no mood to reply. I longed to
have the man dismissed, that I might inquire the reason of the great
complacency which I now saw overspreading Mr. Gryce's frame, to his very
finger-ends. Cook needn't be concerned," remarked Mr. "If he will take
a glass of warm drink to fortify him for his walk, I think he may go to
the lodgings Mr. Give the gent
a glass, and let him mix for himself." But it was full ten minutes before we were delivered of the man and his
vain regrets. Mary's image had called up every latent feeling in his
heart, and I could but wonder over a loveliness capable of swaying the
low as well as the high. But at last he yielded to the seductions of the
now wily Q, and departed. Gryce, I must have allowed some of the confused
emotions which filled my breast to become apparent on my countenance;
for after a few minutes of ominous silence, he exclaimed very grimly,
and yet with a latent touch of that complacency I had before noticed:

"This discovery rather upsets you, doesn't it? Well, it don't me,"
shutting his mouth like a trap. "Your conclusions must differ very materially from mine," I returned;
"or you would see that this discovery alters the complexion of the whole
affair." Gryce's very legs grew thoughtful; his voice sank to its deepest
tone. "Then," said he, "to my notion, the complexion of things has altered,
but very much for the better. As long as Eleanore was believed to be
the wife, her action in this matter was accounted for; but the tragedy
itself was not. Why should Eleanore or Eleanore's husband wish the death
of a man whose bounty they believed would end with his life? But with
Mary, the heiress, proved the wife!--I tell you, Mr. Raymond, it all
hangs together now. You must never, in reckoning up an affair of murder
like this, forget who it is that most profits by the deceased man's
death." her concealment of certain proofs and evidences
in her own breast--how will you account for that? I can imagine a woman
devoting herself to the shielding of a husband from the consequences of
crime; but a cousin's husband, never." Gryce put his feet very close together, and softly grunted. I could only stare at him in my sudden doubt and dread. "Why, what else is there to think? You don't--you can't--suspect
Eleanore of having deliberately undertaken to help her cousin out of a
difficulty by taking the life of their mutual benefactor?" Gryce; "no, I do not think Eleanore Leavenworth had any
hand in the business." "Then who--" I began, and stopped, lost in the dark vista that was
opening before me. Why, who but the one whose past deceit and present necessity
demanded his death as a relief? Who but the beautiful, money-loving,
man-deceiving goddess----"

I leaped to my feet in my sudden horror and repugnance. You are wrong; but do not speak the name." "Excuse me," said he; "but it will have to be spoken many times, and we
may as well begin here and now--who then but Mary Leavenworth; or, if
you like it better, Mrs. It
has been my thought from the beginning." GRYCE EXPLAINS HIMSELF


    "Sits the wind in that corner?" I DO not propose to enter into a description of the mingled feelings
aroused in me by this announcement. As a drowning man is said to live
over in one terrible instant the events of a lifetime, so each word
uttered in my hearing by Mary, from her first introduction to me in her
own room, on the morning of the inquest, to our final conversation on
the night of Mr. Clavering's call, swept in one wild phantasmagoria
through my brain, leaving me aghast at the signification which her whole
conduct seemed to acquire from the lurid light which now fell upon it. "I perceive that I have pulled down an avalanche of doubts about your
ears," exclaimed my companion from the height of his calm superiority. "You never thought of this possibility, then, yourself?" "Do not ask me what I have thought. I only know I will never believe
your suspicions true. That, however much Mary may have been benefited by
her uncle's death, she never had a hand in it; actual hand, I mean." "And what makes you so sure of this?" "And what makes you so sure of the contrary? It is for you to prove, not
for me to prove her innocence." Gryce, in his slow, sarcastic way, "you recollect that
principle of law, do you? If I remember rightly, you have not always
been so punctilious in regarding it, or wishing to have it regarded,
when the question was whether Mr. It does not seem so dreadful to accuse a man of a
crime. I cannot listen to it; it is
horrible. Nothing short of absolute confession on her part will ever
make me believe Mary Leavenworth, or any other woman, committed this
deed. It was too cruel, too deliberate, too----"

"Read the criminal records," broke in Mr. "I do not care for the criminal records. All the
criminal records in the world would never make me believe Eleanore
perpetrated this crime, nor will I be less generous towards her cousin. Mary Leavenworth is a faulty woman, but not a guilty one." "You are more lenient in your judgment of her than her cousin was, it
appears." "I do not understand you," I muttered, feeling a new and yet more
fearful light breaking upon me. have you forgotten, in the hurry of these late events, the
sentence of accusation which we overheard uttered between these ladies
on the morning of the inquest?" "No, but----"

"You believed it to have been spoken by Mary to Eleanore?" I left that
baby-play for you. I thought one was enough to follow on that tack." The light, the light that was breaking upon me! "And do you mean to say
it was Eleanore who was speaking at that time? That I have been laboring
all these weeks under a terrible mistake, and that you could have
righted me with a word, and did not?" "Well, as to that, I had a purpose in letting you follow your own lead
for a while. In the first place, I was not sure myself which spoke;
though I had but little doubt about the matter. The voices are, as you
must have noticed, very much alike, while the attitudes in which we
found them upon entering were such as to be explainable equally by the
supposition that Mary was in the act of launching a denunciation, or in
that of repelling one. So that, while I did not hesitate myself as to
the true explanation of the scene before me, I was pleased to find you
accept a contrary one; as in this way both theories had a chance of
being tested; as was right in a case of so much mystery. You accordingly
took up the affair with one idea for your starting-point, and I with
another. You saw every fact as it developed through the medium of Mary's
belief in Eleanore's guilt, and I through the opposite. With you, doubt, contradiction, constant unsettlement,
and unwarranted resorts to strange sources for reconcilement between
appearances and your own convictions; with me, growing assurance, and
a belief which each and every development so far has but served to
strengthen and make more probable." Again that wild panorama of events, looks, and words swept before me. Mary's reiterated assertions of her cousin's innocence, Eleanore's
attitude of lofty silence in regard to certain matters which might be
considered by her as pointing towards the murderer. "Your theory must be the correct one," I finally admitted; "it was
undoubtedly Eleanore who spoke. She believes in Mary's guilt, and I have
been blind, indeed, not to have seen it from the first." "If Eleanore Leavenworth believes in her cousin's criminality, she must
have some good reasons for doing so." "She did not conceal in her bosom that
telltale key,--found who knows where?--and destroy, or seek to destroy,
it and the letter which introduced her cousin to the public as the
unprincipled destroyer of a trusting man's peace, for nothing." "And yet you, a stranger, a young man who have never seen Mary
Leavenworth in any other light than that in which her coquettish nature
sought to display itself, presume to say she is innocent, in the face of
the attitude maintained from the first by her cousin!" "But," said I, in my great unwillingness to accept his conclusions,
"Eleanore Leavenworth is but mortal. She may have been mistaken in her
inferences. She has never stated what her suspicion was founded upon;
nor can we know what basis she has for maintaining the attitude you
speak of. Clavering is as likely as Mary to be the assassin, for all we
know, and possibly for all she knows." "You seem to be almost superstitious in your belief in Clavering's
guilt." Harwell's fanciful conviction in
regard to this man had in any way influenced me to the detriment of my
better judgment? "I do not pretend to be set
in my notions. Future investigation may succeed in fixing something upon
him; though I hardly think it likely. His behavior as the secret husband
of a woman possessing motives for the commission of a crime has been too
consistent throughout." "No exception at all; for he hasn't left her." "I mean that, instead of leaving the country, Mr. Clavering has only
made pretence of doing so. That, in place of dragging himself off to
Europe at her command, he has only changed his lodgings, and can now be
found, not only in a house opposite to hers, but in the window of that
house, where he sits day after day watching who goes in and out of her
front door." I remembered his parting injunction to me, in that memorable interview
we had in my office, and saw myself compelled to put a new construction
upon it. "But I was assured at the Hoffman House that he had sailed for Europe,
and myself saw the man who professes to have driven him to the steamer." "In another carriage, and to another house." "And you tell me that man is all right?" "No; I only say there isn't the shadow of evidence against him as the
person who shot Mr. Rising, I paced the floor, and for a few minutes silence fell between
us. But the clock, striking, recalled me to the necessity of the hour,
and, turning, I asked Mr. "There is but one thing I can do," said he. "To go upon such lights as I have, and cause the arrest of Miss
Leavenworth." I had by this time schooled myself to endurance, and was able to hear
this without uttering an exclamation. But I could not let it pass
without making one effort to combat his determination. "But," said I, "I do not see what evidence you have, positive enough in
its character, to warrant extreme measures. You have yourself intimated
that the existence of motive is not enough, even though taken with
the fact of the suspected party being in the house at the time of the
murder; and what more have you to urge against Miss Leavenworth?" I said 'Miss Leavenworth'; I should have said 'Eleanore
Leavenworth.'" when you and all unite in thinking that she alone of
all these parties to the crime is utterly guiltless of wrong?" "And yet who is the only one against whom positive testimony of any kind
can be brought." Raymond," he remarked very gravely; "the public is becoming
clamorous; something must be done to satisfy it, if only for the moment. Eleanore has laid herself open to the suspicion of the police, and
must take the consequences of her action. I am sorry; she is a noble
creature; I admire her; but justice is justice, and though I think her
innocent, I shall be forced to put her under arrest unless----"

"But I cannot be reconciled to it. It is doing an irretrievable injury
to one whose only fault is an undue and mistaken devotion to an unworthy
cousin. "Unless something occurs between now and tomorrow morning," Mr. Gryce
went on, as if I had not spoken. I tried to realize it; tried to face the fact that all my efforts had
been for nothing, and failed. "Will you not grant me one more day?" Clavering, and force from him the
truth." "To make a mess of the whole affair!" "No, sir; the die is
cast. Eleanore Leavenworth knows the one point which fixes this
crime upon her cousin, and she must tell us that point or suffer the
consequences of her refusal." Having exhausted so much time already in our
inquiries, why not take a little more; especially as the trail is
constantly growing warmer? A little more moleing----"

"A little more folderol!" "No,
sir; the hour for moleing has passed; something decisive has got to be
done now; though, to be sure, if I could find the one missing link I
want----"

"Missing link? "The immediate motive of the tragedy; a bit of proof that Mr. Leavenworth threatened his niece with his displeasure, or Mr. Clavering
with his revenge, would place me on the vantage-point at once; no
arresting of Eleanore then! I would walk right into your
own gilded parlors, and when you asked me if I had found the murderer
yet, say 'yes,' and show you a bit of paper which would surprise you! This has been moled for, and
moled for, as you are pleased to call our system of investigation, and
totally without result. Nothing but the confession of some one of these
several parties to the crime will give us what we want. I will tell you
what I will do," he suddenly cried. "Miss Leavenworth has desired me to
report to her; she is very anxious for the detection of the murderer,
you know, and offers an immense reward. Well, I will gratify this desire
of hers. The suspicions I have, together with my reasons for them, will
make an interesting disclosure. I should not greatly wonder if they
produced an equally interesting confession." I could only jump to my feet in my horror. "At all events, I propose to try it. Eleanore is worth that much risk
any way." "It will do no good," said I. "If Mary is guilty, she will never confess
it. If not----"

"She will tell us who is." "Not if it is Clavering, her husband." "Yes; even if it is Clavering, her husband. She has not the devotion of
Eleanore." She would hide no keys for the sake of
shielding another: no, if Mary were accused, she would speak. The future
opening before us looked sombre enough. And yet when, in a short time
from that, I found myself alone in a busy street, the thought that
Eleanore was free rose above all others, filling and moving me till my
walk home in the rain that day has become a marked memory of my life. It was only with nightfall that I began to realize the truly critical
position in which Mary stood if Mr. But,
once seized with this thought, nothing could drive it from my mind. Shrink as I would, it was ever before me, haunting me with the direst
forebodings. Nor, though I retired early, could I succeed in getting
either sleep or rest. All night I tossed on my pillow, saying over to
myself with dreary iteration: "Something must happen, something will
happen, to prevent Mr. Then I would
start up and ask what could happen; and my mind would run over various
contingencies, such as,--Mr. Clavering might confess; Hannah might come
back; Mary herself wake up to her position and speak the word I had more
than once seen trembling on her lips. But further thought showed me how
unlikely any of these things were to happen, and it was with a brain
utterly exhausted that I fell asleep in the early dawn, to dream I saw
Mary standing above Mr. I was awakened
from this pleasing vision by a heavy knock at the door. Hastily rising,
I asked who was there. The answer came in the shape of an envelope
thrust under the door. Raising it, I found it to be a note. Gryce, and ran thus:

"Come at once; Hannah Chester is found." "Sit down, and I will tell you." Drawing up a chair in a flurry of hope and fear, I sat down by Mr. "She is not in the cupboard," that person dryly assured me, noting
without doubt how my eyes went travelling about the room in my anxiety
and impatience. "We are not absolutely sure that she is anywhere. But
word has come to us that a girl's face believed to be Hannah's has been
seen at the upper window of a certain house in--don't start--R----,
where a year ago she was in the habit of visiting while at the hotel
with the Misses Leavenworth. Now, as it has already been determined that
she left New York the night of the murder, by the ------ ----Railroad,
though for what point we have been unable to ascertain, we consider the
matter worth inquiring into." "But--"

"If she is there," resumed Mr. Gryce, "she is secreted; kept very
close. No one except the informant has ever seen her, nor is there any
suspicion among the neighbors of her being in town." "Hannah secreted at a certain house in R----? Gryce honored me with one of his grimmest smiles. "The name of
the lady she's with is given in the communication as Belden; Mrs. the name found written on a torn envelope by Mr. "Then we are upon the
verge of some discovery; Providence has interfered, and Eleanore will be
saved! "Last night, or rather this morning; Q brought it." "It was a message, then, to Q?" "Yes, the result of his moleings while in R----, I suppose." "A respectable tinsmith who lives next door to Mrs. "And is this the first you knew of an Amy Belden living in R----?" "Don't know; don't know anything about her but her name." "But you have already sent Q to make inquiries?" "No; the affair is a little too serious for him to manage alone. He is
not equal to great occasions, and might fail just for the lack of a keen
mind to direct him." "In short----"

"I wish you to go. Since I cannot be there myself, I know of no one else
sufficiently up in the affair to conduct it to a successful issue. You see, it is not enough to find and identify the girl. The present
condition of things demands that the arrest of so important a witness
should be kept secret. Now, for a man to walk into a strange house in a
distant village, find a girl who is secreted there, frighten her,
cajole her, force her, as the case may be, from her hiding-place to a
detective's office in New York, and all without the knowledge of the
next-door neighbor, if possible, requires judgment, brains, genius. She must have her reasons for doing so; and
they must be known. Altogether, the affair is a delicate one. "To think what pleasure I am
losing on your account!" he grumbled, gazing reproachfully at his
helpless limbs. a train leaves the depot at 12.15. Once in R----,
it will be for you to decide upon the means of making Mrs. Belden's
acquaintance without arousing her suspicions. Q, who will follow you,
will hold himself in readiness to render you any assistance you may
require. Only this thing is to be understood: as he will doubtless go in
disguise, you are not to recognize him, much less interfere with him
and his plans, till he gives you leave to do so, by some preconcerted
signal. You are to work in your way, and he in his, till circumstances
seem to call for mutual support and countenance. I cannot even say
whether you will see him or not; he may find it necessary to keep out of
the way; but you may be sure of one thing, that he will know where
you are, and that the display of, well, let us say a red silk
handkerchief--have you such a thing?" "Will be regarded by him as a sign that you desire his presence or
assistance, whether it be shown about your person or at the window of
your room." "And these are all the instructions you can give me?" "Yes, I don't know of anything else. You must depend largely upon your
own discretion, and the exigencies of the moment. I cannot tell you now
what to do. Only, if possible, let
me either hear from you or see you by to-morrow at this time." And he handed me a cipher in case I should wish to telegraph. HANNAH



XXVII. AMY BELDEN


    "A merrier man
    Within the limits of becoming mirth,
    I never spent an hour's talk withal." I HAD a client in R---- by the name of Monell; and it was from him I
had planned to learn the best way of approaching Mrs. When,
therefore, I was so fortunate as to meet him, almost on my arrival,
driving on the long road behind his famous trotter Alfred, I regarded
the encounter as a most auspicious beginning of a very doubtful
enterprise. was his exclamation as, the first
greetings passed, we drove rapidly into town. "Your part in it goes pretty smoothly," I returned; and thinking I could
never hope to win his attention to my own affairs till I had satisfied
him in regard to his, I told him all I could concerning the law-suit
then pending; a subject so prolific of question and answer, that we
had driven twice round the town before he remembered he had a letter to
post. As it was an important one, admitting of no delay, we hasted at
once to the post-office, where he went in, leaving me outside to watch
the rather meagre stream of goers and comers who at that time of day
make the post-office of a country town their place of rendezvous. Among
these, for some reason, I especially noted one middle-aged woman; why, I
cannot say; her appearance was anything but remarkable. And yet when
she came out, with two letters in her hand, one in a large and one in a
small envelope, and meeting my eye hastily drew them under her shawl,
I found myself wondering what was in her letters and who she could be,
that the casual glance of a stranger should unconsciously move her to an
action so suspicious. Monell's reappearance at the same moment,
diverted my attention, and in the interest of the conversation that
followed, I soon forgot both the woman and her letters. For determined
that he should have no opportunity to revert to that endless topic, a
law case, I exclaimed with the first crack of the whip,--"There, I knew
there was something I wanted to ask you. It is this: Are you acquainted
with any one is this town by the name of Belden?" "There is a widow Belden in town; I don't know of any other." "Who is she, what is she, and what is the
extent of your acquaintance with her?" "Well," said he, " I cannot conceive why you should be interested in
such an antiquated piece of commonplace goodness as she is, but seeing
you ask, I have no objection to telling you that she is the very
respectable relict of a deceased cabinetmaker of this town; that she
lives in a little house down the street there, and that if you have any
forlorn old tramp to be lodged over night, or any destitute family of
little ones to be looked after, she is the one to go to. As to knowing
her, I know her as I do a dozen other members of our church there up
over the hill. When I see her I speak to her, and that is all." "No; lives alone, has a little income, I believe; must have, to put the
money on the plate she always does; but spends her time in plain sewing
and such deeds of charity, as one with small means but willing heart can
find the opportunity of doing in a town like this. But why in the name
of wonders do you ask?" Belden--don't mention it by the
way--has got mixed up in a case of mine, and I felt it due to my
curiosity if not to my purse, to find out something about her. The fact is I would give something, Monell, for the
opportunity of studying this woman's character. Now couldn't you manage
to get me introduced into her house in some way that would make it
possible and proper for me to converse with her at my leisure? "Well, I don't know; I suppose it could be done. She used to take
lodgers in the summer when the hotel was full, and might be induced
to give a bed to a friend of mine who is very anxious to be near the
post-office on account of a business telegram he is expecting, and which
when it comes will demand his immediate attention." Monell gave
me a sly wink of his eye, little imagining how near the mark he had
struck. Tell her I have a peculiar dislike to sleeping
in a public house, and that you know of no one better fitted to
accommodate me, for the short time I desire to be in town, than
herself." "And what will be said of my hospitality in allowing you under these
circumstances to remain in any other house than my own?" "I don't know; very hard things, no doubt; but I guess your hospitality
can stand it." "Well, if you persist, we will see what can be done." And driving up to
a neat white cottage of homely, but sufficiently attractive appearance,
he stopped. "This is her house," said he, jumping to the ground; "let's go in and
see what we can do." Glancing up at the windows, which were all closed save the two on the
veranda overlooking the street, I thought to myself, "If she has anybody
in hiding here, whose presence in the house she desires to keep secret,
it is folly to hope she will take me in, however well recommended I may
come." But, yielding to the example of my friend, I alighted in my turn
and followed him up the short, grass-bordered walk to the front door. "As she has no servant, she will come to the door herself, so be ready,"
he remarked as he knocked. I had barely time to observe that the curtains to the window at my left
suddenly dropped, when a hasty step made itself heard within, and a
quick hand drew open the door; and I saw before me the woman whom I
had observed at the post-office, and whose action with the letters had
struck me as peculiar. I recognized her at first glance, though she
was differently dressed, and had evidently passed through some worry or
excitement that had altered the expression of her countenance, and
made her manner what it was not at that time, strained and a trifle
uncertain. But I saw no reason for thinking she remembered me. On the
contrary, the look she directed towards me had nothing but inquiry in
it, and when Mr. Monell pushed me forward with the remark, "A friend
of mine; in fact my lawyer from New York," she dropped a hurried
old-fashioned curtsey whose only expression was a manifest desire to
appear sensible of the honor conferred upon her, through the mist of a
certain trouble that confused everything about her. "We have come to ask a favor, Mrs. Belden; but may we not come in? "said
my client in a round, hearty voice well calculated to recall a person's
thoughts into their proper channel. "I have heard many times of your
cosy home, and am glad of this opportunity of seeing it." And with a
blind disregard to the look of surprised resistance with which she met
his advance, he stepped gallantly into the little room whose cheery
red carpet and bright picture-hung walls showed invitingly through the
half-open door at our left. Finding her premises thus invaded by a sort of French _coup d'etat,_
Mrs. Belden made the best of the situation, and pressing me to enter
also, devoted herself to hospitality. Monell, he quite
blossomed out in his endeavors to make himself agreeable; so much so,
that I shortly found myself laughing at his sallies, though my heart was
full of anxiety lest, after all, our efforts should fail of the success
they certainly merited. Belden softened more and more,
joining in the conversation with an ease hardly to be expected from one
in her humble circumstances. Indeed, I soon saw she was no common woman. There was a refinement in her speech and manner, which, combined with
her motherly presence and gentle air, was very pleasing. The last woman
in the world to suspect of any underhanded proceeding, if she had not
shown a peculiar hesitation when Mr. Monell broached the subject of my
entertainment there. "I don't know, sir; I would be glad, but," and she turned a very
scrutinizing look upon me, "the fact is, I have not taken lodgers of
late, and I have got out of the way of the whole thing, and am afraid I
cannot make him comfortable. In short, you will have to excuse me." "What, entice a fellow into a room
like this"--and he cast a hearty admiring glance round the apartment
which, for all its simplicity, both its warm coloring and general air of
cosiness amply merited, "and then turn a cold shoulder upon him when he
humbly entreats the honor of staying a single night in the enjoyment
of its attractions? Belden; I know you too well for that. Lazarus himself couldn't come to your door and be turned away; much less
a good-hearted, clever-headed young gentleman like my friend here." "You are very good," she began, an almost weak love of praise showing
itself for a moment in her eyes; "but I have no room prepared. I have
been house-cleaning, and everything is topsy-turvy Mrs. Wright, now,
over the way----"

"My young friend is going to stop here," Mr. Mouell broke in, with frank
positiveness. "If I cannot have him at my own house,--and for certain
reasons it is not advisable,--I shall at least have the satisfaction of
knowing he is in the charge of the best housekeeper in R----." "Yes," I put in, but without too great a show of interest; "I should be
sorry, once introduced here, to be obliged to go elsewhere." The troubled eye wavered away from us to the door. "I was never called inhospitable," she commenced; "but everything in
such disorder. "I was in hopes I might remain now," I replied; "I have some letters
to write, and ask nothing better than for leave to sit here and write
them." At the word letters I saw her hand go to her pocket in a movement which
must have been involuntary, for her countenance did not change, and she
made the quick reply:

"Well, you may. If you can put up with such poor accommodations as I can
offer, it shall not be said I refused you what Mr. Monell is pleased to
call a favor." And, complete in her reception as she had been in her resistance, she
gave us a pleasant smile, and, ignoring my thanks, bustled out with Mr. Monell to the buggy, where she received my bag and what was, doubtless,
more to her taste, the compliments he was now more than ever ready to
bestow upon her. "I will see that a room is got ready for you in a very short space of
time," she said, upon re-entering. "Meanwhile, make yourself at home
here; and if you wish to write, why I think you will find everything for
the purpose in these drawers." And wheeling up a table to the easy chair
in which I sat, she pointed to the small compartments beneath, with
an air of such manifest desire to have me make use of anything and
everything she had, that I found myself wondering over my position with
a sort of startled embarrassment that was not remote from shame. "Thank you; I have materials of my own," said I, and hastened to open my
bag and bring out the writing-case, which I always carried with me. "Then I will leave you," said she; and with a quick bend and a short,
hurried look out of the window, she hastily quitted the room. I could hear her steps cross the hall, go up two or three stairs, pause,
go up the rest of the flight, pause again, and then pass on. I was left
on the first floor alone. A WEIRD EXPERIENCE


    "Flat burglary as ever was committed." THE first thing I did was to inspect with greater care the room in which
I sat. It was a pleasant apartment, as I have already said; square, sunny, and
well furnished. On the floor was a crimson carpet, on the walls several
pictures, at the windows, cheerful curtains of white, tastefully
ornamented with ferns and autumn leaves; in one corner an old melodeon,
and in the centre of the room a table draped with a bright cloth, on
which were various little knick-knacks which, without being rich or
expensive, were both pretty and, to a certain extent, ornamental. But
it was not these things, which I had seen repeated in many other country
homes, that especially attracted my attention, or drew me forward in the
slow march which I now undertook around the room. It was the something
underlying all these, the evidences which I found, or sought to find,
not only in the general aspect of the room, but in each trivial object
I encountered, of the character, disposition, and history of the woman
with whom I now had to deal. It was for this reason I studied the
daguerreotypes on the mantel-piece, the books on the shelf, and the
music on the rack; for this and the still further purpose of noting if
any indications were to be found of there being in the house any such
person as Hannah. First then, for the little library, which I was pleased to see occupied
one corner of the room. Composed of a few well-chosen books, poetical,
historical, and narrative, it was of itself sufficient to account
for the evidences of latent culture observable in Mrs. Taking out a well-worn copy of _Byron,_ I opened it. There
were many passages marked, and replacing the book with a mental comment
upon her evident impressibility to the softer emotions, I turned towards
the melodeon fronting me from the opposite wall. It was closed, but on
its neatly-covered top lay one or two hymn-books, a basket of russet
apples, and a piece of half-completed knitting work. I took up the latter, but was forced to lay it down again without a
notion for what it was intended. Proceeding, I next stopped before
a window opening upon the small yard that ran about the house, and
separated it from the one adjoining. The scene without failed to attract
me, but the window itself drew my attention, for, written with a diamond
point on one of the panes, I perceived a row of letters which, as
nearly as I could make out, were meant for some word or words, but which
utterly failed in sense or apparent connection. Passing it by as the
work of some school-girl, I glanced down at the work-basket standing on
a table at my side. It was full of various kinds of work, among which I
spied a pair of stockings, which were much too small, as well as in too
great a state of disrepair, to belong to Mrs. Belden; and drawing them
carefully out, I examined them for any name on them. Do not start when I
say I saw the letter H plainly marked upon them. Thrusting them back,
I drew a deep breath of relief, gazing, as I did so, out of the window,
when those letters again attracted my attention. Idly I began to read them backward, when--But try
for yourself, reader, and judge of my surprise! Elate at the discovery
thus made, I sat down to write my letters. I had barely finished them,
when Mrs. Belden came in with the announcement that supper was ready. "As for your room," said she, "I have prepared my own room for your use,
thinking you would like to remain on the first floor." And, throwing
open a door at my side, she displayed a small, but comfortable room,
in which I could dimly see a bed, an immense bureau, and a shadowy
looking-glass in a dark, old-fashioned frame. "I live in very primitive fashion," she resumed, leading the way into
the dining-room; "but I mean to be comfortable and make others so." "I should say you amply succeeded," I rejoined, with an appreciative
glance at her well-spread board. She smiled, and I felt I had paved the way to her good graces in a way
that would yet redound to my advantage. its dainties, its pleasant freedom, its
mysterious, pervading atmosphere of unreality, and the constant sense
which every bountiful dish she pressed upon me brought of the shame of
eating this woman's food with such feelings of suspicion in my heart! Shall I ever forget the emotion I experienced when I first perceived
she had something on her mind, which she longed, yet hesitated, to give
utterance to! Or how she started when a cat jumped from the sloping roof
of the kitchen on to the grass-plot at the back of the house; or how my
heart throbbed when I heard, or thought I heard, a board creak overhead! We were in a long and narrow room which seemed, curiously enough, to run
crosswise of the house, opening on one side into the parlor, and on the
other into the small bedroom, which had been allotted to my use. "You live in this house alone, without fear?" Belden,
contrary to my desire, put another bit of cold chicken on my plate. "Have you no marauders in this town: no tramps, of whom a solitary woman
like you might reasonably be afraid?" "No one will hurt me," said she; "and no one ever came here for food or
shelter but got it." "I should think, then, that living as you do, upon a railroad, you would
be constantly overrun with worthless beings whose only trade is to take
all they can get without giving a return." It is the only luxury I have: to feed the
poor." "But the idle, restless ones, who neither will work, nor let others
work----"

"Are still the poor." Mentally remarking, here is the woman to shield an unfortunate who has
somehow become entangled in the meshes of a great crime, I drew back
from the table. As I did so, the thought crossed me that, in case
there was any such person in the house as Hannah, she would take the
opportunity of going up-stairs with something for her to eat; and that
she might not feel hampered by my presence, I stepped out on the veranda
with my cigar. While smoking it, I looked about for Q. I felt that the least token
of his presence in town would be very encouraging at this time. But it
seemed I was not to be afforded even that small satisfaction. If Q was
anywhere near, he was lying very low. Belden (who I know came down-stairs with an
empty plate, for going into the kitchen for a drink, I caught her in
the act of setting it down on the table), I made up my mind to wait a
reasonable length of time for what she had to say; and then, if she did
not speak, make an endeavor on my own part to surprise her secret. But her avowal was nearer and of a different nature from what I
expected, and brought its own train of consequences with it. "You are a lawyer, I believe," she began, taking down her knitting work,
with a forced display of industry. "Yes," I said; "that is my profession." She remained for a moment silent, creating great havoc in her work I am
sure, from the glance of surprise and vexation she afterwards threw it. Then, in a hesitating voice, remarked:

"Perhaps you may be willing, then, to give me some advice. The truth is,
I am in a very curious predicament; one from which I don't know how to
escape, and yet which demands immediate action. I should like to tell
you about it; may I?" "You may; I shall be only too happy to give you any advice in my power." She drew in her breath with a sort of vague relief, though her forehead
did not lose its frown. "It can all be said in a few words. I have in my possession a package of
papers which were intrusted to me by two ladies, with the understanding
that I should neither return nor destroy them without the full
cognizance and expressed desire of both parties, given in person or
writing. That they were to remain in my hands till then, and that
nothing or nobody should extort them from me." "That is easily understood," said I; for she stopped. "But, now comes word from one of the ladies, the one, too, most
interested in the matter, that, for certain reasons, the immediate
destruction of those papers is necessary to her peace and safety." "And do you want to know what your duty is in this case?" I could not help it: a flood of conjectures rushing in tumult
over me. "It is to hold on to the papers like grim death till released from your
guardianship by the combined wish of both parties." Once pledged in that way, you have no choice. It
would be a betrayal of trust to yield to the solicitations of one party
what you have undertaken to return to both. The fact that grief or loss
might follow your retention of these papers does not release you from
your bond. You have nothing to do with that; besides, you are by no
means sure that the representations of the so-called interested party
are true. You might be doing a greater wrong, by destroying in this way,
what is manifestly considered of value to them both, than by preserving
the papers intact, according to compact." Circumstances alter cases; and in short, it
seems to me that the wishes of the one most interested ought to be
regarded, especially as there is an estrangement between these ladies
which may hinder the other's consent from ever being obtained." "No," said I; "two wrongs never make a right; nor are we at liberty to
do an act of justice at the expense of an injustice. The papers must be
preserved, Mrs. Her head sank very despondingly; evidently it had been her wish to
please the interested party. "Law is very hard," she said; "very hard." "This is not only law, but plain duty," I remarked. "Suppose a case
different; suppose the honor and happiness of the other party depended
upon the preservation of the papers; where would your duty be then?" "But----"

"A contract is a contract," said I, "and cannot be tampered with. Having
accepted the trust and given your word, you are obliged to fulfil, to
the letter, all its conditions. It would be a breach of trust for you to
return or destroy the papers without the mutual consent necessary." An expression of great gloom settled slowly over her features. "I
suppose you are right," said she, and became silent. Watching her, I thought to myself, "If I were Mr. Gryce, or even Q, I
would never leave this seat till I had probed this matter to the bottom,
learned the names of the parties concerned, and where those precious
papers are hidden, which she declares to be of so much importance." But
being neither, I could only keep her talking upon the subject until
she should let fall some word that might serve as a guide to my further
enlightenment; I therefore turned, with the intention of asking her
some question, when my attention was attracted by the figure of a woman
coming out of the back-door of the neighboring house, who, for general
dilapidation and uncouthness of bearing, was a perfect type of the style
of tramp of whom we had been talking at the supper table. Gnawing a
crust which she threw away as she reached the street, she trudged down
the path, her scanty dress, piteous in its rags and soil, flapping in
the keen spring wind, and revealing ragged shoes red with the mud of the
highway. "There is a customer that may interest you," said I.

Mrs. Belden seemed to awake from a trance. Rising slowly, she looked
out, and with a rapidly softening gaze surveyed the forlorn creature
before her. she muttered; "but I cannot do much for her to-night. A
good supper is all I can give her." And, going to the front door, she bade her step round the house to the
kitchen, where, in another moment, I heard the rough creature's voice
rise in one long "Bless you!" that could only have been produced by the
setting before her of the good things with which Mrs. Belden's larder
seemed teeming. After a decent length of time,
employed as I should judge in mastication, I heard her voice rise once
more in a plea for shelter. "The barn, ma'am, or the wood-house. Any place where I can lie out of
the wind." And she commenced a long tale of want and disease, so piteous
to hear that I was not at all surprised when Mrs. Belden told me,
upon re-entering, that she had consented, notwithstanding her previous
determination, to allow the woman to lie before the kitchen fire for the
night. "She has such an honest eye," said she; "and charity is my only luxury." The interruption of this incident effectually broke up our conversation. Belden went up-stairs, and for some time I was left alone to ponder
over what I had heard, and determine upon my future course of action. I
had just reached the conclusion that she would be fully as liable to
be carried away by her feelings to the destruction of the papers in her
charge, as to be governed by the rules of equity I had laid down to her,
when I heard her stealthily descend the stairs and go out by the front
door. Distrustful of her intentions, I took up my hat and hastily
followed her. She was on her way down the main street, and my first
thought was, that she was bound for some neighbor's house or perhaps for
the hotel itself; but the settled swing into which she soon altered her
restless pace satisfied me that she had some distant goal in prospect;
and before long I found myself passing the hotel with its appurtenances,
even the little schoolhouse, that was the last building at this end of
the village, and stepping out into the country beyond. But still her fluttering figure hasted on, the outlines of her form,
with its close shawl and neat bonnet, growing fainter and fainter in the
now settled darkness of an April night; and still I followed, walking on
the turf at the side of the road lest she should hear my footsteps and
look round. Over this I could hear her
pass, and then every sound ceased. She had paused, and was evidently
listening. It would not do for me to pause too, so gathering myself into
as awkward a shape as possible, I sauntered by her down the road, but
arrived at a certain point, stopped, and began retracing my steps with a
sharp lookout for her advancing figure, till I had arrived once more at
the bridge. Convinced now that she had discovered my motive for being in her house
and, by leading me from it, had undertaken to supply Hannah with an
opportunity for escape, I was about to hasten back to the charge I had
so incautiously left, when a strange sound heard at my left arrested me. It came from the banks of the puny stream which ran under the bridge,
and was like the creaking of an old door on worn-out hinges. Leaping the fence, I made my way as best I could down the sloping field
in the direction from which the sound came. It was quite dark, and my
progress was slow; so much so, that I began to fear I had ventured upon
a wild-goose chase, when an unexpected streak of lightning shot across
the sky, and by its glare I saw before me what seemed, in the momentary
glimpse I had of it, an old barn. From the rush of waters near at hand,
I judged it to be somewhere on the edge of the stream, and consequently
hesitated to advance, when I heard the sound of heavy breathing near me,
followed by a stir as of some one feeling his way over a pile of loose
boards; and presently, while I stood there, a faint blue light flashed
up from the interior of the barn, and I saw, through the tumbled-down
door that faced me, the form of Mrs. Belden standing with a lighted
match in her hand, gazing round on the four walls that encompassed her. Hardly daring to breathe, lest I should alarm her, I watched her while
she turned and peered at the roof above her, which was so old as to be
more than half open to the sky, at the flooring beneath, which was in
a state of equal dilapidation, and finally at a small tin box which she
drew from under her shawl and laid on the ground at her feet. The sight
of that box at once satisfied me as to the nature of her errand. She was
going to hide what she dared not destroy; and, relieved upon this point,
I was about to take a step forward when the match went out in her hand. While she was engaged in lighting another, I considered that perhaps it
would be better for me not to arouse her apprehensions by accosting her
at this time, and thus endanger the success of my main scheme; but
to wait till she was gone, before I endeavored to secure the box. Accordingly I edged my way up to the side of the barn and waited till
she should leave it, knowing that if I attempted to peer in at the
door, I ran great risk of being seen, owing to the frequent streaks of
lightning which now flashed about us on every side. Minute after minute
went by, with its weird alternations of heavy darkness and sudden
glare; and still she did not come. At last, just as I was about to start
impatiently from my hiding-place, she reappeared, and began to withdraw
with faltering steps toward the bridge. When I thought her quite out of
hearing, I stole from my retreat and entered the barn. It was of course
as dark as Erebus, but thanks to being a smoker I was as well provided
with matches as she had been, and having struck one, I held it up; but
the light it gave was very feeble, and as I did not know just where to
look, it went out before I had obtained more than a cursory glimpse of
the spot where I was. I thereupon lit another; but though I confined my
attention to one place, namely, the floor at my feet, it too went out
before I could conjecture by means of any sign seen there where she had
hidden the box. I now for the first time realized the difficulty before
me. She had probably made up her mind, before she left home, in just
what portion of this old barn she would conceal her treasure; but I had
nothing to guide me: I could only waste matches. A
dozen had been lit and extinguished before I was so much as sure the box
was not under a pile of debris that lay in one corner, and I had taken
the last in my hand before I became aware that one of the broken boards
of the floor was pushed a little out of its proper position. and that board was to be raised, the space beneath examined, and the
box, if there, lifted safely out. I concluded not to waste my resources,
so kneeling down in the darkness, I groped for the board, tried it, and
found it to be loose. Wrenching at it with all my strength, I tore it
free and cast it aside; then lighting my match looked into the hole thus
made. Something, I could not tell what, stone or box, met my eye, but
while I reached for it, the match flew out of my hand. Deploring my
carelessness, but determined at all hazards to secure what I had seen,
I dived down deep into the hole, and in another moment had the object of
my curiosity in my hands. Satisfied at this result of my efforts, I turned to depart, my one wish
now being to arrive home before Mrs. She had
several minutes the start of me; I would have to pass her on the road,
and in so doing might be recognized. Regaining the highway, I started at a brisk pace. For some little
distance I kept it up, neither overtaking nor meeting any one. But
suddenly, at a turn in the road, I came unexpectedly upon Mrs. Belden,
standing in the middle of the path, looking back. Somewhat disconcerted,
I hastened swiftly by her, expecting her to make some effort to stop me. Indeed, I doubt now if she even saw
or heard me. Astonished at this treatment, and still more surprised
that she made no attempt to follow me, I looked back, when I saw what
enchained her to the spot, and made her so unmindful of my presence. The
barn behind us was on fire! Instantly I realized it was the work of my hands; I had dropped a
half-extinguished match, and it had fallen upon some inflammable
substance. Aghast at the sight, I paused in my turn, and stood staring. Higher and
higher the red flames mounted, brighter and brighter glowed the clouds
above, the stream beneath; and in the fascination of watching it all,
I forgot Mrs. But a short, agitated gasp in my vicinity soon
recalled her presence to my mind, and drawing nearer, I heard her
exclaim like a person speaking in a dream, "Well, I didn't mean to do
it"; then lower, and with a certain satisfaction in her tone, "But it's
all right, any way; the thing is lost now for good, and Mary will be
satisfied without any one being to blame." I did not linger to hear more; if this was the conclusion she had come
to, she would not wait there long, especially as the sound of distant
shouts and running feet announced that a crowd of village boys was on
its way to the scene of the conflagration. The first thing I did, upon my arrival at the house, was to assure
myself that no evil effects had followed my inconsiderate desertion of
it to the mercies of the tramp she had taken in; the next to retire to
my room, and take a peep at the box. I found it to be a neat tin coffer,
fastened with a lock. Satisfied from its weight that it contained
nothing heavier than the papers of which Mrs. Belden had spoken, I hid
it under the bed and returned to the sitting-room. I had barely taken a
seat and lifted a book when Mrs. cried she, taking off her bonnet and revealing a face much
flushed with exercise, but greatly relieved in expression; "this _is_
a night! It lightens, and there is a fire somewhere down street, and
altogether it is perfectly dreadful out. I hope you have not been
lonesome," she continued, with a keen searching of my face which I
bore in the best way I could. "I had an errand to attend to, but didn't
expect to stay so long." I returned some nonchalant reply, and she hastened from the room to
fasten up the house. I waited, but she did not come back; fearful, perhaps, of betraying
herself, she had retired to her own apartment, leaving me to take care
of myself as best I might. I own that I was rather relieved at this. The
fact is, I did not feel equal to any more excitement that night, and was
glad to put off further action until the next day. As soon, then, as
the storm was over, I myself went to bed, and, after several ineffectual
efforts, succeeded in getting asleep. THE MISSING WITNESS


    "I fled and cried out death." The voice was low and searching; it reached me in my dreams, waked me,
and caused me to look up. Morning had begun to break, and by its light I
saw, standing in the open door leading into the dining-room, the forlorn
figure of the tramp who had been admitted into the house the night
before. Angry and perplexed, I was about to bid her be gone, when, to my
great surprise, she pulled out a red handkerchief from her pocket, and I
recognized Q. "Read that," said he, hastily advancing and putting a slip of paper into
my hand. And, without another word or look, left the room, closing the
door behind him. Rising in considerable agitation, I took it to the window, and by the
rapidly increasing light, succeeded in making out the rudely scrawled
lines as follows:

"She is here; I have seen her; in the room marked with a cross in the
accompanying plan. Wait till eight o'clock, then go up. I will contrive
some means of getting Mrs. Sketched below this was the following plan of the upper floor:

Hannah, then, was in the small back room over the dining-room, and I had
not been deceived in thinking I had heard steps overhead, the evening
before. Greatly relieved, and yet at the same time much moved at the
near prospect of being brought face to face with one who we had every
reason to believe was acquainted with the dreadful secret involved in
the Leavenworth murder, I lay down once more, and endeavored to catch
another hour's rest. But I soon gave up the effort in despair, and
contented myself with listening to the sounds of awakening life which
now began to make themselves heard in the house and neighborhood. As Q had closed the door after him, I could only faintly hear Mrs. Belden when she came down-stairs. But the short, surprised exclamation
which she uttered upon reaching the kitchen and finding the tramp gone
and the back-door wide open, came plainly enough to my ears, and for a
moment I was not sure but that Q had made a mistake in thus leaving so
unceremoniously. As she came, in the course of her preparations for breakfast, into the
room adjoining mine, I could hear her murmur to herself:

"Poor thing! She has lived so long in the fields and at the roadside,
she finds it unnatural to be cooped up in the house all night." The effort to eat and appear unconcerned,
to chat and make no mistake,--May I never be called upon to go through
such another! But at last it was over, and I was left free to await
in my own room the time for the dreaded though much-to-be-desired
interview. Slowly the minutes passed; eight o'clock struck, when, just
as the last vibration ceased, there came a loud knock at the backdoor,
and a little boy burst into the kitchen, crying at the top of his voice:
"Papa's got a fit! papa's got a fit; do come!" Rising, as was natural, I hastened towards the kitchen, meeting Mrs. Belden's anxious face in the doorway. "A poor wood-chopper down the street has fallen in a fit," she said. "Will you please watch over the house while I see what I can do for him? I won't be absent any longer than I can help." And almost without waiting for my reply, she caught up a shawl, threw
it over her head, and followed the urchin, who was in a state of great
excitement, out into the street. Instantly the silence of death seemed to fill the house, and a dread the
greatest I had ever experienced settled upon me. To leave the kitchen,
go up those stairs, and confront that girl seemed for the moment beyond
my power; but, once on the stair, I found myself relieved from the
especial dread which had overwhelmed me, and possessed, instead, of a
sort of combative curiosity that led me to throw open the door which
I saw at the top with a certain fierceness new to my nature, and not
altogether suitable, perhaps, to the occasion. I found myself in a large bedroom, evidently the one occupied by Mrs. Barely stopping to note certain evidences of
her having passed a restless night, I passed on to the door leading into
the room marked with a cross in the plan drawn for me by Q. It was a
rough affair, made of pine boards rudely painted. Pausing before it, I
listened. Raising the latch, I endeavored to enter. Pausing again, I bent my ear to the keyhole. Not a
sound came from within; the grave itself could not have been stiller. Awe-struck and irresolute, I looked about me and questioned what I had
best do. Suddenly I remembered that, in the plan Q had given me, I had
seen intimation of another door leading into this same room from the one
on the opposite side of the hall. Going hastily around to it, I tried
it with my hand. Convinced at last that
nothing was left me but force, I spoke for the first time, and, calling
the girl by name, commanded her to open the door. Receiving no response,
I said aloud with an accent of severity:

"Hannah Chester, you are discovered; if you do not open the door, we
shall be obliged to break it down; save us the trouble, then, and open
immediately." Going back a step, I threw my whole weight against the door. It creaked
ominously, but still resisted. Stopping only long enough to be sure no movement had taken place within,
I pressed against it once more, this time with all my strength, when it
flew from its hinges, and I fell forward into a room so stifling, chill,
and dark that I paused for a moment to collect my scattered senses
before venturing to look around me. In another
moment, the pallor and fixity of the pretty Irish face staring upon me
from amidst the tumbled clothes of a bed, drawn up against the wall at
my side, struck me with so deathlike a chill that, had it not been for
that one instant of preparation, I should have been seriously dismayed. As it was, I could not prevent a feeling of sickly apprehension from
seizing me as I turned towards the silent figure stretched so near, and
observed with what marble-like repose it lay beneath the patchwork quilt
drawn across it, asking myself if sleep could be indeed so like death
in its appearance. For that it was a sleeping woman I beheld, I did not
seriously doubt. There were too many evidences of careless life in the
room for any other inference. The clothes, left just as she had stepped
from them in a circle on the floor; the liberal plate of food placed
in waiting for her on the chair by the door, --food amongst which I
recognized, even in this casual glance, the same dish which we had had
for breakfast --all and everything in the room spoke of robust life and
reckless belief in the morrow. And yet so white was the brow turned up to the bare beams of the
unfinished wall above her, so glassy the look of the half-opened eyes,
so motionless the arm lying half under, half over, the edge of the
coverlid that it was impossible not to shrink from contact with a
creature so sunk in unconsciousness. But contact seemed to be necessary;
any cry which I could raise at that moment would be ineffectual enough
to pierce those dull ears. Nerving myself, therefore, I stooped and
lifted the hand which lay with its telltale scar mockingly uppermost,
intending to speak, call, do something, anything, to arouse her. But at
the first touch of her hand on mine an unspeakable horror thrilled me. It was not only icy cold, but stiff. Dropping it in my agitation, I
started back and again surveyed the face. What sleep ever wore such pallid hues, such accusing
fixedness? Bending once more I listened at the lips. Not a breath, nor a
stir. Shocked to the core of my being, I made one final effort. Tearing
down the clothes, I laid my hand upon her heart. BURNED PAPER


    "I could have better spared a better man." I DO not think I called immediately for help. The awful shock of this
discovery, coming as it did at the very moment life and hope were
strongest within me; the sudden downfall which it brought of all the
plans based upon this woman's expected testimony; and, worst of all, the
dread coincidence between this sudden death and the exigency in which
the guilty party, whoever it was, was supposed to be at that hour were
much too appalling for instant action. I could only stand and stare at
the quiet face before me, smiling in its peaceful rest as if death
were pleasanter than we think, and marvel over the providence which
had brought us renewed fear instead of relief, complication instead of
enlightenment, disappointment instead of realization. For eloquent as is
death, even on the faces of those unknown and unloved by us, the causes
and consequences of this one were much too important to allow the mind
to dwell upon the pathos of the scene itself. Hannah, the girl, was lost
in Hannah the witness. But gradually, as I gazed, the look of expectation which I perceived
hovering about the wistful mouth and half-open lids attracted me, and I
bent above her with a more personal interest, asking myself if she were
quite dead, and whether or not immediate medical assistance would be of
any avail. But the more closely I looked, the more certain I became
that she had been dead for some hours; and the dismay occasioned by this
thought, taken with the regrets which I must ever feel, that I had not
adopted the bold course the evening before, and, by forcing my way to
the hiding-place of this poor creature, interrupted, if not prevented
the consummation of her fate, startled me into a realization of my
present situation; and, leaving her side, I went into the next room,
threw up the window, and fastened to the blind the red handkerchief
which I had taken the precaution to bring with me. Instantly a young man, whom I was fain to believe Q, though he bore
not the least resemblance, either in dress or facial expression to
any renderings of that youth which I had yet seen, emerged from the
tinsmith's house, and approached the one I was in. Observing him cast a hurried glance in my direction, I crossed the
floor, and stood awaiting him at the head of the stairs. he whispered, upon entering the house and meeting my glance from
below; "have you seen her?" "Yes," I returned bitterly, "I have seen her!" "No; I have had no talk with her." Then, as I perceived him growing
alarmed at my voice and manner, I drew him into Mrs. Belden's room and
hastily inquired: "What did you mean this morning when you informed me
you had seen this girl? that she was in a certain room where I might
find her?" "You have, then, been to her room?" "No; I have only been on the outside of it. Seeing a light, I crawled up
on to the ledge of the slanting roof last night while both you and Mrs. Belden were out, and, looking through the window, saw her moving round
the room." He must have observed my countenance change, for he stopped. "Come," I said, "and see for
yourself!" And, leading him to the little room I had just left, I
pointed to the silent form lying within. "You told me I should
find Hannah here; but you did not tell me I should find her in this
condition." he cried with a start: "not dead?" It seemed as if he could not realize it. "She is in a heavy sleep, has taken a narcotic----"

"It is not sleep," I said, "or if it is, she will never wake. And, taking the hand once more in mine, I let it fall in its stone
weight upon the bed. Calming down, he stood gazing at her
with a very strange expression upon his face. Suddenly he moved and
began quietly turning over the clothes that were lying on the floor. "I am looking for the bit of paper from which I saw her take what I
supposed to be a dose of medicine last night. he cried,
lifting a morsel of paper that, lying on the floor under the edge of the
bed, had hitherto escaped his notice. He handed me the paper, on the inner surface of which I could dimly
discern the traces of an impalpable white powder. "This is important," I declared, carefully folding the paper together. "If there is enough of this powder remaining to show that the contents
of this paper were poisonous, the manner and means of the girl's death
are accounted for, and a case of deliberate suicide made evident." "I am not so sure of that," he retorted. "If I am any judge of
countenances, and I rather flatter myself I am, this girl had no more
idea she was taking poison than I had. She looked not only bright but
gay; and when she tipped up the paper, a smile of almost silly triumph
crossed her face. Belden gave her that dose to take, telling her
it was medicine----"

"That is something which yet remains to be learned; also whether the
dose, as you call it, was poisonous or not. It may be she died of heart
disease." He simply shrugged his shoulders, and pointed first at the plate of
breakfast left on the chair, and secondly at the broken-down door. "Yes," I said, answering his look, "Mrs. Belden has been in here this
morning, and Mrs. Belden locked the door when she went out; but that
proves nothing beyond her belief in the girl's hearty condition." "A belief which that white face on its tumbled pillow did not seem to
shake?" "Perhaps in her haste she may not have looked at the girl, but have set
the dishes down without more than a casual glance in her direction?" "I don't want to suspect anything wrong, but it is such a coincidence!" This was touching me on a sore point, and I stepped back. "Well,"
said I, "there is no use in our standing here busying ourselves with
conjectures. and I moved hurriedly
towards the door. "Have you forgotten this is but
an episode in the one great mystery we are sent here to unravel? If this
girl has come to her death by some foul play, it is our business to find
it out." "I know; but we can at least take full note of the room and everything
in it before throwing the affair into the hands of strangers. Gryce
will expect that much of us, I am sure." I am
only afraid I can never forget it." the lay of the bed-clothes
around it? the lack there is of all signs of struggle or fear? "Yes, yes; don't make me look at it any more." --rapidly pointing out each
object as he spoke. a calico dress, a shawl,--not the
one in which she was believed to have run away, but an old black
one, probably belonging to Mrs. Then this chest,"--opening
it,--"containing a few underclothes marked,--let us see, ah, with the
name of the lady of the house, but smaller than any she ever wore;
made for Hannah, you observe, and marked with her own name to prevent
suspicion. And then these other clothes lying on the floor, all new,
all marked in the same way. Going over to where he stood I stooped down, when a wash-bowl half full
of burned paper met my eye. "I saw her bending over something in this corner, and could not think
what it was. Can it be she is a suicide after all? She has evidently
destroyed something here which she didn't wish any one to see." "Not a scrap, not a morsel left to show what it was; how unfortunate!" Belden must solve this riddle," I cried. Belden must solve the whole riddle," he replied; "the secret
of the Leavenworth murder hangs upon it." Then, with a lingering
look towards the mass of burned paper, "Who knows but what that was a
confession?" "Whatever it was," said I, "it is now ashes, and we have got to accept
the fact and make the best of it." "Yes," said he with a deep sigh; "that's so; but Mr. Gryce will never
forgive me for it, never. He will say I ought to have known it was a
suspicious circumstance for her to take a dose of medicine at the very
moment detection stood at her back." "But she did not know that; she did not see you." "We don't know what she saw, nor what Mrs. Women are a
mystery; and though I flatter myself that ordinarily I am a match for
the keenest bit of female flesh that ever walked, I must say that in
this case I feel myself thoroughly and shamefully worsted." "Well, well," I said, "the end has not come yet; who knows what a talk
with Mrs. And, by the way, she will be coming
back soon, and I must be ready to meet her. Everything depends upon
finding out, if I can, whether she is aware of this tragedy or not. It
is just possible she knows nothing about it." And, hurrying him from the room, I pulled the door to behind me, and led
the way down-stairs. "Now," said I, "there is one thing you must attend to at once. Gryce acquainting him with this unlooked-for
occurrence." "All right, sir," and Q started for the door. "I may not have another opportunity to
mention it. Belden received two letters from the postmaster
yesterday; one in a large and one in a small envelope; if you could find
out where they were postmarked----"

Q put his hand in his pocket. "I think I will not have to go far to
find out where one of them came from. And
before I knew it, he had returned up-stairs. "THEREBY HANGS A TALE." "IT was all a hoax; nobody was ill; I have been imposed upon, meanly
imposed upon!" Belden, flushed and panting, entered the room
where I was, and proceeded to take off her bonnet; but whilst doing so
paused, and suddenly exclaimed: "What is the matter? "Something very serious has occurred," I replied; "you have been gone
but a little while, but in that time a discovery has been made--" I
purposely paused here that the suspense might elicit from her some
betrayal; but, though she turned pale, she manifested less emotion than
I expected, and I went on--"which is likely to produce very important
consequences." "I always said it would be impossible to keep it secret
if I let anybody into the house; she is so restless. But I forget," she
suddenly said, with a frightened look; "you haven't told me what the
discovery was. Perhaps it isn't what I thought; perhaps----"

I did not hesitate to interrupt her. Belden," I said, "I shall not
try to mitigate the blow. A woman who, in the face of the most urgent
call from law and justice, can receive into her house and harbor there a
witness of such importance as Hannah, cannot stand in need of any great
preparation for hearing that her efforts, have been too successful, that
she has accomplished her design of suppressing valuable testimony, that
law and justice are outraged, and that the innocent woman whom this
girl's evidence might have saved stands for ever compromised in the eyes
of the world, if not in those of the officers of the law." Her eyes, which had never left me during this address, flashed wide with
dismay. "I have intended no wrong; I have only
tried to save people. What have you got to do
with all this? What is it to you what I do or don't do? Can it be you are come from Mary Leavenworth to see how I
am fulfilling her commands, and----"

"Mrs. Belden," I said, "it is of small importance now as to who I am, or
for what purpose I am here. But that my words may have the more effect,
I will say, that whereas I have not deceived you, either as to my name
or position, it is true that I am the friend of the Misses Leavenworth,
and that anything which is likely to affect them, is of interest to
me. When, therefore, I say that Eleanore Leavenworth is irretrievably
injured by this girl's death----"

"Death? The burst was too natural, the tone too horror-stricken for me to doubt
for another moment as to this woman's ignorance of the true state of
affairs. "Yes," I repeated, "the girl you have been hiding so long and so well is
now beyond your control. I shall never lose from my ears the shriek which she uttered, nor the
wild, "I don't believe it! with which she dashed
from the room and rushed up-stairs. Nor that after-scene when, in the presence of the dead, she stood
wringing her hands and protesting, amid sobs of the sincerest grief and
terror, that she knew nothing of it; that she had left the girl in the
best of spirits the night before; that it was true she had locked her
in, but this she always did when any one was in the house; and that if
she died of any sudden attack, it must have been quietly, for she had
heard no stir all night, though she had listened more than once, being
naturally anxious lest the girl should make some disturbance that would
arouse me. I was in a hurry, and thought she was asleep;
so I set the things down where she could get them and came right away,
locking the door as usual." "It is strange she should have died this night of all others. "No, sir; she was even brighter than common; more lively. I never
thought of her being sick then or ever. If I had----"

"You never thought of her being sick?" "Why,
then, did you take such pains to give her a dose of medicine last
night?" she protested, evidently under the supposition it was I who
had spoken. "Did I, Hannah, did I, poor girl?" stroking the hand that
lay in hers with what appeared to be genuine sorrow and regret. Where she did she get it if you didn't give
it to her?" This time she seemed to be aware that some one besides myself was
talking to her, for, hurriedly rising, she looked at the man with a
wondering stare, before replying. "I don't know who you are, sir; but I can tell you this, the girl had no
medicine,--took no dose; she wasn't sick last night that I know of." "Saw her!--the world is crazy, or I am--saw her swallow a powder! How
could you see her do that or anything else? Hasn't she been shut up in
this room for twenty-four hours?" "Yes; but with a window like that in the roof, it isn't so very
difficult to see into the room, madam." "Oh," she cried, shrinking, "I have a spy in the house, have I? But I
deserve it; I kept her imprisoned in four close walls, and never came
to look at her once all night. I don't complain; but what was it you say
you saw her take? You think she has poisoned herself, and that I had a
hand in it!" "No," I hastened to remark, "he does not think you had a hand in it. He
says he saw the girl herself swallow something which he believes to have
been the occasion of her death, and only asks you now where she obtained
it." I never gave her anything; didn't know she had
anything." Somehow, I believed her, and so felt unwilling to prolong the present
interview, especially as each moment delayed the action which I felt it
incumbent upon us to take. So, motioning Q to depart upon his errand, I
took Mrs. Belden by the hand and endeavored to lead her from the
room. But she resisted, sitting down by the side of the bed with the
expression, "I will not leave her again; do not ask it; here is my
place, and here I will stay," while Q, obdurate for the first time,
stood staring severely upon us both, and would not move, though I urged
him again to make haste, saying that the morning was slipping away, and
that the telegram to Mr. "Till that woman leaves the room, I don't; and unless you promise to
take my place in watching her, I don't quit the house." Astonished, I left her side and crossed to him. "You carry your suspicions too far," I whispered, "and I think you are
too rude. We have seen nothing, I am sure, to warrant us in any such
action; besides, she can do no harm here; though, as for watching her, I
promise to do that much if it will relieve your mind." "I don't want her watched here; take her below. "Are you not assuming a trifle the master?" If I am, it is because I have something in my
possession which excuses my conduct." Agitated now in my turn, I held out my hand. "Not while that woman remains in the room." Seeing him implacable, I returned to Mrs. "I must entreat you to come with me," said I. "This is not a common
death; we shall be obliged to have the coroner here and others. You had
better leave the room and go below." "I don't mind the coroner; he is a neighbor of mine; his coming won't
prevent my watching over the poor girl until he arrives." Belden," I said, "your position as the only one conscious of the
presence of this girl in your house makes it wiser for you not to invite
suspicion by lingering any longer than is necessary in the room where
her dead body lies." "As if my neglect of her now were the best surety of my good intentions
towards her in time past!" "It will not be neglect for you to go below with me at my earnest
request. You can do no good here by staying; will, in fact, be doing
harm. So listen to me or I shall be obliged to leave you in charge of
this man and go myself to inform the authorities." This last argument seemed to affect her, for with one look of shuddering
abhorrence at Q she rose, saying, "You have me in your power," and then,
without another word, threw her handkerchief over the girl's face and
left the room. In two minutes more I had the letter of which Q had
spoken in my hands. "It is the only one I could find, sir. It was in the pocket of the dress
Mrs. The other must be lying around somewhere,
but I haven't had time to find it. Scarcely noticing at the time with what deep significance he spoke, I
opened the letter. It was the smaller of the two I had seen her draw
under her shawl the day before at the post-office, and read as follows:


    "DEAR, DEAR FRIEND:

    "I am in awful trouble. I cannot
    explain, I can only make one prayer. Destroy what you have,
    to-day, instantly, without question or hesitation. The consent
    of any one else has nothing to do with it. I am
    lost if you refuse. Do then what I ask, and save

    "ONE WHO LOVES YOU." Belden; there was no signature or date,
only the postmark New York; but I knew the handwriting. came in the dry tones which Q seemed to think fit to
adopt on this occasion. "And a damning bit of evidence against the one
who wrote it, and the woman who received it!" "A terrible piece of evidence, indeed," said I, "if I did not happen to
know that this letter refers to the destruction of something radically
different from what you suspect. "Quite; but we will talk of this hereafter. It is time you sent your
telegram, and went for the coroner." And with this we parted; he to perform his role and I
mine. Belden walking the floor below, bewailing her situation,
and uttering wild sentences as to what the neighbors would say of her;
what the minister would think; what Clara, whoever that was, would do,
and how she wished she had died before ever she had meddled with the
affair. Succeeding in calming her after a while, I induced her to sit down and
listen to what I had to say. "You will only injure yourself by this
display of feeling," I remarked, "besides unfitting yourself for what
you will presently be called upon to go through." And, laying myself out
to comfort the unhappy woman, I first explained the necessities of the
case, and next inquired if she had no friend upon whom she could call in
this emergency. To my great surprise she replied no; that while she had kind neighbors
and good friends, there was no one upon whom she could call in a case
like this, either for assistance or sympathy, and that, unless I would
take pity on her, she would have to meet it alone--"As I have met
everything," she said, "from Mr. Belden's death to the loss of most of
my little savings in a town fire last year." I was touched by this,--that she who, in spite of her weakness and
inconsistencies of character, possessed at least the one virtue of
sympathy with her kind, should feel any lack of friends. Unhesitatingly,
I offered to do what I could for her, providing she would treat me with
the perfect frankness which the case demanded. To my great relief, she
expressed not only her willingness, but her strong desire, to tell all
she knew. "I have had enough secrecy for my whole life," she said. And indeed I do believe she was so thoroughly frightened, that if a
police-officer had come into the house and asked her to reveal secrets
compromising the good name of her own son, she would have done so
without cavil or question. "I feel as if I wanted to take my stand out
on the common, and, in the face of the whole world, declare what I have
done for Mary Leavenworth. But first," she whispered, "tell me, for
God's sake, how those girls are situated. I have not dared to ask or
write. The papers say a good deal about Eleanore, but nothing about
Mary; and yet Mary writes of her own peril only, and of the danger she
would be in if certain facts were known. I don't want
to injure them, only to take care of myself." Belden," I said, "Eleanore Leavenworth has got into her
present difficulty by not telling all that was required of her. Mary
Leavenworth--but I cannot speak of her till I know what you have to
divulge. Her position, as well as that of her cousin, is too anomalous
for either you or me to discuss. What we want to learn from you is, how
you became connected with this affair, and what it was that Hannah knew
which caused her to leave New York and take refuge here." Belden, clasping and unclasping her hands, met my gaze with one
full of the most apprehensive doubt. "You will never believe me," she
cried; "but I don't know what Hannah knew. I am in utter ignorance of
what she saw or heard on that fatal night; she never told, and I never
asked. She merely said that Miss Leavenworth wished me to secrete her
for a short time; and I, because I loved Mary Leavenworth and admired
her beyond any one I ever saw, weakly consented, and----"

"Do you mean to say," I interrupted, "that after you knew of the murder,
you, at the mere expression of Miss Leavenworth's wishes, continued to
keep this girl concealed without asking her any questions or demanding
any explanations?" "Yes, sir; you will never believe me, but it is so. I thought that,
since Mary had sent her here, she must have her reasons; and--and--I
cannot explain it now; it all looks so differently; but I did do as I
have said." You must have had strong reason for
obeying Mary Leavenworth so blindly." "Oh, sir," she gasped, "I thought I understood it all; that Mary, the
bright young creature, who had stooped from her lofty position to make
use of me and to love me, was in some way linked to the criminal, and
that it would be better for me to remain in ignorance, do as I was
bid, and trust all would come right. I did not reason about it; I only
followed my impulse. I couldn't do otherwise; it isn't my nature. When I
am requested to do anything for a person I love, I cannot refuse." "And you love Mary Leavenworth; a woman whom you yourself seem to
consider capable of a great crime?" "Oh, I didn't say that; I don't know as I thought that. She might be in
some way connected with it, without being the actual perpetrator. She
could never be that; she is too dainty." Belden," I said, "what do you know of Mary Leavenworth which makes
even that supposition possible?" The white face of the woman before me flushed. "I scarcely know what to
reply," she cried. "It is a long story, and----"

"Never mind the long story," I interrupted. "Let me hear the one vital
reason." "Well," said she, "it is this; that Mary was in an emergency from which
nothing but her uncle's death could release her." But here we were interrupted by the sound of steps on the porch, and,
looking out, I saw Q entering the house alone. Belden where
she was, I stepped into the hall. "Well," said I, "what is the matter? "No, gone away; off in a buggy to look after a man that was found some
ten miles from here, lying in a ditch beside a yoke of oxen." Then, as
he saw my look of relief, for I was glad of this temporary delay, said,
with an expressive wink: "It would take a fellow a long time to go to
him--if he wasn't in a hurry--hours, I think." "Very; no horse I could get could travel it faster than a walk." "Well," said I, "so much the better for us. Belden has a long story
to tell, and----"

"Doesn't wish to be interrupted. "Yes, sir; if he has to hobble on two sticks." "At what time do you look for him?" "_You_ will look for him as early as three o'clock. I shall be among the
mountains, ruefully eying my broken-down team." And leisurely donning
his hat he strolled away down the street like one who has the whole day
on his hands and does not know what to do with it. Belden's story, she at once
composed herself to the task, with the following result. BELDEN'S NARRATIVE


    "Cursed, destructive Avarice,
     Thou everlasting foe to Love and Honor." "Mischief never thrives
     Without the help of Woman." IT will be a year next July since I first saw Mary Leavenworth. I
was living at that time a most monotonous existence. Loving what was
beautiful, hating what was sordid, drawn by nature towards all that
was romantic and uncommon, but doomed by my straitened position and the
loneliness of my widowhood to spend my days in the weary round of plain
sewing, I had begun to think that the shadow of a humdrum old age
was settling down upon me, when one morning, in the full tide of my
dissatisfaction, Mary Leavenworth stepped across the threshold of my
door and, with one smile, changed the whole tenor of my life. This may seem exaggeration to you, especially when I say that her errand
was simply one of business, she having heard I was handy with my needle;
but if you could have seen her as she appeared that day, marked the look
with which she approached me, and the smile with which she left, you
would pardon the folly of a romantic old woman, who beheld a fairy queen
in this lovely young lady. The fact is, I was dazzled by her beauty and
her charms. And when, a few days after, she came again, and crouching
down on the stool at my feet, said she was so tired of the gossip and
tumult down at the hotel, that it was a relief to run away and hide with
some one who would let her act like the child she was, I experienced
for the moment, I believe, the truest happiness of my life. Meeting her
advances with all the warmth her manner invited, I found her ere long
listening eagerly while I told her, almost without my own volition, the
story of my past life, in the form of an amusing allegory. The next day saw her in the same place; and the next; always with the
eager, laughing eyes, and the fluttering, uneasy hands, that grasped
everything they touched, and broke everything they grasped. But the fourth day she was not there, nor the fifth, nor the sixth, and
I was beginning to feel the old shadow settling back upon me, when one
night, just as the dusk of twilight was merging into evening gloom, she
came stealing in at the front door, and, creeping up to my side, put her
hands over my eyes with such a low, ringing laugh, that I started. "You don't know what to make of me!" she cried, throwing aside her
cloak, and revealing herself in the full splendor of evening attire. "I
don't know what to make of myself. Though it seems folly, I felt that
I must run away and tell some one that a certain pair of eyes have been
looking into mine, and that for the first time in my life I feel
myself a woman as well as a queen." And with a glance in which coyness
struggled with pride, she gathered up her cloak around her, and
laughingly cried:

"Have you had a visit from a flying sprite? Has one little ray of
moonlight found its way into your prison for a wee moment, with Mary's
laugh and Mary's snowy silk and flashing diamonds? and she patted
my cheek, and smiled so bewilderingly, that even now, with all the
dull horror of these after-events crowding upon me, I cannot but feel
something like tears spring to my eyes at the thought of it. "And so the Prince has come for you?" I whispered, alluding to a story I
had told her the last time she had visited me; a story in which a girl,
who had waited all her life in rags and degradation for the lordly
knight who was to raise her from a hovel to a throne, died just as her
one lover, an honest peasant-lad whom she had discarded in her pride,
arrived at her door with the fortune he had spent all his days in
amassing for her sake. But at this she flushed, and drew back towards the door. "I don't know;
I am afraid not. I--I don't think anything about that. Princes are not
so easily won," she murmured. But she only shook her fairy head, and replied: "No, no; that would be
spoiling the romance, indeed. I have come upon you like a sprite, and
like a sprite I will go." And, flashing like the moonbeam she was, she
glided out into the night, and floated away down the street. When she next came, I observed a feverish excitement in her manner,
which assured me, even plainer than the coy sweetness displayed in
our last interview, that her heart had been touched by her lover's
attentions. Indeed, she hinted as much before she left, saying in a
melancholy tone, when I had ended my story in the usual happy way, with
kisses and marriage, "I shall never marry!" finishing the exclamation
with a long-drawn sigh, that somehow emboldened me to say, perhaps
because I knew she had no mother:

"And why? What reason can there be for such rosy lips saying their
possessor will never marry?" She gave me one quick look, and then dropped her eyes. I feared I had
offended her, and was feeling very humble, when she suddenly replied, in
an even but low tone, "I said I should never marry, because the one man
who pleases me can never be my husband." All the hidden romance in my nature started at once into life. "There is nothing to tell," said she; "only I have been so weak as
to"--she would not say, fall in love, she was a proud woman--"admire a
man whom my uncle will never allow me to marry." And she rose as if to go; but I drew her back. "Whom your uncle will not
allow you to marry!" "No; uncle loves money, but not to such an extent as that. He is the owner of a beautiful place in his own
country----"

"Own country?" "No," she returned; "he is an Englishman." I did not see why she need say that in just the way she did, but,
supposing she was aggravated by some secret memory, went on to inquire:
"Then what difficulty can there be? Isn't he--" I was going to say
steady, but refrained. "He is an Englishman," she emphasized in the same bitter tone as
before. "In saying that, I say it all. Uncle will never let me marry an
Englishman." Such a puerile reason as this had never
entered my mind. "He has an absolute mania on the subject," resumed she. "I might as well
ask him to allow me to drown myself as to marry an Englishman." A woman of truer judgment than myself would have said: "Then, if that is
so, why not discard from your breast all thought of him? Why dance with
him, and talk to him, and let your admiration develop into love?" But
I was all romance then, and, angry at a prejudice I could neither
understand nor appreciate, I said:

"But that is mere tyranny! And why,
if he does, should you feel yourself obliged to gratify him in a whim so
unreasonable?" "Yes," I returned; "tell me everything." "Well, then, if you want to know the worst of me, as you already know
the best, I hate to incur my uncle's displeasure, because--because--I
have always been brought up to regard myself as his heiress, and I
know that if I were to marry contrary to his wishes, he would instantly
change his mind, and leave me penniless." "But," I cried, my romance a little dampened by this admission, "you
tell me Mr. Clavering has enough to live upon, so you would not want;
and if you love--"

Her violet eyes fairly flashed in her amazement. "You don't understand," she said; "Mr. Clavering is not poor; but uncle
is rich. I shall be a queen--" There she paused, trembling, and falling
on my breast. "Oh, it sounds mercenary, I know, but it is the fault of
my bringing up. And yet"--her whole face softening with the light of
another emotion, "I cannot say to Henry Clavering, 'Go! my prospects are
dearer to me than you!' said I, determined to get at the truth of the
matter if possible. If you knew me, you
would say it was." And, turning, she took her stand before a picture
that hung on the wall of my sitting-room. It was one of a pair of good photographs I possessed. "Yes," I remarked, "that is why I prize it." She did not seem to hear me; she was absorbed in gazing at the exquisite
face before her. "That is a winning face," I heard her say. I wonder if she would ever hesitate between love and money. I
do not believe she would," her own countenance growing gloomy and sad
as she said so; "she would think only of the happiness she would confer;
she is not hard like me. I think she had forgotten my presence, for at the mention of her
cousin's name she turned quickly round with a half suspicious look,
saying lightly:

"My dear old Mamma Hubbard looks horrified. She did not know she had
such a very unromantic little wretch for a listener, when she was
telling all those wonderful stories of Love slaying dragons, and living
in caves, and walking over burning ploughshares as if they were tufts of
spring grass?" "No," I said, taking her with an irresistible impulse of admiring
affection into my arms; "but if I had, it would have made no difference. I should still have talked about love, and of all it can do to make this
weary workaday world sweet and delightful." Then you do not think me such a wretch?" I thought her the winsomest being in the world, and
frankly told her so. Instantly she brightened into her very gayest self. Not that I thought then, much less do I think now, she partially
cared for my good opinion; but her nature demanded admiration, and
unconsciously blossomed under it, as a flower under the sunshine. "And you will still let me come and tell you how bad I am,--that is, if
I go on being bad, as I doubtless shall to the end of the chapter? "Not if I should do a dreadful thing? Not if I should run away with my
lover some fine night, and leave uncle to discover how his affectionate
partiality had been requited?" It was lightly said, and lightly meant, for she did not even wait for my
reply. But its seed sank deep into our two hearts for all that. And for
the next few days I spent my time in planning how I should manage, if
it should ever fall to my lot to conduct to a successful issue so
enthralling a piece of business as an elopement. You may imagine, then,
how delighted I was, when one evening Hannah, this unhappy girl who
is now lying dead under my roof, and who was occupying the position of
lady's maid to Miss Mary Leavenworth at that time, came to my door with
a note from her mistress, running thus:


    "Have the loveliest story of the season ready for me tomorrow; and
    let the prince be as handsome as--as some one you have heard of,
    and the princess as foolish as your little yielding pet,

    "MARY." Which short note could only mean that she was engaged. But the next day
did not bring me my Mary, nor the next, nor the next; and beyond hearing
that Mr. Leavenworth had returned from his trip I received neither word
nor token. Two more days dragged by, when, just as twilight set in, she
came. It had been a week since I had seen her, but it might have been
a year from the change I observed in her countenance and expression. I
could scarcely greet her with any show of pleasure, she was so unlike
her former self. "You
expected revelations, whispered hopes, and all manner of sweet
confidences; and you see, instead, a cold, bitter woman, who for
the first time in your presence feels inclined to be reserved and
uncommunicative." "That is because you have had more to trouble than encourage you in your
love," I returned, though not without a certain shrinking, caused more
by her manner than words. She did not reply to this, but rose and paced the floor, coldly at
first, but afterwards with a certain degree of excitement that proved
to be the prelude to a change in her manner; for, suddenly pausing, she
turned to me and said: "Mr. "Yes, my uncle commanded me to dismiss him, and I obeyed." The work dropped from my hands, in my heartfelt disappointment. "Yes; he had not been in the house five minutes before Eleanore told
him." I was foolish enough
to give her the cue in my first moment of joy and weakness. I did
not think of the consequences; but I might have known. "I do not call it conscientiousness to tell another's secrets," I
returned. "That is because you are not Eleanore." Not having a reply for this, I said, "And so your uncle did not regard
your engagement with favor?" Did I not tell you he would never allow me to marry an
Englishman? Let the hard, cruel man have his
way?" She was walking off to look again at that picture which had attracted
her attention the time before, but at this word gave me one little
sidelong look that was inexpressibly suggestive. "I obeyed him when he commanded, if that is what you mean." Clavering after having given him your word of honor
to be his wife?" "Why not, when I found I could not keep my word." "Then you have decided not to marry him?" She did not reply at once, but lifted her face mechanically to the
picture. "My uncle would tell you that I had decided to be governed wholly by
his wishes!" she responded at last with what I felt was self-scornful
bitterness. and instantly blushed, startled that I had called her by her
first name. "Is it not my manifest
duty to be governed by my uncle's wishes? Has he not brought me up from
childhood? made me all I am, even to the
love of riches which he has instilled into my soul with every gift he
has thrown into my lap, every word he has dropped into my ear, since I
was old enough to know what riches meant? Is it for me now to turn my
back upon fostering care so wise, beneficent, and free, just because
a man whom I have known some two weeks chances to offer me in exchange
what he pleases to call his love?" "But," I feebly essayed, convinced perhaps by the tone of sarcasm in
which this was uttered that she was not far from my way of thinking
after all, "if in two weeks you have learned to love this man more than
everything else, even the riches which make your uncle's favor a thing
of such moment--"

"Well," said she, "what then?" "Why, then I would say, secure your happiness with the man of your
choice, if you have to marry him in secret, trusting to your influence
over your uncle to win the forgiveness he never can persistently deny." You should have seen the arch expression which stole across her face
at that. "Would it not be better," she asked, creeping to my arms, and
laying her head on my shoulder, "would it not be better for me to make
sure of that uncle's favor first, before undertaking the hazardous
experiment of running away with a too ardent lover?" Struck by her manner, I lifted her face and looked at it. "Oh, my darling," said I, "you have not, then dismissed Mr. "I have sent him away," she whispered demurely. "Oh, you dear old Mamma Hubbard; what a matchmaker you are, to be sure! You appear as much interested as if you were the lover yourself." "He will wait for me," said she. The next day I submitted to her the plan I had formed for her
clandestine intercourse with Mr. It was for them both to
assume names, she taking mine, as one less liable to provoke conjecture
than a strange name, and he that of LeRoy Robbins. The plan pleased
her, and with the slight modification of a secret sign being used on the
envelope, to distinguish her letters from mine, was at once adopted. And so it was I took the fatal step that has involved me in all this
trouble. With the gift of my name to this young girl to use as she
would and sign what she would, I seemed to part with what was left me of
judgment and discretion. Henceforth, I was only her scheming, planning,
devoted slave; now copying the letters which she brought me, and
enclosing them to the false name we had agreed upon, and now busying
myself in devising ways to forward to her those which I received from
him, without risk of discovery. Hannah was the medium we employed, as
Mary felt it would not be wise for her to come too often to my house. To this girl's charge, then, I gave such notes as I could not forward in
any other way, secure in the reticence of her nature, as well as in her
inability to read, that these letters addressed to Mrs. Amy Belden would
arrive at their proper destination without mishap. At all events, no difficulty that I ever heard of arose out
of the use of this girl as a go-between. Clavering, who had left an invalid mother
in England, was suddenly summoned home. He prepared to go, but, flushed
with love, distracted by doubts, smitten with the fear that, once
withdrawn from the neighborhood of a woman so universally courted as
Mary, he would stand small chance of retaining his position in her
regard, he wrote to her, telling his fears and asking her to marry him
before he went. "Make me your husband, and I will follow your wishes in all things,"
he wrote. "The certainty that you are mine will make parting possible;
without it, I cannot go; no, not if my mother should die without the
comfort of saying good-bye to her only child." By some chance she was in my house when I brought this letter from the
post-office, and I shall never forget how she started when she read it. But, from looking as if she had received an insult, she speedily settled
down into a calm consideration of the subject, writing and delivering
into my charge for copying a few lines in which she promised to accede
to his request, if he would agree to leave the public declaration of the
marriage to her discretion, and consent to bid her farewell at the door
of the church or wherever the ceremony of marriage should take place,
never to come into her presence again till such declaration had been
made. Of course this brought in a couple of days the sure response:
"Anything, so you will be mine." And Amy Belden's wits and powers of planning were all summoned into
requisition for the second time, to devise how this matter could be
arranged without subjecting the parties to the chance of detection. In the first place, it was essential
that the marriage should come off within three days, Mr. Clavering
having, upon the receipt of her letter, secured his passage upon a
steamer that sailed on the following Saturday; and, next, both he and
Miss Leavenworth were too conspicuous in their personal appearance to
make it at all possible for them to be secretly married anywhere within
gossiping distance of this place. And yet it was desirable that the
scene of the ceremony should not be too far away, or the time occupied
in effecting the journey to and from the place would necessitate an
absence from the hotel on the part of Miss Leavenworth long enough to
arouse the suspicions of Eleanore; something which Mary felt it wiser
to avoid. Her uncle, I have forgotten to say, was not here--having gone
away again shortly after the apparent dismissal of Mr. F----, then, was the only town I could think of which combined the two
advantages of distance and accessibility. Although upon the railroad, it
was an insignificant place, and had, what was better yet, a very obscure
man for its clergyman, living, which was best of all, not ten rods from
the depot. Making inquiries, I found that it
could be done, and, all alive to the romance of the occasion, proceeded
to plan the details. And now I am coming to what might have caused the overthrow of the
whole scheme: I allude to the detection on the part of Eleanore of the
correspondence between Mary and Mr. Hannah,
who, in her frequent visits to my house, had grown very fond of my
society, had come in to sit with me for a while one evening. She had not
been in the house, however, more than ten minutes, before there came a
knock at the front door; and going to it I saw Mary, as I supposed, from
the long cloak she wore, standing before me. Thinking she had come with
a letter for Mr. Clavering, I grasped her arm and drew her into the
hall, saying, "Have you got it? I must post it to-night, or he will not
receive it in time." There I paused, for, the panting creature I had by the arm turning upon
me, I saw myself confronted by a stranger. "You have made a mistake," she cried. "I am Eleanore Leavenworth, and I
have come for my girl Hannah. I could only raise my hand in apprehension, and point to the girl
sitting in the corner of the room before her. Miss Leavenworth
immediately turned back. "Hannah, I want you," said she, and would have left the house without
another word, but I caught her by the arm. "Oh, miss--" I began, but she gave me such a look, I dropped her arm. And, with a glance to see if Hannah were following her,
she went out. For an hour I sat crouched on the stair just where she had left me. Then
I went to bed, but I did not sleep a wink that night. You can imagine,
then, my wonder when, with the first glow of the early morning light,
Mary, looking more beautiful than ever, came running up the steps and
into the room where I was, with the letter for Mr. I cried in my joy and relief, "didn't she understand me, then?" The gay look on Mary's face turned to one of reckless scorn. "If you
mean Eleanore, yes. I couldn't keep it secret after the
mistake you made last evening; so I did the next best thing, told her
the truth." "Not that you were about to be married?" "And you did not find her as angry as you expected?" "I will not say that; she was angry enough. And yet," continued Mary,
with a burst of self-scornful penitence, "I will not call Eleanore's
lofty indignation anger. She was grieved, Mamma Hubbard, grieved." And
with a laugh which I believe was rather the result of her own relief
than of any wish to reflect on her cousin, she threw her head on one
side and eyed me with a look which seemed to say, "Do I plague you so
very much, you dear old Mamma Hubbard?" She did plague me, and I could not conceal it. "And will she not tell
her uncle?" The naive expression on Mary's face quickly changed. I felt a heavy hand, hot with fever, lifted from my heart. The plan agreed upon between us for the carrying out of our intentions
was this. At the time appointed, Mary was to excuse herself to her
cousin upon the plea that she had promised to take me to see a friend
in the next town. She was then to enter a buggy previously ordered, and
drive here, where I was to join her. We were then to proceed immediately
to the minister's house in F----, where we had reason to believe we
should find everything prepared for us. But in this plan, simple as it
was, one thing was forgotten, and that was the character of Eleanore's
love for her cousin. That her suspicions would be aroused we did
not doubt; but that she would actually follow Mary up and demand an
explanation of her conduct, was what neither she, who knew her so well,
nor I, who knew her so little, ever imagined possible. Mary, who had followed out the
programme to the point of leaving a little note of excuse on Eleanore's
dressing-table, had come to my house, and was just taking off her long
cloak to show me her dress, when there came a commanding knock at
the front door. Hastily pulling her cloak about her I ran to open it,
intending, you may be sure, to dismiss my visitor with short ceremony,
when I heard a voice behind me say, "Good heavens, it is Eleanore!" and,
glancing back, saw Mary looking through the window-blind upon the porch
without. why, open the door and let her in; I am not afraid of Eleanore." I immediately did so, and Eleanore Leavenworth, very pale, but with
a resolute countenance, walked into the house and into this room,
confronting Mary in very nearly the same spot where you are now sitting. "I have come," said she, lifting a face whose expression of mingled
sweetness and power I could not but admire, even in that moment of
apprehension, "to ask you without any excuse for my request, if you will
allow me to accompany you upon your drive this morning?" Mary, who had drawn herself up to meet some word of accusation or
appeal, turned carelessly away to the glass. "I am very sorry," she
said, "but the buggy holds only two, and I shall be obliged to refuse." "But I do not wish your company, Eleanore. We are off on a pleasure
trip, and desire to have our fun by ourselves." "And you will not allow me to accompany you?" "I cannot prevent your going in another carriage." Eleanore's face grew yet more earnest in its expression. "Mary," said
she, "we have been brought up together. I am your sister in affection
if not in blood, and I cannot see you start upon this adventure with no
other companion than this woman. Then tell me, shall I go with you, as a
sister, or on the road behind you as the enforced guardian of your honor
against your will?" "Now is it discreet or honorable in you to do this?" Mary's haughty lip took an ominous curve. "The same hand that raised you
has raised me," she cried bitterly. "This is no time to speak of that," returned Eleanore. All the antagonism of her nature was
aroused. She looked absolutely Juno-like in her wrath and reckless
menace. "Eleanore," she cried, "I am going to F---- to marry Mr. _Now_ do you wish to accompany me?" Leaping forward, she grasped her cousin's
arm and shook it. "To witness the marriage, if it be a true one; to step between you
and shame if any element of falsehood should come in to affect its
legality." Mary's hand fell from her cousin's arm. "I do not understand you,"
said she. "I thought you never gave countenance to what you considered
wrong." "Nor do I. Any one who knows me will understand that I do not give my
approval to this marriage just because I attend its ceremonial in the
capacity of an unwilling witness." "Because I value your honor above my own peace. Because I love our
common benefactor, and know that he would never pardon me if I let his
darling be married, however contrary her union might be to his wishes,
without lending the support of my presence to make the transaction at
least a respectable one." "But in so doing you will be involved in a world of deception--which you
hate." Clavering does not return with me, Eleanore." Mary's face crimsoned, and she turned slowly away. "What every other girl does under such circumstances, I suppose. The
development of more reasonable feelings in an obdurate parent's heart." Eleanore sighed, and a short silence ensued, broken by Eleanore's
suddenly falling upon her knees, and clasping her cousin's hand. "Oh,
Mary," she sobbed, her haughtiness all disappearing in a gush of wild
entreaty, "consider what you are doing! Think, before it is too late, of
the consequences which must follow such an act as this. Marriage founded
upon deception can never lead to happiness. Love would have led you either to have dismissed Mr. Clavering at once,
or to have openly accepted the fate which a union with him would bring. Only passion stoops to subterfuge like this. And you," she continued,
rising and turning toward me in a sort of forlorn hope very touching
to see, "can you see this young motherless girl, driven by caprice, and
acknowledging no moral restraint, enter upon the dark and crooked path
she is planning for herself, without uttering one word of warning and
appeal? Tell me, mother of children dead and buried, what excuse you
will have for your own part in this day's work, when she, with her
face marred by the sorrows which must follow this deception, comes to
you----"

"The same excuse, probably," Mary's voice broke in, chill and strained,
"which you will have when uncle inquires how you came to allow such an
act of disobedience to be perpetrated in his absence: that she could not
help herself, that Mary would gang her ain gait, and every one around
must accommodate themselves to it." It was like a draught of icy air suddenly poured into a room heated up
to fever point. Eleanore stiffened immediately, and drawing back, pale
and composed, turned upon her cousin with the remark:

"Then nothing can move you?" The curling of Mary's lips was her only reply. Raymond, I do not wish to weary you with my feelings, but the first
great distrust I ever felt of my wisdom in pushing this matter so far
came with that curl of Mary's lip. More plainly than Eleanore's words it
showed me the temper with which she was entering upon this undertaking;
and, struck with momentary dismay, I advanced to speak when Mary stopped
me. "There, now, Mamma Hubbard, don't you go and acknowledge that you
are frightened, for I won't hear it. I have promised to marry Henry
Clavering to-day, and I am going to keep my word--if I don't love him,"
she added with bitter emphasis. Then, smiling upon me in a way which
caused me to forget everything save the fact that she was going to her
bridal, she handed me her veil to fasten. As I was doing this, with very
trembling fingers, she said, looking straight at Eleanore:

"You have shown yourself more interested in my fate than I had any
reason to expect. Will you continue to display this concern all the way
to F----, or may I hope for a few moments of peace in which to dream
upon the step which, according to you, is about to hurl upon me such
dreadful consequences?" "If I go with you to F----," Eleanore returned, "it is as a witness, no
more. "Very well, then," Mary said, dimpling with sudden gayety; "I suppose
I shall have to accept the situation. Mamma Hubbard, I am so sorry to
disappoint you, but the buggy _won't_ hold three. If you are good you
shall be the first to congratulate me when I come home to-night." And,
almost before I knew it, the two had taken their seats in the buggy that
was waiting at the door. "Good-by," cried Mary, waving her hand from the
back; "wish me much joy--of my ride." I tried to do so, but the words wouldn't come. I could only wave my hand
in response, and rush sobbing into the house. Of that day, and its long hours of alternate remorse and anxiety, I
cannot trust myself to speak. Let me come at once to the time when,
seated alone in my lamp-lighted room, I waited and watched for the token
of their return which Mary had promised me. It came in the shape of Mary
herself, who, wrapped in her long cloak, and with her beautiful face
aglow with blushes, came stealing into the house just as I was beginning
to despair. A strain of wild music from the hotel porch, where they were having a
dance, entered with her, producing such a weird effect upon my fancy
that I was not at all surprised when, in flinging off her cloak, she
displayed garments of bridal white and a head crowned with snowy roses. I cried, bursting into tears; "you are then----"

"Mrs. "Without a bridal," I murmured, taking her passionately into my embrace. Nestling close to me, she gave
herself up for one wild moment to a genuine burst of tears, saying
between her sobs all manner of tender things; telling me how she loved
me, and how I was the only one in all the world to whom she dared come
on this, her wedding night, for comfort or congratulation, and of how
frightened she felt now it was all over, as if with her name she had
parted with something of inestimable value. "And does not the thought of having made some one the proudest of men
solace you?" I asked, more than dismayed at this failure of mine to make
these lovers happy. "I don't know," she sobbed. "What satisfaction can it be for him to
feel himself tied for life to a girl who, sooner than lose a prospective
fortune, subjected him to such a parting?" "Tell me about it," said I.

But she was not in the mood at that moment. The excitement of the day
had been too much for her. A thousand fears seemed to beset her mind. Crouching down on the stool at my feet, she sat with her hands folded
and a glare on her face that lent an aspect of strange unreality to her
brilliant attire. The thought haunts me
every moment; how can I keep it secret!" "Why, is there any danger of its being known?" "It all went off well, but----"

"Where is the danger, then?" "I cannot say; but some deeds are like ghosts. They will not be laid;
they reappear; they gibber; they make themselves known whether we will
or not. I was mad, reckless, what you
will. But ever since the night has come, I have felt it crushing upon me
like a pall that smothers life and youth and love out of my heart. While
the sunlight remained I could endure it; but now--oh, Auntie, I have
done something that will keep me in constant fear. I have allied myself
to a living apprehension. "For two hours I have played at being gay. Dressed in my bridal white,
and crowned with roses, I have greeted my friends as if they were
wedding-guests, and made believe to myself that all the compliments
bestowed upon me--and they are only too numerous--were just so many
congratulations upon my marriage. But it was no use; Eleanore knew it
was no use. She has gone to her room to pray, while I--I have come here
for the first time, perhaps for the last, to fall at some one's feet and
cry,--' God have mercy upon me!'" "Oh, Mary, have I only
succeeded, then, in making you miserable?" She did not answer; she was engaged in picking up the crown of roses
which had fallen from her hair to the floor. "If I had not been taught to love money so!" "If,
like Eleanore, I could look upon the splendor which has been ours from
childhood as a mere accessory of life, easy to be dropped at the call of
duty or affection! If prestige, adulation, and elegant belongings were
not so much to me; or love, friendship, and domestic happiness more! If only I could walk a step without dragging the chain of a thousand
luxurious longings after me. Imperious as she often is in
her beautiful womanhood, haughty as she can be when the delicate quick
of her personality is touched too rudely, I have known her to sit by the
hour in a low, chilly, ill-lighted and ill-smelling garret, cradling a
dirty child on her knee, and feeding with her own hand an impatient old
woman whom no one else would consent to touch. they talk about
repentance and a change of heart! If some one or something would only
change mine! no hope of my ever being
anything else than what I am: a selfish, wilful, mercenary girl." Nor was this mood a mere transitory one. That same night she made a
discovery which increased her apprehension almost to terror. This was
nothing less than the fact that Eleanore had been keeping a diary of
the last few weeks. "Oh," she cried in relating this to me the next day,
"what security shall I ever feel as long as this diary of hers remains
to confront me every time I go into her room? And she will not consent
to destroy it, though I have done my best to show her that it is a
betrayal of the trust I reposed in her. She says it is all she has to
show in the way of defence, if uncle should ever accuse her of treachery
to him and his happiness. She promises to keep it locked up; but what
good will that do! A thousand accidents might happen, any of them
sufficient to throw it into uncle's hands. I shall never feel safe for a
moment while it exists." I endeavored to calm her by saying that if Eleanore was without malice,
such fears were groundless. But she would not be comforted, and seeing
her so wrought up, I suggested that Eleanore should be asked to trust it
into my keeping till such time as she should feel the necessity of using
it. "O yes," she cried; "and I will
put my certificate with it, and so get rid of all my care at once." And before the afternoon was over, she had seen Eleanore and made her
request. It was acceded to with this proviso, that I was neither to destroy nor
give up all or any of the papers except upon their united demand. A
small tin box was accordingly procured, into which were put all the
proofs of Mary's marriage then existing, viz. Clavering's letters, and such leaves from Eleanore's diary as referred
to this matter. It was then handed over to me with the stipulation
I have already mentioned, and I stowed it away in a certain closet
upstairs, where it has lain undisturbed till last night. Belden paused, and, blushing painfully, raised her eyes to
mine with a look in which anxiety and entreaty were curiously blended. "I don't know what you will say," she began, "but, led away by my
fears, I took that box out of its hiding-place last evening and,
notwithstanding your advice, carried it from the house, and it is
now----"

"In my possession," I quietly finished. I don't think I ever saw her look more astounded, not even when I told
her of Hannah's death. "I left it last
night in the old barn that was burned down. I merely meant to hide it
for the present, and could think of no better place in my hurry; for the
barn is said to be haunted--a man hung himself there once--and no one
ever goes there. she cried, "unless----"

"Unless I found and brought it away before the barn was destroyed," I
suggested. "Yes," said I. Then, as I felt my own countenance redden, hastened to
add: "We have been playing strange and unaccustomed parts, you and I.
Some time, when all these dreadful events shall be a mere dream of the
past, we will ask each other's pardon. The
box is safe, and I am anxious to hear the rest of your story." This seemed to compose her, and after a minute she continued:

Mary seemed more like herself after this. Leavenworth's return and their subsequent preparations for departure,
I saw but little more of her, what I did see was enough to make me
fear that, with the locking up of the proofs of her marriage, she was
indulging the idea that the marriage itself had become void. But I may
have wronged her in this. The story of those few weeks is almost finished. On the eve of the day
before she left, Mary came to my house to bid me good-by. She had a
present in her hand the value of which I will not state, as I did not
take it, though she coaxed me with all her prettiest wiles. But she said
something that night that I have never been able to forget. I had been speaking of my hope that before two months had elapsed she
would find herself in a position to send for Mr. Clavering, and that
when that day came I should wish to be advised of it; when she suddenly
interrupted me by saying:

"Uncle will never be won upon, as you call it, while he lives. If I was
convinced of it before, I am sure of it now. Nothing but his death will
ever make it possible for me to send for Mr. Then, seeing
me look aghast at the long period of separation which this seemed to
betoken, blushed a little and whispered: "The prospect looks somewhat
dubious, doesn't it? "But," said I, "your uncle is only little past the prime of life and
appears to be in robust health; it will be years of waiting, Mary." "I don't know," she muttered, "I think not. Uncle is not as strong as he
looks and--" She did not say any more, horrified perhaps at the turn the
conversation was taking. But there was an expression on her countenance
that set me thinking at the time, and has kept me thinking ever since. Not that any actual dread of such an occurrence as has since happened
came to oppress my solitude during the long months which now intervened. I was as yet too much under the spell of her charm to allow anything
calculated to throw a shadow over her image to remain long in my
thoughts. But when, some time in the fall, a letter came to me
personally from Mr. Clavering, filled with a vivid appeal to tell
him something of the woman who, in spite of her vows, doomed him to a
suspense so cruel, and when, on the evening of the same day, a friend
of mine who had just returned from New York spoke of meeting Mary
Leavenworth at some gathering, surrounded by manifest admirers, I began
to realize the alarming features of the affair, and, sitting down, I
wrote her a letter. Not in the strain in which I had been accustomed to
talk to her,--I had not her pleading eyes and trembling, caressing hands
ever before me to beguile my judgment from its proper exercise,--but
honestly and earnestly, telling her how Mr. Clavering felt, and what a
risk she ran in keeping so ardent a lover from his rights. Robbins out of my calculations for the present, and
advise you to do the same. As for the gentleman himself, I have told him
that when I could receive him I would be careful to notify him. "But do not let him be discouraged," she added in a postscript. "When he
does receive his happiness, it will be a satisfying one." Ah, it is that _when_ which is likely to ruin all! But, intent only upon fulfilling her will, I sat down and wrote a letter
to Mr. Clavering, in which I stated what she had said, and begged him
to have patience, adding that I would surely let him know if any change
took place in Mary or her circumstances. And, having despatched it to
his address in London, awaited the development of events. In two weeks I heard of the sudden
death of Mr. Stebbins, the minister who had married them; and while
yet laboring under the agitation produced by this shock, was further
startled by seeing in a New York paper the name of Mr. Clavering among
the list of arrivals at the Hoffman House; showing that my letter to
him had failed in its intended effect, and that the patience Mary had
calculated upon so blindly was verging to its end. I was consequently
far from being surprised when, in a couple of weeks or so afterwards,
a letter came from him to my address, which, owing to the careless
omission of the private mark upon the envelope, I opened, and read
enough to learn that, driven to desperation by the constant failures
which he had experienced in all his endeavors to gain access to her in
public or private, a failure which he was not backward in ascribing
to her indisposition to see him, he had made up his mind to risk
everything, even her displeasure; and, by making an appeal to her uncle,
end the suspense under which he was laboring, definitely and at once. "I
want you," he wrote; "dowered or dowerless, it makes little difference
to me. If you will not come of yourself, then I must follow the example
of the brave knights, my ancestors; storm the castle that holds you, and
carry you off by force of arms." Neither can I say I was much surprised, knowing Mary as I did, when, in
a few days from this, she forwarded to me for copying, this reply: "If
Mr. Robbins ever expects to be happy with Amy Belden, let him reconsider
the determination of which he speaks. Not only would he by such an
action succeed in destroying the happiness of her he professes to love,
but run the greater risk of effectually annulling the affection which
makes the tie between them endurable." It was the cry of warning
which a spirited, self-contained creature gives when brought to bay. It
made even me recoil, though I had known from the first that her pretty
wilfulness was but the tossing foam floating above the soundless depths
of cold resolve and most deliberate purpose. What its real effect was upon him and her fate I can only conjecture. All I know is that in two weeks thereafter Mr. Leavenworth was found
murdered in his room, and Hannah Chester, coming direct to my door from
the scene of violence, begged me to take her in and secrete her from
public inquiry, as I loved and desired to serve Mary Leavenworth. UNEXPECTED TESTIMONY


    _Pol._ What do you read, my lord? BELDEN paused, lost in the sombre shadow which these words were
calculated to evoke, and a short silence fell upon the room. It was
broken by my asking for some account of the occurrence she had just
mentioned, it being considered a mystery how Hannah could have found
entrance into her house without the knowledge of the neighbors. "Well," said she, "it was a chilly night, and I had gone to bed early
(I was sleeping then in the room off this) when, at about a quarter to
one--the last train goes through R---- at 12.50--there came a low knock
on the window-pane at the head of my bed. Thinking that some of the
neighbors were sick, I hurriedly rose on my elbow and asked who
was there. The answer came in low, muffled tones, 'Hannah, Miss
Leavenworth's girl! Startled at
hearing the well-known voice, and fearing I knew not what, I caught up
a lamp and hurried round to the door. But no sooner had she done so than
my strength failed me, and I had to sit down, for I saw she looked very
pale and strange, was without baggage, and altogether had the appearance
of some wandering spirit. what brings you here in this condition and at this time
of night?' 'Miss Leavenworth has sent me,' she replied, in the low,
monotonous tone of one repeating a lesson by rote. 'She told me to come
here; said you would keep me. I am not to go out of the house, and no
one is to know I am here.' I asked, trembling with a thousand
undefined fears; 'what has occurred?' 'I dare not say,' she whispered;
'I am forbid; I am just to stay here, and keep quiet.' 'But,' I began,
helping her to take off her shawl,--the dingy blanket advertised for
in the papers--'you must tell me. She surely did not forbid you to tell
_me?_' 'Yes she did; every one,' the girl replied, growing white in her
persistence, 'and I never break my word; fire couldn't draw it out
of me.' She looked so determined, so utterly unlike herself, as I
remembered her in the meek, unobtrusive days of our old acquaintance,
that I could do nothing but stare at her. 'You will keep me,' she said;
'you will not turn me away?' 'No,' I said, 'I will not turn you away.' Thanking me, she quietly followed me
up-stairs. I put her into the room in which you found her, because it
was the most secret one in the house; and there she has remained ever
since, satisfied and contented, as far as I could see, till this very
same horrible day." "Did you have no explanation with her
afterwards? Did she never give you any information in regard to the
transactions which led to her flight?" Neither then nor when,
upon the next day, I confronted her with the papers in my hand, and the
awful question upon my lips as to whether her flight had been occasioned
by the murder which had taken place in Mr. Leavenworth's household, did
she do more than acknowledge she had run away on this account. Some one
or something had sealed her lips, and, as she said, 'Fire and torture
should never make her speak.'" Another short pause followed this; then, with my mind still hovering
about the one point of intensest interest to me, I said:

"This story, then, this account which you have just given me of Mary
Leavenworth's secret marriage and the great strait it put her
into--a strait from which nothing but her uncle's death could relieve
her--together with this acknowledgment of Hannah's that she had left
home and taken refuge here on the insistence of Mary Leavenworth, is the
groundwork you have for the suspicions you have mentioned?" "Yes, sir; that and the proof of her interest in the matter which is
given by the letter I received from her yesterday, and which you say you
have now in your possession." Belden went on in a broken voice, "that it is wrong, in a
serious case like this, to draw hasty conclusions; but, oh, sir, how can
I help it, knowing what I do?" I did not answer; I was revolving in my mind the old question: was it
possible, in face of all these later developments, still to believe Mary
Leavenworth's own hand guiltless of her uncle's blood? "It is dreadful to come to such conclusions," proceeded Mrs. Belden,
"and nothing but her own words written in her own hand would ever have
driven me to them, but----"

"Pardon me," I interrupted; "but you said in the beginning of this
interview that you did not believe Mary herself had any direct hand in
her uncle's murder. Whatever I may think of her influence in inducing
it, I never could imagine her as having anything to do with its actual
performance. whatever was done on that dreadful night,
Mary Leavenworth never put hand to pistol or ball, or even stood by
while they were used; that you may be sure of. Only the man who loved
her, longed for her, and felt the impossibility of obtaining her by any
other means, could have found nerve for an act so horrible." "Then you think----"

"Mr. I do: and oh, sir, when you consider that he
is her husband, is it not dreadful enough?" "It is, indeed," said I, rising to conceal how much I was affected by
this conclusion of hers. Something in my tone or appearance seemed to startle her. "I hope and
trust I have not been indiscreet," she cried, eying me with something
like an incipient distrust. "With this dead girl lying in my house, I
ought to be very careful, I know, but----"

"You have said nothing," was my earnest assurance as I edged towards the
door in my anxiety to escape, if but for a moment, from an atmosphere
that was stifling me. "No one can blame you for anything you have
either said or done to-day. But"--and here I paused and walked hurriedly
back,--"I wish to ask one question more. Have you any reason, beyond
that of natural repugnance to believing a young and beautiful woman
guilty of a great crime, for saying what you have of Henry Clavering, a
gentleman who has hitherto been mentioned by you with respect?" "No," she whispered, with a touch of her old agitation. I felt the reason insufficient, and turned away with something of the
same sense of suffocation with which I had heard that the missing key
had been found in Eleanore Leavenworth's possession. "You must excuse
me," I said; "I want to be a moment by myself, in order to ponder over
the facts which I have just heard; I will soon return "; and without
further ceremony, hurried from the room. By some indefinable impulse, I went immediately up-stairs, and took my
stand at the western window of the large room directly over Mrs. The blinds were closed; the room was shrouded in funereal gloom, but
its sombreness and horror were for the moment unfelt; I was engaged in
a fearful debate with myself. Was Mary Leavenworth the principal, or
merely the accessory, in this crime? Gryce, the convictions of Eleanore, the circumstantial evidence even of
such facts as had come to our knowledge, preclude the possibility
that Mrs. That all the detectives
interested in the affair would regard the question as settled, I did not
doubt; but need it be? Was it utterly impossible to find evidence yet
that Henry Clavering was, after all, the assassin of Mr. Filled with the thought, I looked across the room to the closet where
lay the body of the girl who, according to all probability, had known
the truth of the matter, and a great longing seized me. Oh, why could
not the dead be made to speak? Why should she lie there so silent, so
pulseless, so inert, when a word from her were enough to decide the
awful question? Was there no power to compel those pallid lips to move? Carried away by the fervor of the moment, I made my way to her side. With what a mockery the closed lips and lids confronted
my demanding gaze! A stone could not have been more unresponsive. With a feeling that was almost like anger, I stood there, when--what
was it I saw protruding from beneath her shoulders where they crushed
against the bed? Dizzy with the sudden surprise, overcome with the wild hopes this
discovery awakened, I stooped in great agitation and drew the letter
out. Breaking it hastily open, I took
a glance at its contents. it was the work of the girl
herself!--its very appearance was enough to make that evident! Feeling
as if a miracle had happened, I hastened with it into the other room,
and set myself to decipher the awkward scrawl. This is what I saw, rudely printed in lead pencil on the inside of a
sheet of common writing-paper:

"I am a wicked girl. I have knone things all the time which I had ought
to have told but I didn't dare to he said he would kill me if I did I
mene the tall splendud looking gentulman with the black mustash who I
met coming out of Mister Levenworth's room with a key in his hand the
night Mr. He was so scared he gave me money and
made me go away and come here and keep every thing secret but I can't do
so no longer. I seem to see Miss Elenor all the time crying and asking
me if I want her sent to prisun. And this is
the truth and my last words and I pray every body's forgivness and hope
nobody will blame me and that they wont bother Miss Elenor any more but
go and look after the handsome gentulman with the black mushtash." THE PROBLEM SOLVED



XXXIV. GRYCE RESUMES CONTROL


    "It out-herods Herod." --Richard III

A HALF-HOUR had passed. The train upon which I had every reason to
expect Mr. Gryce had arrived, and I stood in the doorway awaiting with
indescribable agitation the slow and labored approach of the motley
group of men and women whom I had observed leave the depot at the
departure of the cars. Was the telegram of a
nature peremptory enough to make his presence here, sick as he was, an
absolute certainty? The written confession of Hannah throbbing against
my heart, a heart all elation now, as but a short half-hour before it
had been all doubt and struggle, seemed to rustle distrust, and the
prospect of a long afternoon spent in impatience was rising before me,
when a portion of the advancing crowd turned off into a side street,
and I saw the form of Mr. Gryce hobbling, not on two sticks, but very
painfully on one, coming slowly down the street. His face, as he approached, was a study. "Well, well, well," he exclaimed, as we met at the gate; "this is a
pretty how-dye-do, I must say. and everything turned
topsy-turvy! Humph, and what do you think of Mary Leavenworth now?" It would therefore seem natural, in the conversation which followed his
introduction into the house and installment in Mrs. Belden's parlor,
that I should begin my narration by showing him Hannah's confession; but
it was not so. Whether it was that I felt anxious to have him go through
the same alternations of hope and fear it had been my lot to experience
since I came to R----; or whether, in the depravity of human nature,
there lingered within me sufficient resentment for the persistent
disregard he had always paid to my suspicions of Henry Clavering to make
it a matter of moment to me to spring this knowledge upon him just at
the instant his own convictions seemed to have reached the point of
absolute certainty, I cannot say. Enough that it was not till I had
given him a full account of every other matter connected with my stay in
this house; not till I saw his eye beaming, and his lip quivering with
the excitement incident upon the perusal of the letter from Mary, found
in Mrs. Belden's pocket; not, indeed, until I became assured from such
expressions as "Tremendous! Nothing
like it since the Lafarge affair!" that in another moment he would be
uttering some theory or belief that once heard would forever stand like
a barrier between us, did I allow myself to hand him the letter I had
taken from under the dead body of Hannah. I shall never forget his expression as he received it; "Good heavens!" I found it lying in her bed when
I went up, a half-hour ago, to take a second look at her." Opening it, he glanced over it with an incredulous air that speedily,
however, turned to one of the utmost astonishment, as he hastily perused
it, and then stood turning it over and over in his hand, examining it. "A remarkable piece of evidence," I observed, not without a certain
feeling of triumph; "quite changes the aspect of affairs!" he sharply retorted; then, whilst I stood staring at him in
amazement, his manner was so different from what I expected, looked up
and said: "You tell me that you found this in her bed. "Under the body of the girl herself," I returned. "I saw one corner of
it protruding from beneath her shoulders, and drew it out." "Was it folded or open, when you first
looked at it?" "Folded; fastened up in this envelope," showing it to him. He took it, looked at it for a moment, and went on with his questions. "This envelope has a very crumpled appearance, as well as the letter
itself. "Yes, not only so, but doubled up as you see." Folded, sealed, and then doubled up
as if her body had rolled across it while alive?" No look as if the thing had been insinuated there
since her death?" I should rather say that to every appearance she held it in
her hand when she lay down, but turning over, dropped it and then laid
upon it." Gryce's eyes, which had been very bright, ominously clouded;
evidently he had been disappointed in my answers, paying the letter
down, he stood musing, but suddenly lifted it again, scrutinized the
edges of the paper on which it was written, and, darting me a quick
look, vanished with it into the shade of the window curtain. His manner
was so peculiar, I involuntarily rose to follow; but he waved me back,
saying:

"Amuse yourself with that box on the table, which you had such an ado
over; see if it contains all we have a right to expect to find in it. I
want to be by myself for a moment." Subduing my astonishment, I proceeded to comply with his request, but
scarcely had I lifted the lid of the box before me when he came hurrying
back, flung the letter down on the table with an air of the greatest
excitement, and cried:

"Did I say there had never been anything like it since the Lafarge
affair? I tell you there has never been anything like it in any affair. It is the rummest case on record! Raymond," and his eyes, in his
excitement, actually met mine for the first time in my experience of
him, "prepare yourself for a disappointment. This pretended confession
of Hannah's is a fraud!" "Yes; fraud, forgery, what you will; the girl never wrote it." Amazed, outraged almost, I bounded from my chair. Bending forward, he put the letter into my hand. "Look at it," said he;
"examine it closely. Now tell me what is the first thing you notice in
regard to it?" "Why, the first thing that strikes me, is that the words are printed,
instead of written; something which might be expected from this girl,
according to all accounts." "That they are printed on the inside of a sheet of ordinary paper----"

"Ordinary paper?" "That is, a sheet of commercial note of the ordinary quality." "Why, yes; I should say so." Oh, I see, they run up close to the top of the page;
evidently the scissors have been used here." "In short, it is a large sheet, trimmed down to the size of commercial
note?" "Don't you perceive what has been lost by means of this trimming down?" "No, unless you mean the manufacturer's stamp in the corner." "But I don't see why the loss of that
should be deemed a matter of any importance." Not when you consider that by it we seem to be deprived of
all opportunity of tracing this sheet back to the quire of paper from
which it was taken?" then you are more of an amateur than I thought you. Don't you
see that, as Hannah could have had no motive for concealing where the
paper came from on which she wrote her dying words, this sheet must have
been prepared by some one else?" "No," said I; "I cannot say that I see all that." Why should Hannah, a girl about to
commit suicide, care whether any clue was furnished, in her confession,
to the actual desk, drawer, or quire of paper from which the sheet was
taken, on which she wrote it?" "Yet especial pains have been taken to destroy that clue." "But----"

"Then there is another thing. Raymond,
and tell me what you gather from it." "Why," said I, after complying, "that the girl, worn out with constant
apprehension, has made up her mind to do away with herself, and that
Henry Clavering----"

"Henry Clavering?" The interrogation was put with so much meaning, I looked up. "Ah, I didn't know that Mr. Clavering's name was mentioned there; excuse
me." "His name is not mentioned, but a description is given so strikingly in
accordance----"

Here Mr. "Does it not seem a little surprising to
you that a girl like Hannah should have stopped to describe a man she
knew by name?" Belden's story, don't you?" "Consider her accurate in her relation of what took place here a year
ago?" "Must believe, then, that Hannah, the go-between, was acquainted with
Mr. If her intention was, as she here
professes, to save Eleanore Leavenworth from the false imputation which
had fallen upon her, she would naturally take the most direct method
of doing it. This description of a man whose identity she could have at
once put beyond a doubt by the mention of his name is the work, not of
a poor, ignorant girl, but of some person who, in attempting to play the
_role_ of one, has signally failed. Belden,
according to you, maintains that Hannah told her, upon entering the
house, that Mary Leavenworth sent her here. But in this document, she
declares it to have been the work of Black Mustache." "I know; but could they not have both been parties to the transaction?" "Yes," said he; "yet it is always a suspicious circumstance, when there
is a discrepancy between the written and spoken declaration of a person. But why do we stand here fooling, when a few words from this Mrs. Belden, you talk so much about, will probably settle the whole matter!" "I have had thousands
from her to-day, and find the matter no nearer settled than in the
beginning." "_You_ have had," said he, "but I have not. "One thing," said I, "before I go. What if Hannah had found the
sheet of paper, trimmed just as it is, and used it without any thought
of the suspicions it would occasion!" said he, "that is just what we are going to find out." Belden was in a flutter of impatience when I entered the
sitting-room. and what did I
imagine this detective would do for us? It was dreadful waiting there
alone for something, she knew not what. I calmed her as well as I could, telling her the detective had not yet
informed me what he could do, having some questions to ask her first. Gryce, who in the short interim of my absence had altered his mood
from the severe to the beneficent, received Mrs. Belden with just that
show of respectful courtesy likely to impress a woman as dependent as
she upon the good opinion of others. and this is the lady in whose house this very disagreeable event
has occurred," he exclaimed, partly rising in his enthusiasm to greet
her. "May I request you to sit," he asked; "if a stranger may be allowed
to take the liberty of inviting a lady to sit in her own house." "It does not seem like my own house any longer," said she, but in a sad,
rather than an aggressive tone; so much had his genial way imposed upon
her. "Little better than a prisoner here, go and come, keep silence or
speak, just as I am bidden; and all because an unhappy creature, whom
I took in for the most unselfish of motives, has chanced to die in my
house!" This sudden death
ought to be easily explained. You say you had no poison in the house?" "And that no one has ever been here to see her?" "So that she could not have procured any such thing if she had wished?" "Unless," he added suavely, "she had it with her when she came here?" She brought no baggage; and as for her
pocket, I know everything there was in it, for I looked." "Some money in bills, more than you would have expected such a girl to
have, some loose pennies, and a common handkerchief." "Well, then, it is proved the girl didn't die of poison, there being
none in the house." He said this in so convinced a tone she was deceived. "That is just what I have been telling Mr. Raymond," giving me a
triumphant look. "Must have been heart disease," he went on, "You say she was well
yesterday?" "I did not say that; she was, sir, very." "What, ma'am, this girl?" I
should think her anxiety about those she had left behind her in the city
would have been enough to keep her from being very cheerful." Belden; "but it wasn't so. On the
contrary, she never seemed to worry about them at all." not about Miss Eleanore, who, according to the papers, stands
in so cruel a position before the world? But perhaps she didn't know
anything about that--Miss Leavenworth's position, I mean?" "Yes, she did, for I told her. I was so astonished I could not keep
it to myself. You see, I had always considered Eleanore as one above
reproach, and it so shocked me to see her name mentioned in the
newspaper in such a connection, that I went to Hannah and read the
article aloud, and watched her face to see how she took it." She looked as if she didn't understand; asked me why I
read such things to her, and told me she didn't want to hear any more;
that I had promised not to trouble her about this murder, and that if I
continued to do so she wouldn't listen." She put her hand over her ears and frowned in such a
sullen way I left the room." "She has, however, mentioned the subject since?" not asked what they were going to do with her mistress?" "She has shown, however, that something was preying on her mind--fear,
remorse, or anxiety?" "No, sir; on the contrary, she has oftener appeared like one secretly
elated." Gryce, with another sidelong look at me, "that was
very strange and unnatural. I used to try to explain it by thinking her sensibilities
had been blunted, or that she was too ignorant to comprehend the
seriousness of what had happened; but as I learned to know her better,
I gradually changed my mind. There was too much method in her gayety for
that. I could not help seeing she had some future before her for which
she was preparing herself. As, for instance, she asked me one day if I
thought she could learn to play on the piano. And I finally came to the
conclusion she had been promised money if she kept the secret intrusted
to her, and was so pleased with the prospect that she forgot the
dreadful past, and all connected with it. At all events, that was the
only explanation I could find for her general industry and desire to
improve herself, or for the complacent smiles I detected now and then
stealing over her face when she didn't know I was looking." Not such a smile as crept over the countenance of Mr. Gryce at that
moment, I warrant. Belden, "which made her death such a
shock to me. I couldn't believe that so cheerful and healthy a creature
could die like that, all in one night, without anybody knowing anything
about it. But----"

"Wait one moment," Mr. "You speak of her endeavors
to improve herself. "Her desire to learn things she didn't know; as, for instance, to write
and read writing. She could only clumsily print when she came here." Gryce would take a piece out of my arm, he griped it so. Do you mean to say that since she has been with you
she has learned to write?" "Yes, sir; I used to set her copies and----"

"Where are these copies?" Gryce, subduing his voice to its
most professional tone. I'd like
to see some of them. I always made it a point to destroy them as soon as
they had answered their purpose. I didn't like to have such things lying
around. "Do," said he; "and I will go with you. I want to take a look at things
upstairs, any way." And, heedless of his rheumatic feet, he rose and
prepared to accompany her. "This is getting very intense," I whispered, as he passed me. The smile he gave me in reply would have made the fortune of a Thespian
Mephistopheles. Of the ten minutes of suspense which I endured in their absence, I say
nothing. At the end of that time they returned with their hands full of
paper boxes, which they flung down on the table. "The writing-paper of the household," observed Mr. Gryce; "every scrap
and half-sheet which could be found. But, before you examine it, look at
this." And he held out a sheet of bluish foolscap, on which were written
some dozen imitations of that time-worn copy, "BE GOOD AND YOU WILL
BE HAPPY"; with an occasional "_Beauty soon fades,"_ and "_Evil
communications corrupt good manners. "_

"What do you think of that?" The only specimens of her writing to be found. Not much like some scrawls we have seen, eh?" Belden says this girl has known how to write as good as this for
more than a week. Took great pride in it, and was continually talking
about how smart she was." Leaning over, he whispered in my ear, "This
thing you have in your hand must have been scrawled some time ago, if
she did it." Then aloud: "But let us look at the paper she used to write
on." Dashing open the covers of the boxes on the table, he took out the loose
sheets lying inside, and scattered them out before me. One glance showed
they were all of an utterly different quality from that used in the
confession. "This is all the paper in the house," said he. Belden, who stood in
a sort of maze before us. "Wasn't there one stray sheet lying around
somewhere, foolscap or something like that, which she might have got
hold of and used without your knowing it?" "No, sir; I don't think so. I had only these kinds; besides, Hannah had
a whole pile of paper like this in her room, and wouldn't have been apt
to go hunting round after any stray sheets." "But you don't know what a girl like that might do. Look at this one,"
said I, showing her the blank side of the confession. "Couldn't a sheet
like this have come from somewhere about the house? Examine it well; the
matter is important." "I have, and I say, no, I never had a sheet of paper like that in my
house." Gryce advanced and took the confession from my hand. As he did so,
he whispered: "What do you think now? Many chances that Hannah got up
this precious document?" I shook my head, convinced at last; but in another moment turned to him
and whispered back: "But, if Hannah didn't write it, who did? And how
came it to be found where it was?" "That," said he, "is just what is left for us to learn." And, beginning
again, he put question after question concerning the girl's life in the
house, receiving answers which only tended to show that she could not
have brought the confession with her, much less received it from a
secret messenger. Belden's word, the mystery
seemed impenetrable, and I was beginning to despair of success, when Mr. Gryce, with an askance look at me, leaned towards Mrs. Belden and said:

"You received a letter from Miss Mary Leavenworth yesterday, I hear." "Now I want to ask you a question. Was the letter, as you see it, the
only contents of the envelope in which it came? Wasn't there one for
Hannah enclosed with it?" There was nothing in my letter for her; but she had a letter
herself yesterday. we both exclaimed; "and in the mail?" "Yes; but it was not directed to her. It was"--casting me a look full of
despair, "directed to me. It was only by a certain mark in the corner of
the envelope that I knew----"

"Good heaven!" Why didn't you
speak of it before? What do you mean by allowing us to flounder about
here in the dark, when a glimpse at this letter might have set us right
at once?" "I didn't think anything about it till this minute. I didn't know it was
of importance. I----"

But I couldn't restrain myself. "No," said she; "I gave it to the girl yesterday; I haven't seen it
since." and I hastened
towards the door. "You won't find it," said Mr. There
is nothing but a pile of burned paper in the corner. By the way, what
could that have been?" She hadn't anything to burn unless it was the
letter." "We will see about that," I muttered, hurrying upstairs and bringing
down the wash-bowl with its contents. "If the letter was the one I saw
in your hand at the post-office, it was in a yellow envelope." "Yellow envelopes burn differently from white paper. I ought to be able
to tell the tinder made by a yellow envelope when I see it. Ah, the
letter has been destroyed; here is a piece of the envelope," and I drew
out of the heap of charred scraps a small bit less burnt than the rest,
and held it up. "Then there is no use looking here for what the letter contained," said
Mr. Gryce, putting the wash-bowl aside. "We will have to ask you, Mrs. It was directed to me, to be sure; but Hannah told
me, when she first requested me to teach her how to write, that she
expected such a letter, so I didn't open it when it came, but gave it to
her just as it was." "You, however, stayed by to see her read it?" "No, sir; I was in too much of a flurry. Raymond had just come and I
had no time to think of her. My own letter, too, was troubling me." "But you surely asked her some questions about it before the day was
out?" "Yes, sir, when I went up with her tea things; but she had nothing
to say. Hannah could be as reticent as any one I ever knew, when she
pleased. She didn't even admit it was from her mistress." then you thought it was from Miss Leavenworth?" "Why, yes, sir; what else was I to think, seeing that mark in the
corner? Though, to be sure, it might have been put there by Mr. "You say she was cheerful yesterday; was she so after receiving this
letter?" "Yes, sir; as far as I could see. I wasn't with her long; the necessity
I felt of doing something with the box in my charge--but perhaps Mr. "It was an exhausting evening, and quite put Hannah out of my head,
but----"

"Wait!" Gryce, and beckoning me into a corner, he whispered,
"Now comes in that experience of Q's. While you are gone from the house,
and before Mrs. Belden sees Hannah again, he has a glimpse of the girl
bending over something in the corner of her room which may very fairly
be the wash-bowl we found there. After which, he sees her swallow, in
the most lively way, a dose of something from a bit of paper. "Very well, then," he cried, going back to Mrs. "But----"

"But when I went upstairs to bed, I thought of the girl, and going to
her door opened it. The light was extinguished, and she seemed asleep,
so I closed it again and came out." "In something of the same position in which she was found this morning?" "And that is all you can tell us, either of her letter or her mysterious
death?" Belden," said he, "you know Mr. Clavering's handwriting when _you_
see it?" "Now, which of the two was upon the envelope of the letter you gave
Hannah?" It was a disguised handwriting and might have been that
of either; but I think----"

"Well?" "That it was more like hers than his, though it wasn't like hers
either." Gryce enclosed the confession in his hand in the
envelope in which it had been found. "You remember how large the letter
was which you gave her?" "Oh, it was large, very large; one of the largest sort." "O yes; thick enough for two letters." "Large enough and thick enough to contain this?" laying the confession,
folded and enveloped as it was, before her. "Yes, sir," giving it a look of startled amazement, "large enough and
thick enough to contain that." Gryce's eyes, bright as diamonds, flashed around the room, and
finally settled upon a fly traversing my coat-sleeve. "Do you need to
ask now," he whispered, in a low voice, "where, and from whom, this
so-called confession comes?" He allowed himself one moment of silent triumph, then rising, began
folding the papers on the table and putting them in his pocket. He took me by the arm and led me across the hall into toe sitting-room. "I am going back to New York, I am going to pursue this matter. I am
going to find out from whom came the poison which killed this girl, and
by whose hand this vile forgery of a confession was written." "But," said I, rather thrown off my balance by all this, "Q and the
coroner will be here presently, won't you wait to see them?" "No; clues such as are given here must be followed while the trail is
hot; I can't afford to wait." "If I am not mistaken, they have already come," I remarked, as a
tramping of feet without announced that some one stood at the door. "That is so," he assented, hastening to let them in. Judging from common experience, we had every reason to fear that an
immediate stop would be put to all proceedings on our part, as soon as
the coroner was introduced upon the scene. But happily for us and the
interest at stake, Dr. Fink, of R ----, proved to be a very sensible
man. He had only to hear a true story of the affair to recognize at
once its importance and the necessity of the most cautious action in
the matter. Further, by a sort of sympathy with Mr. Gryce, all the more
remarkable that he had never seen him before, he expressed himself
as willing to enter into our plans, offering not only to allow us the
temporary use of such papers as we desired, but even undertaking to
conduct the necessary formalities of calling a jury and instituting
an inquest in such a way as to give us time for the investigations we
proposed to make. Gryce was enabled to take the 6:30
train for New York, and I to follow on the 10 p.m.,--the calling of a
jury, ordering of an autopsy, and final adjournment of the inquiry till
the following Tuesday, having all taken place in the interim. FINE WORK


    "No hinge nor loop
     To hang a doubt on!" "But yet the pity of it, Iago! Oh, Iago, the pity of it, Iago." Gryce before leaving R---- prepared me for
his next move. "The clue to this murder is supplied by the paper on which the
confession is written. Find from whose desk or portfolio this especial
sheet was taken, and you find the double murderer," he had said. Consequently, I was not surprised when, upon visiting his house, early
the next morning, I beheld him seated before a table on which lay
a lady's writing-desk and a pile of paper, till told the desk was
Eleanore's. "What," said I, "are you not
satisfied yet of her innocence?" "O yes; but one must be thorough. No conclusion is valuable which is not
preceded by a full and complete investigation. Why," he cried, casting
his eyes complacently towards the fire-tongs, "I have even been
rummaging through Mr. Clavering's effects, though the confession bears
the proof upon its face that it could not have been written by him. It
is not enough to look for evidence where you expect to find it. You must
sometimes search for it where you don't. Now," said he, drawing the desk
before him, "I don't anticipate finding anything here of a criminating
character; but it is among the possibilities that I may; and that is
enough for a detective." "Did you see Miss Leavenworth this morning?" I asked, as he proceeded
to fulfil his intention by emptying the contents of the desk upon the
table. "Yes; I was unable to procure what I desired without it. And she behaved
very handsomely, gave me the desk with her own hands, and never raised
an objection. To be sure, she had little idea what I was looking for;
thought, perhaps, I wanted to make sure it did not contain the letter
about which so much has been said. But it would have made but little
difference if she had known the truth. This desk contains nothing _we_
want." "Was she well; and had she heard of Hannah's sudden death?" I asked, in
my irrepressible anxiety. "Yes, and feels it, as you might expect her to. But let us see what we
have here," said he, pushing aside the desk, and drawing towards him the
stack of paper I have already referred to. "I found this pile, just as
you see it, in a drawer of the library table at Miss Mary Leavenworth's
house in Fifth Avenue. If I am not mistaken, it will supply us with the
clue we want." "But----"

"But this paper is square, while that of the confession is of the size
and shape of commercial note? I know; but you remember the sheet used in
the confession was trimmed down. Taking the confession from his pocket and the sheet from the pile before
him, he carefully compared them, then held them out for my inspection. A
glance showed them to be alike in color. "Hold them up to the light," said he. I did so; the appearance presented by both was precisely alike. And, laying them both down on the
table, he placed the edges of the two sheets together. The lines on the
one accommodated themselves to the lines on the other; and that question
was decided. "I was convinced of it," said he. "From the
moment I pulled open that drawer and saw this mass of paper, I knew the
end was come." "But," I objected, in my old spirit of combativeness, "isn't there any
room for doubt? Every family on the
block might easily have specimens of it in their library." "It is letter size, and that has gone out. Leavenworth used it for his manuscript, or I doubt if it would have been
found in his library. But, if you are still incredulous, let us see what
can be done," and jumping up, he carried the confession to the window,
looked at it this way and that, and, finally discovering what he wanted,
came back and, laying it before me, pointed out one of the lines of
ruling which was markedly heavier than the rest, and another which was
so faint as to be almost undistinguishable. "Defects like these often
run through a number of consecutive sheets," said he. "If we could find
the identical half-quire from which this was taken, I might show you
proof that would dispel every doubt," and taking up the one that lay on
top, he rapidly counted the sheets. "It might have
been taken from this one," said he; but, upon looking closely at the
ruling, he found it to be uniformly distinct. The remainder of the paper, some dozen or so half-quires, looked
undisturbed. Gryce tapped his fingers on the table and a frown
crossed his face. "Such a pretty thing, if it could have been done!" Suddenly he took up the next half-quire. "Count the
sheets," said he, thrusting it towards me, and himself lifting another. "Go on with the rest," he cried. I counted the sheets in the next; twelve. He counted those in the one
following, and paused. He counted again, and quietly put them aside. "I made a mistake," said
he. Taking another half-quire, he went
through with the same operation;--in vain. With a sigh of impatience he
flung it down on the table and looked up. he cried, "what is
the matter?" "There are but eleven sheets in this package," I said, placing it in his
hand. The excitement he immediately evinced was contagious. Oppressed as I
was, I could not resist his eagerness. the light on the inside, the heavy one on the
outside, and both in positions precisely corresponding to those on
this sheet of Hannah's. "The veriest doubter must succumb before this," returned I.

With something like a considerate regard for my emotion, he turned away. "I am obliged to congratulate myself, notwithstanding the gravity of the
discovery that has been made," said he. "It is so neat, so very neat,
and so conclusive. I declare I am myself astonished at the perfection
of the thing. he suddenly cried, in a tone
of the greatest admiration. I declare it is almost a pity to entrap a woman who has done
as well as this--taken a sheet from the very bottom of the pile, trimmed
it into another shape, and then, remembering the girl couldn't write,
put what she had to say into coarse, awkward printing, Hannah-like. or would have been, if any other man than myself had
had this thing in charge." And, all animated and glowing with his
enthusiasm, he eyed the chandelier above him as if it were the
embodiment of his own sagacity. Sunk in despair, I let him go on. "Watched, circumscribed
as she was, could she have done any better? I hardly think so; the fact
of Hannah's having learned to write after she left here was fatal. No,
she could not have provided against that contingency." Gryce," I here interposed, unable to endure this any longer; "did
you have an interview with Miss Mary Leavenworth this morning?" "No," said he; "it was not in the line of my present purpose to do so. I
doubt, indeed, if she knew I was in her house. A servant maid who has a
grievance is a very valuable assistant to a detective. With Molly at my
side, I didn't need to pay my respects to the mistress." Gryce," I asked, after another moment of silent self-congratulation
on his part, and of desperate self-control on mine, "what do you propose
to do now? You have followed your clue to the end and are satisfied. Such knowledge as this is the precursor of action." we will see," he returned, going to his private desk and
bringing out the box of papers which we had no opportunity of looking at
while in R----. "First let us examine these documents, and see if they
do not contain some hint which may be of service to us." And taking out
the dozen or so loose sheets which had been torn from Eleanore's Diary,
he began turning them over. While he was doing this, I took occasion to examine the contents of
the box. Belden had led me to
expect,--a certificate of marriage between Mary and Mr. Clavering and
a half-dozen or more letters. While glancing over the former, a short
exclamation from Mr. He thrust into my hand the leaves of Eleanore's Diary. "Most of it is a repetition of what you have already heard from Mrs. Belden, though given from a different standpoint; but there is one
passage in it which, if I am not mistaken, opens up the way to an
explanation of this murder such as we have not had yet. Begin at the
beginning; you won't find it dull." Eleanore's feelings and thoughts during that anxious time, dull! Mustering up my self-possession, I spread out the leaves in their order
and commenced:

"R----, July 6,-"

"Two days after they got there, you perceive," Mr. --A gentleman was introduced to us to-day upon the _piazza_ whom
I cannot forbear mentioning; first, because he is the most perfect
specimen of manly beauty I ever beheld, and secondly, because Mary, who
is usually so voluble where gentlemen are concerned, had nothing to say
when, in the privacy of our own apartment, I questioned her as to the
effect his appearance and conversation had made upon her. The fact
that he is an Englishman may have something to do with this; Uncle's
antipathy to every one of that nation being as well known to her as to
me. Her experience with
Charlie Somerville has made me suspicious. What if the story of last
summer were to be repeated here, with an Englishman for the hero! But
I will not allow myself to contemplate such a possibility. Uncle will
return in a few days, and then all communication with one who, however
prepossessing, is of a family and race with whom it is impossible for
us to unite ourselves, must of necessity cease. I doubt if I should have
thought twice of all this if Mr. Clavering had not betrayed, upon his
introduction to Mary, such intense and unrestrained admiration. Mary not only submits to the
attentions of Mr. To-day she sat
two hours at the piano singing over to him her favorite songs, and
to-night--But I will not put down every trivial circumstance that comes
under my observation; it is unworthy of me. And yet, how can I shut my
eyes when the happiness of so many I love is at stake! Clavering is not absolutely in love with Mary, he is on
the verge of it. He is a very fine-looking man, and too honorable to be
trifled with in this reckless fashion. She was absolutely
wonderful to-night in scarlet and silver. I think her smile the sweetest
I ever beheld, and in this I am sure Mr. Clavering passionately agrees
with me; he never looked away from her to-night. But it is not so easy
to read _her_ heart. To be sure, she appears anything but indifferent
to his fine appearance, strong sense, and devoted affection. But did she
not deceive us into believing she loved Charlie Somerville? In her case,
blush and smile go for little, I fear. Would it not be wiser under the
circumstances to say, I hope? Mary came into my room this evening, and
absolutely startled me by falling at my side and burying her face in my
lap. 'Oh, Eleanore, Eleanore!' she murmured, quivering with what seemed
to me very happy sobs. But when I strove to lift her head to my breast,
she slid from my arms, and drawing herself up into her old attitude of
reserved pride, raised her hand as if to impose silence, and haughtily
left the room. There is but one interpretation to put upon this. Clavering has expressed his sentiments, and she is filled with that
reckless delight which in its first flush makes one insensible to the
existence of barriers which have hitherto been deemed impassable. Little did I think when I wrote the above that Uncle was
already in the house. He arrived unexpectedly on the last train, and
came into my room just as I was putting away my diary. Looking a little
care-worn, he took me in his arms and then asked for Mary. I dropped my
head, and could not help stammering as I replied that she was in her own
room. Instantly his love took alarm, and leaving me, he hastened to
her apartment, where I afterwards learned he came upon her sitting
abstractedly before her dressing-table with Mr. Clavering's family ring
on her finger. An unhappy scene, I fear,
for Mary is ill this morning, and Uncle exceedingly melancholy and
stern. Uncle not only refuses to consider
for a moment the question of Mary's alliance with Mr. Clavering, but
even goes so far as to demand his instant and unconditional dismissal. The knowledge of this came to me in the most distressing way. Recognizing the state of affairs, but secretly rebelling against a
prejudice which seemed destined to separate two persons otherwise fitted
for each other, I sought Uncle's presence this morning after breakfast,
and attempted to plead their cause. But he almost instantly stopped me
with the remark, 'You are the last one, Eleanore, who should seek to
promote this marriage.' Trembling with apprehension, I asked him
why. 'For the reason that by so doing you work entirely for your own
interest.' More and more troubled, I begged him to explain himself. 'I
mean,' said he, 'that if Mary disobeys me by marrying this Englishman,
I shall disinherit her, and substitute your name for hers in my will as
well as in my affection.' "For a moment everything swam before my eyes. 'You will never make me so
wretched!' 'I will make you my heiress, if Mary persists
in her present determination,' he declared, and without further word
sternly left the room. What could I do but fall on my knees and pray! Of all in this miserable house, I am the most wretched. But I shall not be called upon to do it; Mary will give up Mr. Isn't it
becoming plain enough what was Mary's motive for this murder? But go on;
let us hear what followed." The next entry is dated July 19, and
runs thus:

"I was right. After a long struggle with Uncle's invincible will, Mary
has consented to dismiss Mr. I was in the room when she
made known her decision, and I shall never forget our Uncle's look of
gratified pride as he clasped her in his arms and called her his own
True Heart. He has evidently been very much exercised over this matter,
and I cannot but feel greatly relieved that affairs have terminated
so satisfactorily. What is there in her manner that vaguely
disappoints me? I only know that I felt a powerful
shrinking overwhelm me when she turned her face to me and asked if I
were satisfied now. But I conquered my feelings and held out my hand. The shadow of our late trial is upon
me yet; I cannot shake it off. Clavering's despairing
face wherever I go. How is it that Mary preserves her cheerfulness? If
she does not love him, I should think the respect which she must feel
for his disappointment would keep her from levity at least. Nothing I could say sufficed to keep him. Mary has only nominally separated from
Mr. Clavering; she still cherishes the idea of one day uniting herself
to him in marriage. The fact was revealed to me in a strange way not
necessary to mention here; and has since been confirmed by Mary herself. 'I admire the man,' she declares, 'and have no intention of giving him
up.' Her only answer was a bitter
smile and a short,--'I leave that for you to do.' Worn completely out, but before my blood cools let
me write. I have just returned from seeing her give her
hand to Henry Clavering. Strange that I can write it without quivering
when my whole soul is one flush of indignation and revolt. Having left my room for a few minutes this morning,
I returned to find on my dressing-table a note from Mary in which she
informed me that she was going to take Mrs. Belden for a drive and would
not be back for some hours. Convinced, as I had every reason to be, that
she was on her way to meet Mr. Clavering, I only stopped to put on my
hat--"

There the Diary ceased. "She was probably interrupted by Mary at this point," explained Mr. "But we have come upon the one thing we wanted to know. Leavenworth threatened to supplant Mary with Eleanore if she persisted
in marrying contrary to his wishes. She did so marry, and to avoid the
consequences of her act she----"

"Say no more," I returned, convinced at last. "But the writer of these words is saved," I went on, trying to grasp
the one comfort left me. "No one who reads this Diary will ever dare to
insinuate she is capable of committing a crime." "Assuredly not; the Diary settles that matter effectually." I tried to be man enough to think of that and nothing else. To rejoice
in her deliverance, and let every other consideration go; but in this I
did not succeed. "But Mary, her cousin, almost her sister, is lost," I
muttered. Gryce thrust his hands into his pockets and, for the first time,
showed some evidence of secret disturbance. "Yes, I am afraid she is;
I really am afraid she is." Then after a pause, during which I felt a
certain thrill of vague hope: "Such an entrancing creature too! It is a
pity, it positively is a pity! I declare, now that the thing is worked
up, I begin to feel almost sorry we have succeeded so well. If there was the least loophole out of it," he muttered. The thing is clear as A, B, C." Suddenly he rose, and began
pacing the floor very thoughtfully, casting his glances here, there, and
everywhere, except at me, though I believe now, as then, my face was all
he saw. "Would it be a very great grief to you, Mr. Raymond, if Miss Mary
Leavenworth should be arrested on this charge of murder?" he asked,
pausing before a sort of tank in which two or three disconsolate-looking
fishes were slowly swimming about. "Yes," said I, "it would; a very great grief." "Yet it must be done," said he, though with a strange lack of his usual
decision. "As an honest official, trusted to bring the murderer of Mr. Leavenworth to the notice of the proper authorities, I have got to do
it." Again that strange thrill of hope at my heart induced by his peculiar
manner. I am not so rich or so famous that I can afford to forget all that a
success like this may bring me. No, lovely as she is, I have got to push
it through." But even as he said this, he became still more thoughtful,
gazing down into the murky depths of the wretched tank before him with
such an intentness I half expected the fascinated fishes to rise from
the water and return his gaze. After a little while he turned, his indecision utterly gone. I shall then have my report ready for
the Superintendent. I should like to show it to you first, so don't fail
me." There was something so repressed in his expression, I could not prevent
myself from venturing one question. "Yes," he returned, but in a peculiar tone, and with a peculiar gesture. "And you are going to make the arrest you speak of?" GATHERED THREADS


    "This is the short and the long of it." PROMPTLY at the hour named, I made my appearance at Mr. I
found him awaiting me on the threshold. "I have met you," said he gravely, "for the purpose of requesting you
not to speak during the coming interview. I am to do the talking; you
the listening. Neither are you to be surprised at anything I may do or
say. I am in a facetious mood"--he did not look so--"and may take it
into my head to address you by another name than your own. If I do,
don't mind it. Above all, don't talk: remember that." And without
waiting to meet my look of doubtful astonishment, he led me softly
up-stairs. The room in which I had been accustomed to meet him was at the top of
the first flight, but he took me past that into what appeared to be the
garret story, where, after many cautionary signs, he ushered me into
a room of singularly strange and unpromising appearance. In the first
place, it was darkly gloomy, being lighted simply by a very dim and
dirty skylight. Next, it was hideously empty; a pine table and two
hard-backed chairs, set face to face at each end of it, being the only
articles in the room. Lastly, it was surrounded by several closed doors
with blurred and ghostly ventilators over their tops which, being round,
looked like the blank eyes of a row of staring mummies. Altogether it
was a lugubrious spot, and in the present state of my mind made me
feel as if something unearthly and threatening lay crouched in the very
atmosphere. Nor, sitting there cold and desolate, could I imagine that
the sunshine glowed without, or that life, beauty, and pleasure paraded
the streets below. Gryce's expression, as he took a seat and beckoned me to do the
same, may have had something to do with this strange sensation, it was
so mysteriously and sombrely expectant. "You'll not mind the room," said he, in so muffled a tone I scarcely
heard him. "It's an awful lonesome spot, I know; but folks with such
matters before them mustn't be too particular as to the places in which
they hold their consultations, if they don't want all the world to know
as much as they do. Smith," and he gave me an admonitory shake of his
finger, while his voice took a more distinct tone, "I have done the
business; the reward is mine; the assassin of Mr. Leavenworth is found,
and in two hours will be in custody. Do you want to know who it
is?" leaning forward with every appearance of eagerness in tone and
expression. any
great change taken place in his conclusions? All this preparation could
not be for the purpose of acquainting me with what I already knew, yet--

He cut short my conjectures with a low, expressive chuckle. "It was a
long chase, I tell you," raising his voice still more; "a tight go; a
woman in the business too; but all the women in the world can't pull
the wool over the eyes of Ebenezer Gryce when he is on a trail; and the
assassin of Mr. Leavenworth and"--here his voice became actually shrill
in his excitement--"and of Hannah Chester is found. he went on, though I had neither spoken nor made any move; "you
didn't know Hannah Chester was murdered. Well, she wasn't in one sense
of the word, but in another she was, and by the same hand that killed
the old gentleman. This scrap of paper
was found on the floor of her room; it had a few particles of white
powder sticking to it; those particles were tested last night and found
to be poison. But you say the girl took it herself, that she was a
suicide. You are right, she did take it herself, and it was a suicide;
but who terrified her into this act of self-destruction? Why, the one
who had the most reason to fear her testimony, of course. Well, sir, this girl left a confession behind her, throwing the
onus of the whole crime on a certain party believed to be innocent; this
confession was a forged one, known from three facts; first, that the
paper upon which it was written was unobtainable by the girl in the
place where she was; secondly, that the words used therein were printed
in coarse, awkward characters, whereas Hannah, thanks to the teaching of
the woman under whose care she has been since the murder, had learned to
write very well; thirdly, that the story told in the confession does not
agree with the one related by the girl herself. Now the fact of a forged
confession throwing the guilt upon an innocent party having been found
in the keeping of this ignorant girl, killed by a dose of poison, taken
with the fact here stated, that on the morning of the day on which she
killed herself the girl received from some one manifestly acquainted
with the customs of the Leavenworth family a letter large enough and
thick enough to contain the confession folded, as it was when found,
makes it almost certain to my mind that the murderer of Mr. Leavenworth
sent this powder and this so-called confession to the girl, meaning
her to use them precisely as she did: for the purpose of throwing off
suspicion from the right track and of destroying herself at the same
time; for, as you know, dead men tell no tales." He paused and looked at the dingy skylight above us. Why did the
air seem to grow heavier and heavier? Why did I shudder in vague
apprehension? I knew all this before; why did it strike me, then, as
something new? Ah, that is the secret; that is the bit of
knowledge which is to bring me fame and fortune. But, secret or not,
I don't mind telling you"; lowering his voice and rapidly raising it
again. "The fact is, _I_ can't keep it to myself; it burns like a new
dollar in my pocket. Smith, my boy, the murderer of Mr. Leavenworth--but
stay, who does the world say it is? Whom do the papers point at and
shake their heads over? a young, beautiful, bewitching woman! The papers are right; it is a woman; young, beautiful, and
bewitching too. There is more
than one woman in this affair. Since Hannah's death I have heard it
openly advanced that she was the guilty party in the crime: bah! Others
cry it is the niece who was so unequally dealt with by her uncle in his
will: bah! But folks are not without some justification for this
latter assertion. Eleanore Leavenworth did know more of this matter than
appeared. Worse than that, Eleanore Leavenworth stands in a position of
positive peril to-day. If you don't think so, let me show you what the
detectives have against her. "First, there is the fact that a handkerchief, with her name on it, was
found stained with pistol grease upon the scene of murder; a place which
she explicitly denies having entered for twenty-four hours previous to
the discovery of the dead body. "Secondly, the fact that she not only evinced terror when confronted
with this bit of circumstantial evidence, but manifested a decided
disposition, both at this time and others, to mislead inquiry, shirking
a direct answer to some questions and refusing all answer to others. "Thirdly, that an attempt was made by her to destroy a certain letter
evidently relating to this crime. "Fourthly, that the key to the library door was seen in her possession. "All this, taken with the fact that the fragments of the letter which
this same lady attempted to destroy within an hour after the inquest
were afterwards put together, and were found to contain a bitter
denunciation of one of Mr. Leavenworth's nieces, by a gentleman we will
call _X_ in other words, an unknown quantity--makes out a dark case
against _you,_ especially as after investigations revealed the fact that
a secret underlay the history of the Leavenworth family. That, unknown
to the world at large, and Mr. Leavenworth in particular, a marriage
ceremony had been performed a year before in a little town called F----
between a Miss Leavenworth and this same _X._ That, in other words, the
unknown gentleman who, in the letter partly destroyed by Miss Eleanore
Leavenworth, complained to Mr. Leavenworth of the treatment received
by him from one of his nieces, was in fact the secret husband of that
niece. And that, moreover, this same gentleman, under an assumed name,
called on the night of the murder at the house of Mr. Leavenworth and
asked for Miss Eleanore. "Now you see, with all this against her, Eleanore Leavenworth is lost
if it cannot be proved, first that the articles testifying against her,
viz. : the handkerchief, letter, and key, passed after the murder through
other hands, before reaching hers; and secondly, that some one else had
even a stronger reason than she for desiring Mr. Leavenworth's death at
this time. "Smith, my boy, both of these hypotheses have been established by me. By dint of moleing into old secrets, and following unpromising clues, I
have finally come to the conclusion that not Eleanore Leavenworth, dark
as are the appearances against her, but another woman, beautiful as
she, and fully as interesting, is the true criminal. In short, that her
cousin, the exquisite Mary, is the murderer of Mr. Leavenworth, and by
inference of Hannah Chester also." He brought this out with such force, and with such a look of triumph
and appearance of having led up to it, that I was for the moment
dumbfounded, and started as if I had not known what he was going to say. The stir I made seemed to awake an echo. Something like a suppressed
cry was in the air about me. All the room appeared to breathe horror and
dismay. Yet when, in the excitement of this fancy, I half turned round
to look, I found nothing but the blank eyes of those dull ventilators
staring upon me. Every one
else is engaged in watching the movements of Eleanore Leavenworth; I
only know where to put my hand upon the real culprit. Ebenezer Gryce deceived after a month of hard work! You are as
bad as Miss Leavenworth herself, who has so little faith in my sagacity
that she offered me, of all men, an enormous reward if I would find for
her the assassin of her uncle! But that is neither here nor there;
you have your doubts, and you are waiting for me to solve them. Know first that on the morning of the inquest I made
one or two discoveries not to be found in the records, viz. : that the
handkerchief picked up, as I have said, in Mr. Leavenworth's library,
had notwithstanding its stains of pistol grease, a decided perfume
lingering about it. Going to the dressing-table of the two ladies, I
sought for that perfume, and found it in Mary's room, not Eleanore's. This led me to examine the pockets of the dresses respectively worn by
them the evening before. In that of Eleanore I found a handkerchief,
presumably the one she had carried at that time. But in Mary's there was
none, nor did I see any lying about her room as if tossed down on
her retiring. The conclusion I drew from this was, that she, and
not Eleanore, had carried the handkerchief into her uncle's room, a
conclusion emphasized by the fact privately communicated to me by one of
the servants, that Mary was in Eleanore's room when the basket of clean
clothes was brought up with this handkerchief lying on top. "But knowing the liability we are to mistake in such matters as these,
I made another search in the library, and came across a very curious
thing. Lying on the table was a penknife, and scattered on the floor
beneath, in close proximity to the chair, were two or three minute
portions of wood freshly chipped off from the leg of the table; all of
which looked as if some one of a nervous disposition had been sitting
there, whose hand in a moment of self-forgetfulness had caught up the
knife and unconsciously whittled the table. A little thing, you say;
but when the question is, which of two ladies, one of a calm and
self-possessed nature, the other restless in her ways and excitable in
her disposition, was in a certain spot at a certain time, it is these
little things that become almost deadly in their significance. No one
who has been with these two women an hour can hesitate as to whose
delicate hand made that cut in Mr. I distinctly overheard Eleanore accuse her cousin
of this deed. Now such a woman as Eleanore Leavenworth has proved
herself to be never would accuse a relative of crime without the
strongest and most substantial reasons. First, she must have been sure
her cousin stood in a position of such emergency that nothing but
the death of her uncle could release her from it; secondly, that her
cousin's character was of such a nature she would not hesitate to
relieve herself from a desperate emergency by the most desperate of
means; and lastly, been in possession of some circumstantial evidence
against her cousin, seriously corroborative of her suspicions. Smith,
all this was true of Eleanore Leavenworth. As to the character of her
cousin, she has had ample proof of her ambition, love of money, caprice
and deceit, it having been Mary Leavenworth, and not Eleanore, as was
first supposed, who had contracted the secret marriage already spoken
of. Of the critical position in which she stood, let the threat once
made by Mr. Leavenworth to substitute her cousin's name for hers in
his will in case she had married this _x_ be remembered, as well as the
tenacity with which Mary clung to her hopes of future fortune; while for
the corroborative testimony of her guilt which Eleanore is supposed
to have had, remember that previous to the key having been found in
Eleanore's possession, she had spent some time in her cousin's room; and
that it was at Mary's fireplace the half-burned fragments of that letter
were found,--and you have the outline of a report which in an hour's
time from this will lead to the arrest of Mary Leavenworth as the
assassin of her uncle and benefactor." A silence ensued which, like the darkness of Egypt, could be felt;
then a great and terrible cry rang through the room, and a man's form,
rushing from I knew not where, shot by me and fell at Mr. Gryce's feet
shrieking out:

"It is a lie! Mary Leavenworth is innocent as a babe unborn. CULMINATION


    "Saint seducing gold." "When our actions do not,
     Our fears do make us traitors." I NEVER saw such a look of mortal triumph on the face of a man as that
which crossed the countenance of the detective. "Well," said he, "this is unexpected, but not wholly unwelcome. I am
truly glad to learn that Miss Leavenworth is innocent; but I must hear
some few more particulars before I shall be satisfied. Leavenworth, how comes it that things look so black against everybody
but yourself?" But in the hot, feverish eyes which sought him from the writhing form at
his feet, there was mad anxiety and pain, but little explanation. Seeing
him making unavailing efforts to speak, I drew near. "Lean on me," said I, lifting him to his feet. His face, relieved forever from its mask of repression, turned towards
me with the look of a despairing spirit. "Save
her--Mary--they are sending a report--stop it!" "If there is a man here who believes in
God and prizes woman's honor, let him stop the issue of that report." And Henry Clavering, dignified as ever, but in a state of extreme
agitation, stepped into our midst through an open door at our right. But at the sight of his face, the man in our arms quivered, shrieked,
and gave one bound that would have overturned Mr. Clavering, herculean
of frame as he was, had not Mr. he cried; and holding back the secretary with one hand--where
was his rheumatism now!--he put the other in his pocket and drew thence
a document which he held up before Mr. "It has not gone
yet," said he; "be easy. And you," he went on, turning towards Trueman
Harwell, "be quiet, or----"

His sentence was cut short by the man springing from his grasp. "Let me have my revenge on him who, in face of all I
have done for Mary Leavenworth, dares to call her his wife! Let me--"
But at this point he paused, his quivering frame stiffening into stone,
and his clutching hands, outstretched for his rival's throat, falling
heavily back. Clavering's shoulder:
"it is she! she--" a low, shuddering sigh of longing and despair finished the
sentence: the door opened, and Mary Leavenworth stood before us! It was a moment to make young hairs turn gray. To see her face, so pale,
so haggard, so wild in its fixed horror, turned towards Henry Clavering,
to the utter ignoring of the real actor in this most horrible scene! cold, cold; not one glance for me,
though I have just drawn the halter from her neck and fastened it about
my own!" And, breaking from the clasp of the man who in his jealous rage would
now have withheld him, he fell on his knees before Mary, clutching her
dress with frenzied hands. "You _shall_ look at me," he cried; "you
_shall_ listen to me! I will not lose body and soul for nothing. Mary,
they said you were in peril! I could not endure that thought, so I
uttered the truth,--yes, though I knew what the consequence would
be,--and all I want now is for you to say you believe me, when I swear
that I only meant to secure to you the fortune you so much desired; that
I never dreamed it would come to this; that it was because I loved you,
and hoped to win your love in return that I----"

But she did not seem to see him, did not seem to hear him. Her eyes were
fixed upon Henry Clavering with an awful inquiry in their depths, and
none but he could move her. "Ice that you are, you
would not turn your head if I should call to you from the depths of
hell!" Pushing her hands down upon his
shoulders as though she would sweep some impediment from her path, she
endeavored to advance. she cried, indicating
her husband with one quivering hand. "What has he done that he should be
brought here to confront me at this awful time?" '"I told her to come here to meet her uncle's murderer," whispered Mr. But before I could reply to her, before Mr. Clavering himself could
murmur a word, the guilty wretch before her had started to his feet. It is because these gentlemen,
chivalrous and honorable as they consider themselves, think that you,
the beauty and the Sybarite, committed with your own white hand the
deed of blood which has brought you freedom and fortune. Yes, yes, this
man"--turning and pointing at me--"friend as he has made himself out to
be, kindly and honorable as you have doubtless believed him, but who in
every look he has bestowed upon you, every word he has uttered in your
hearing during all these four horrible weeks, has been weaving a cord
for your neck--thinks you the assassin of your uncle, unknowing that a
man stood at your side ready to sweep half the world from your path if
that same white hand rose in bidding. now she could see him: now she could hear him! "Yes," clutching her robe again as she hastily recoiled; "didn't you
know it? When in that dreadful hour of your rejection by your uncle, you
cried aloud for some one to help you, didn't you know----"

"Don't!" she shrieked, bursting from him with a look of unspeakable
horror. she gasped, "is the mad cry of a stricken
woman for aid and sympathy the call for a murderer?" And turning away
in horror, she moaned: "Who that ever looks at me now will forget that
a man--such a man!--dared to think that, because I was in mortal
perplexity, I would accept the murder of my best friend as a relief from
it!" "Oh, what a chastisement for folly!" "What a punishment for the love of money which has always been
my curse!" Henry Clavering could no longer restrain himself, leaping to her side,
he bent over her. Are you guiltless of
any deeper wrong? Is there no link of complicity between you two? Have
you nothing on your soul but an inordinate desire to preserve your place
in your uncle's will, even at the risk of breaking my heart and wronging
your noble cousin? placing
his hand on her head, he pressed it slowly back and gazed into her eyes;
then, without a word, took her to his breast and looked calmly around
him. It was the uplifting of a stifling pall. No one in the room, unless it
was the wretched criminal shivering before us, but felt a sudden influx
of hope. Even Mary's own countenance caught a glow. she whispered,
withdrawing from his arms to look better into his face, "and is this the
man I have trifled with, injured, and tortured, till the very name of
Mary Leavenworth might well make him shudder? Is this he whom I married
in a fit of caprice, only to forsake and deny? Henry, do you declare
me innocent in face of all you have seen and heard; in face of that
moaning, chattering wretch before us, and my own quaking flesh and
evident terror; with the remembrance on your heart and in your mind of
the letter I wrote you the morning after the murder, in which I prayed
you to keep away from me, as I was in such deadly danger the least hint
given to the world that I had a secret to conceal would destroy me? Do
you, can you, will you, declare me innocent before God and the world?" A light such as had never visited her face before passed slowly over it. "Then God forgive me the wrong I have done this noble heart, for I can
never forgive myself! "Before I
accept any further tokens of your generous confidence, let me show you
what I am. You shall know the worst of the woman you have taken to your
heart. Raymond," she cried, turning towards me for the first time,
"in those days when, with such an earnest desire for my welfare (you see
I do not believe this man's insinuations), you sought to induce me to
speak out and tell all I knew concerning this dreadful deed, I did not
do it because of my selfish fears. I knew the case looked dark against
me. Eleanore herself--and it was the keenest
pang I had to endure--believed me guilty. She knew
first, from the directed envelope she had found lying underneath my
uncle's dead body on the library table, that he had been engaged at the
moment of death in summoning his lawyer to make that change in his will
which would transfer my claims to her; secondly, that notwithstanding
my denial of the same, I had been down to his room the night before, for
she had heard my door open and my dress rustle as I passed out. But that
was not all; the key that every one felt to be a positive proof of guilt
wherever found, had been picked up by her from the floor of my room; the
letter written by Mr. Clavering to my uncle was found in my fire; and
the handkerchief which she had seen me take from the basket of clean
clothes, was produced at the inquest stained with pistol grease. I could not stir without encountering some new toil. I knew I was
innocent; but if I failed to satisfy my cousin of this, how could I
hope to convince the general public, if once called upon to do so. Worse
still, if Eleanore, with every apparent motive for desiring long life
to our uncle, was held in such suspicion because of a few circumstantial
evidences against her, what would I not have to fear if these evidences
were turned against me, the heiress! The tone and manner of the juryman
at the inquest that asked who would be most benefited by my uncle's will
showed but too plainly. When, therefore, Eleanore, true to her heart's
generous instincts, closed her lips and refused to speak when speech
would have been my ruin, I let her do it, justifying myself with the
thought that she had deemed me capable of crime, and so must bear the
consequences. Nor, when I saw how dreadful these were likely to
prove, did I relent. Fear of the ignominy, suspense, and danger which
confession would entail sealed my lips. That
was when, in the last conversation we had, I saw that, notwithstanding
appearances, you believed in Eleanore's innocence, and the thought
crossed me you might be induced to believe in mine if I threw myself
upon your mercy. Clavering came; and as in a flash I
seemed to realize what my future life would be, stained by suspicion,
and, instead of yielding to my impulse, went so far in the other
direction as to threaten Mr. Clavering with a denial of our marriage if
he approached me again till all danger was over. "Yes, he will tell you that was my welcome to him when, with heart
and brain racked by long suspense, he came to my door for one word of
assurance that the peril I was in was not of my own making. That was the
greeting I gave him after a year of silence every moment of which was
torture to him. But he forgives me; I see it in his eyes; I hear it in
his accents; and you--oh, if in the long years to come you can forget
what I have made Eleanore suffer by my selfish fears; if with the shadow
of her wrong before you, you can by the grace of some sweet hope think
a little less hardly of me, do. As for this man--torture could not be
worse to me than this standing with him in the same room--let him
come forward and declare if I by look or word have given him reason to
believe I understood his passion, much less returned it." "Don't you see it was your indifference which
drove me mad? To stand before you, to agonize after you, to follow you
with thoughts in every move you made; to know my soul was welded to
yours with bands of steel no fire could melt, no force destroy, no
strain dissever; to sleep under the same roof, sit at the same table,
and yet meet not so much as one look to show me you understood! It was
that which made my life a hell. If I had to leap into a pit of flame, you should know what I was, and
what my passion for you was. Shrink as you will from my presence, cower as you may to the weak man
you call husband, you can never forget the love of Trueman Harwell;
never forget that love, love, love, was the force which led me down into
your uncle's room that night, and lent me will to pull the trigger which
poured all the wealth you hold this day into your lap. Yes," he went on,
towering in his preternatural despair till even the noble form of Henry
Clavering looked dwarfed beside him, "every dollar that chinks from
your purse shall talk of me. Every gew-gaw which flashes on that haughty
head, too haughty to bend to me, shall shriek my name into your ears. Fashion, pomp, luxury,--you will have them all; but till gold loses its
glitter and ease its attraction you will never forget the hand that gave
them to you!" With a look whose evil triumph I cannot describe, he put his hand into
the arm of the waiting detective, and in another moment would have been
led from the room; when Mary, crushing down the swell of emotions that
was seething in her breast, lifted her head and said:

"No, Trueman Harwell; I cannot give you even that thought for your
comfort. Wealth so laden would bring nothing but torture. I cannot
accept the torture, so must release the wealth. From this day, Mary
Clavering owns nothing but what comes to her from the husband she has so
long and so basely wronged." And raising her hands to her ears, she tore
out the diamonds which hung there, and flung them at the feet of the
unfortunate man. With a yell such as I never thought
to listen to from the lips of a man, he flung up his arms, while all the
lurid light of madness glared on his face. "And I have given my soul to
hell for a shadow!" "Well, that is the best day's work I ever did! Raymond, upon the success of the most daring game ever played in a
detective's office." I looked at the triumphant countenance of Mr. I cried; "did you plan all this?" "Could I stand here, seeing how things
have turned out, if I had not? You
are a gentleman, but we can well shake hands over this. I have never
known such a satisfactory conclusion to a bad piece of business in all
my professional career." We did shake hands, long and fervently, and then I asked him to explain
himself. "Well," said he, "there has always been one thing that plagued me, even
in the very moment of my strongest suspicion against this woman, and
that was, the pistol-cleaning business. I could not reconcile it with
what I knew of womankind. I could not make it seem the act of a woman. Did you ever know a woman who cleaned a pistol? They can fire them,
and do; but after firing them, they do not clean them. Now it is a
principle which every detective recognizes, that if of a hundred leading
circumstances connected with a crime, ninety-nine of these are acts
pointing to the suspected party with unerring certainty, but the
hundredth equally important act one which that person could not have
performed, the whole fabric of suspicion is destroyed. Recognizing this
principle, then, as I have said, I hesitated when it came to the point
of arrest. The chain was complete; the links were fastened; but one link
was of a different size and material from the rest; and in this argued a
break in the chain. Harwell, two persons whom I had no reason to suspect,
but who were the only persons beside herself who could have committed
this crime, being the only persons of intellect who were in the house
or believed to be, at the time of the murder, I notified them separately
that the assassin of Mr. Leavenworth was not only found, but was
about to be arrested in my house, and that if they wished to hear
the confession which would be sure to follow, they might have the
opportunity of doing so by coming here at such an hour. They were both
too much interested, though for very different reasons, to refuse; and
I succeeded in inducing them to conceal themselves in the two rooms from
which you saw them issue, knowing that if either of them had committed
this deed, he had done it for the love of Mary Leavenworth, and
consequently could not hear her charged with crime, and threatened
with arrest, without betraying himself. I did not hope much from the
experiment; least of all did I anticipate that Mr. Harwell would prove
to be the guilty man--but live and learn, Mr. A FULL CONFESSION


    "Between the acting of a dreadful thing,
    And the first motion, all the interim is
    Like a phantasma or a hideous dream;
    The genius and the mortal instruments
    Are then in council; and the state of a man,
    Like to a little Kingdom, suffers then
    The nature of an insurrection." I AM not a bad man; I am only an intense one. Ambition, love, jealousy,
hatred, revenge--transitory emotions with some, are terrific passions
with me. To be sure, they are quiet and concealed ones, coiled serpents
that make no stir till aroused; but then, deadly in their spring and
relentless in their action. Those who have known me best have not known
this. Often and often have I heard
her say: "If Trueman only had more sensibility! If Trueman were not so
indifferent to everything! In short, if Trueman had more power in him!" They thought me meek;
called me Dough-face. For three years they called me this, then I turned
upon them. Choosing out their ringleader, I felled him to the ground,
laid him on his back, and stamped upon him. He was handsome before
my foot came down; afterwards--Well, it is enough he never called me
Dough-face again. In the store I entered soon after, I met with even
less appreciation. Regular at my work and exact in my performance of it,
they thought me a good machine and nothing more. What heart, soul, and
feeling could a man have who never sported, never smoked, and never
laughed? I could reckon up figures correctly, but one scarcely needed
heart or soul for that. I could even write day by day and month by month
without showing a flaw in my copy; but that only argued I was no more
than they intimated, a regular automaton. I let them think so, with the
certainty before me that they would one day change their minds as others
had done. The fact was, I loved nobody well enough, not even myself,
to care for any man's opinion. Life was well-nigh a blank to me; a dead
level plain that had to be traversed whether I would or not. And such
it might have continued to this day if I had never met Mary Leavenworth. But when, some nine months since, I left my desk in the counting-house
for a seat in Mr. Leavenworth's library, a blazing torch fell into
my soul whose flame has never gone out, and never will, till the doom
before me is accomplished. When, on that first evening, I followed my new
employer into the parlor, and saw this woman standing up before me
in her half-alluring, half-appalling charm, I knew, as by a lightning
flash, what my future would be if I remained in that house. She was
in one of her haughty moods, and bestowed upon me little more than a
passing glance. But her indifference made slight impression upon me
then. It was enough that I was allowed to stand in her presence and look
unrebuked upon her loveliness. To be sure, it was like gazing into the
flower-wreathed crater of an awakening volcano. Fear and fascination
were in each moment I lingered there; but fear and fascination made the
moment what it was, and I could not have withdrawn if I would. Unspeakable pain as well as pleasure was in the
emotion with which I regarded her. Yet for all that I did not cease to
study her hour by hour and day by day; her smiles, her movement, her way
of turning her head or lifting her eyelids. I
wished to knit her beauty so firmly into the warp and woof of my being
that nothing could ever serve to tear it away. For I saw then as plainly
as now that, coquette though she was, she would never stoop to me. No;
I might lie down at her feet and let her trample over me; she would not
even turn to see what it was she had stepped upon. I might spend days,
months, years, learning the alphabet of her wishes; she would not thank
me for my pains or even raise the lashes from her cheek to look at me as
I passed. I was nothing to her, could not be anything unless--and this
thought came slowly--I could in some way become her master. Leavenworth's dictation and pleased him. My
methodical ways were just to his taste. As for the other member of the
family, Miss Eleanore Leavenworth--she treated me just as one of her
proud but sympathetic nature might be expected to do. Not familiarly,
but kindly; not as a friend, but as a member of the household whom she
met every day at table, and who, as she or any one else could see, was
none too happy or hopeful. I had learned two things; first, that Mary
Leavenworth loved her position as prospective heiress to a large fortune
above every other earthly consideration; and secondly, that she was in
the possession of a secret which endangered that position. What this
was, I had for some time no means of knowing. But when later I became
convinced it was one of love, I grew hopeful, strange as it may seem. Leavenworth's disposition almost as
perfectly as that of his niece, and knew that in a matter of this kind
he would be uncompromising; and that in the clashing of these two wills
something might occur which would give me a hold upon her. The only
thing that troubled me was the fact that I did not know the name of the
man in whom she was interested. One
day--a month ago now--I sat down to open Mr. ran thus:

"HOFFMAN HOUSE,

"March 1, 1876." HORATIO LEAVENWORTH:

"DEAR SIR,--You have a niece whom you love and trust, one, too, who
seems worthy of all the love and trust that you or any other man can
give her; so beautiful, so charming, so tender is she in face, form,
manner, and conversation. But, dear sir, every rose has its thorn, and
your rose is no exception to this rule. Lovely as she is, charming as
she is, tender as she is, she is not only capable of trampling on the
rights of one who trusted her, but of bruising the heart and breaking
the spirit of him to whom she owes all duty, honor, and observance. "If you don't believe this, ask her to her cruel, bewitching face, who
and what is her humble servant, and yours. If a bombshell had exploded at my feet, or the evil one himself appeared
at my call, I would not have been more astounded. Not only was the name
signed to these remarkable words unknown to me, but the epistle itself
was that of one who felt himself to be her master: a position which, as
you know, I was myself aspiring to occupy. For a few minutes, then, I
stood a prey to feelings of the bitterest wrath and despair; then I grew
calm, realizing that with this letter in my possession I was virtually
the arbitrator of her destiny. Some men would have sought her there and
then and, by threatening to place it in her uncle's hand, won from her
a look of entreaty, if no more; but I--well, my plans went deeper than
that. I knew she would have to be in extremity before I could hope to
win her. She must feel herself slipping over the edge of the precipice
before she would clutch at the first thing offering succor. I decided
to allow the letter to pass into my employer's hands. How could I manage to give it to him in this condition without
exciting his suspicion? I knew of but one way; to let him see me open it
for what he would consider the first time. So, waiting till he came into
the room, I approached him with the letter, tearing off the end of the
envelope as I came. Opening it, I gave a cursory glance at its contents
and tossed it down on the table before him. "That appears to be of a private character," said I, "though there is no
sign to that effect on the envelope." At the first word he started, looked
at me, seemed satisfied from my expression that I had not read far
enough to realize its nature, and, whirling slowly around in his chair,
devoured the remainder in silence. I waited a moment, then withdrew to
my own desk. One minute, two minutes passed in silence; he was evidently
rereading the letter; then he hurriedly rose and left the room. As he
passed me I caught a glimpse of his face in the mirror. The expression I
saw there did not tend to lessen the hope that was rising in my breast. By following him almost immediately up-stairs I ascertained that he
went directly to Mary's room, and when in a few hours later the family
collected around the dinner table, I perceived, almost without looking
up, that a great and insurmountable barrier had been raised between him
and his favorite niece. Two days passed; days that were for me one long and unrelieved suspense. Would it all end as it had
begun, without the appearance of the mysterious Clavering on the scene? Meanwhile my monotonous work went on, grinding my heart beneath its
relentless wheel. I wrote and wrote and wrote, till it seemed as if my
life blood went from me with every drop of ink I used. Always alert
and listening, I dared not lift my head or turn my eyes at any unusual
sound, lest I should seem to be watching. The third night I had a dream;
I have already told Mr. Raymond what it was, and hence will not repeat
it here. One correction, however, I wish to make in regard to it. In my
statement to him I declared that the face of the man whom I saw lift his
hand against my employer was that of Mr. The face seen by me in my dream was my own. It was that fact
which made it so horrible to me. In the crouching figure stealing warily
down-stairs, I saw as in a glass the vision of my own form. Otherwise my
account of the matter was true. a
forewarning of the way in which I was to win this coveted creature for
my own? Was the death of her uncle the bridge by which the impassable
gulf between us might be spanned? I began to think it might be; to
consider the possibilities which could make this the only path to
my elysium; even went so far as to picture her lovely face bending
gratefully towards me through the glare of a sudden release from some
emergency in which she stood. One thing was sure; if that was the way I
must go, I had at least been taught how to tread it; and all through the
dizzy, blurred day that followed, I saw, as I sat at my work, repeated
visions of that stealthy, purposeful figure stealing down the stairs
and entering with uplifted pistol into the unconscious presence of my
employer. I even found myself a dozen times that day turning my eyes
upon the door through which it was to come, wondering how long it would
be before my actual form would pause there. That the moment was at hand
I did not imagine. Even when I left him that night after drinking with
him the glass of sherry mentioned at the inquest, I had no idea the hour
of action was so near. But when, not three minutes after going upstairs,
I caught the sound of a lady's dress rustling through the hall, and
listening, heard Mary Leavenworth pass my door on her way to the
library, I realized that the fatal hour was come; that something
was going to be said or done in that room which would make this deed
necessary. Casting about in my mind
for the means of doing so, I remembered that the ventilator running
up through the house opened first into the passage-way connecting Mr. Leavenworth's bedroom and library, and, secondly, into the closet of
the large spare room adjoining mine. Hastily unlocking the door of
the communication between the rooms, I took my position in the closet. Instantly the sound of voices reached my ears; all was open below, and
standing there, I was as much an auditor of what went on between Mary
and her uncle as if I were in the library itself. Enough to assure me my suspicions were correct; that it was a moment of
vital interest to her; that Mr. Leavenworth, in pursuance of a threat
evidently made some time since, was in the act of taking steps to change
his will, and that she had come to make an appeal to be forgiven her
fault and restored to his favor. What that fault was, I did not learn. I only heard her
declare that her action had been the result of impulse, rather than
love; that she regretted it, and desired nothing more than to be free
from all obligations to one she would fain forget, and be again to her
uncle what she was before she ever saw this man. I thought, fool that I
was, it was a mere engagement she was alluding to, and took the insanest
hope from these words; and when, in a moment later I heard her uncle
reply, in his sternest tone, that she had irreparably forfeited her
claims to his regard and favor, I did not need her short and bitter cry
of shame and disappointment, or that low moan for some one to help her,
for me to sound his death-knell in my heart. Creeping back to my own
room, I waited till I heard her reascend, then I stole forth. Calm as
I had ever been in my life, I went down the stairs just as I had seen
myself do in my dream, and knocking lightly at the library door, went
in. Leavenworth was sitting in his usual place writing. "Excuse me," said I as he looked up, "I have lost my memorandum-book,
and think it possible I may have dropped it in the passage-way when I
went for the wine." He bowed, and I hurried past him into the closet. Once there, I proceeded rapidly into the room beyond, procured the
pistol, returned, and almost before I realized what I was doing, had
taken up my position behind him, aimed, and fired. Without a groan his head fell forward on his hands, and Mary
Leavenworth was the virtual possessor of the thousands she coveted. My first thought was to procure the letter he was writing. Approaching
the table, I tore it out from under his hands, looked at it, saw that
it was, as I expected, a summons to his lawyer, and thrust it into my
pocket, together with the letter from Mr. Clavering, which I perceived
lying spattered with blood on the table before me. Not till this was
done did I think of myself, or remember the echo which that low, sharp
report must have made in the house. Dropping the pistol at the side of
the murdered man, I stood ready to shriek to any one who entered that
Mr. But I was saved from committing such
a folly. The report had not been heard, or if so, had evidently failed
to create an alarm. No one came, and I was left to contemplate my
work undisturbed and decide upon the best course to be taken to avoid
detection. A moment's study of the wound made in his head by the
bullet convinced me of the impossibility of passing the affair off as
a suicide, or even the work of a burglar. To any one versed in such
matters it was manifestly a murder, and a most deliberate one. My one
hope, then, lay in making it as mysterious as it was deliberate, by
destroying all due to the motive and manner of the deed. Picking up the
pistol, I carried it into the other room with the intention of
cleaning it, but finding nothing there to do it with, came back for the
handkerchief I had seen lying on the floor at Mr. It
was Miss Eleanore's, but I did not know it till I had used it to clean
the barrel; then the sight of her initials in one corner so shocked me
I forgot to clean the cylinder, and only thought of how I could do
away with this evidence of her handkerchief having been employed for a
purpose so suspicious. Not daring to carry it from the room, I sought
for means to destroy it; but finding none, compromised the matter by
thrusting it deep down behind the cushion of one of the chairs, in the
hope of being able to recover and burn it the next day. This done, I
reloaded the pistol, locked it up, and prepared to leave the room. But here the horror which usually follows such deeds struck me like a
thunderbolt and made me for the first time uncertain in my action. I
locked the door on going out, something I should never have done. Not
till I reached the top of the stairs did I realize my folly; and then it
was too late, for there before me, candle in hand, and surprise written
on every feature of her face, stood Hannah, one of the servants, looking
at me. "Lor, sir, where have you been?" she cried, but strange to say, in a
low tone. "You look as if you had seen a ghost." And her eyes turned
suspiciously to the key which I held in my hand. I felt as if some one had clutched me round the throat. Thrusting the
key into my pocket, I took a step towards her. "I will tell you what I
have seen if you will come down-stairs," I whispered; "the ladies will
be disturbed if we talk here," and smoothing my brow as best I could,
I put out my hand and drew her towards me. What my motive was I hardly
knew; the action was probably instinctive; but when I saw the look which
came into her face as I touched her, and the alacrity with which she
prepared to follow me, I took courage, remembering the one or two
previous tokens I had had of this girl's unreasonable susceptibility to
my influence; a susceptibility which I now felt could be utilized and
made to serve my purpose. Taking her down to the parlor floor, I drew her into the depths of
the great drawing-room, and there told her in the least alarming
way possible what had happened to Mr. She was of course
intensely agitated, but she did not scream;--the novelty of her position
evidently bewildering her--and, greatly relieved, I went on to say that
I did not know who committed the deed, but that folks would declare it
was I if they knew I had been seen by her on the stairs with the library
key in my hand. "But I won't tell," she whispered, trembling violently
in her fright and eagerness. I will say I
didn't see anybody." But I soon convinced her that she could never keep
her secret if the police once began to question her, and, following
up my argument with a little cajolery, succeeded after a long while in
winning her consent to leave the house till the storm should be blown
over. But that given, it was some little time before I could make her
comprehend that she must depart at once and without going back after her
things. Not till I brightened up her wits by a promise to marry her some
day if she only obeyed me now, did she begin to look the thing in
the face and show any evidence of the real mother wit she evidently
possessed. Belden would take me in," said she, "if I could only
get to R----. She takes everybody in who asks, her; and she would
keep me, too, if I told her Miss Mary sent me. But I can't get there
to-night." I immediately set to work to convince her that she could. The midnight
train did not leave the city for a half-hour yet, and the distance to
the depot could be easily walked by her in fifteen minutes. And she was afraid she couldn't find
her way! She still hesitated, but
at length consented to go, and with some further understanding of the
method I was to employ in communicating with her, we went down-stairs. There we found a hat and shawl of the cook's which I put on her, and in
another moment we were in the carriage yard. "Remember, you are to say
nothing of what has occurred, no matter what happens," I whispered in
parting injunction as she turned to leave me. "Remember, you are to come
and marry me some day," she murmured in reply, throwing her arms about
my neck. The movement was sudden, and it was probably at this time she
dropped the candle she had unconsciously held clenched in her hand till
now. I promised her, and she glided out of the gate. Of the dreadful agitation that followed the disappearance of this girl
I can give no better idea than by saying I not only committed the
additional error of locking up the house on my re-entrance, but omitted
to dispose of the key then in my pocket by flinging it into the street
or dropping it in the hall as I went up. The fact is, I was so absorbed
by the thought of the danger I stood in from this girl, I forgot
everything else. Hannah's pale face, Hannah's look of terror, as she
turned from my side and flitted down the street, were continually before
me. I could not escape them; the form of the dead man lying below was
less vivid. It was as though I were tied in fancy to this woman of the
white face fluttering down the midnight streets. That she would fail in
something--come back or be brought back--that I should find her standing
white and horror-stricken on the front steps when I went down in the
morning, was like a nightmare to me. I began to think no other result
possible; that she never would or could win her way unchallenged to that
little cottage in a distant village; that I had but sent a trailing flag
of danger out into the world with this wretched girl;--danger that would
come back to me with the first burst of morning light! But even those thoughts faded after a while before the realization
of the peril I was in as long as the key and papers remained in my
possession. I dared not leave my room again,
or open my window. Indeed I was
afraid to move about in my room. Yes, my
morbid terror had reached that point--I was fearful of one whose ears I
myself had forever closed, imagined him in his bed beneath and wakeful
to the least sound. But the necessity of doing something with these evidences of guilt
finally overcame this morbid anxiety, and drawing the two letters from
my pocket--I had not yet undressed--I chose out the most dangerous of
the two, that written by Mr. Leavenworth himself, and, chewing it till
it was mere pulp, threw it into a corner; but the other had blood on it,
and nothing, not even the hope of safety, could induce me to put it
to my lips. I was forced to lie with it clenched in my hand, and the
flitting image of Hannah before my eyes, till the slow morning broke. I
have heard it said that a year in heaven seems like a day; I can easily
believe it. I know that an hour in hell seems an eternity! Whether it was that the sunshine glancing
on the wall made me think of Mary and all I was ready to do for her
sake, or whether it was the mere return of my natural stoicism in the
presence of actual necessity, I cannot say. I only know that I arose
calm and master of myself. The problem of the letter and key had solved
itself also. Instead of that I would
put them in plain sight, trusting to that very fact for their being
overlooked. Making the letter up into lighters, I carried them into the
spare room and placed them in a vase. Then, taking the key in my hand,
went down-stairs, intending to insert it in the lock of the library door
as I went by. But Miss Eleanore descending almost immediately behind me
made this impossible. I succeeded, however, in thrusting it, without
her knowledge, among the filagree work of the gas-fixture in the
second hall, and thus relieved, went down into the breakfast room as
self-possessed a man as ever crossed its threshold. Mary was there,
looking exceedingly pale and disheartened, and as I met her eye, which
for a wonder turned upon me as I entered, I could almost have laughed,
thinking of the deliverance that had come to her, and of the time when I
should proclaim myself to be the man who had accomplished it. Of the alarm that speedily followed, and my action at that time and
afterwards, I need not speak in detail. I behaved just as I would have
done if I had had no hand in the murder. I even forbore to touch the key
or go to the spare room, or make any movement which I was not willing
all the world should see. For as things stood, there was not a shadow
of evidence against me in the house; neither was I, a hard-working,
uncomplaining secretary, whose passion for one of his employer's nieces
was not even mistrusted by the lady herself, a person to be suspected
of the crime which threw him out of a fair situation. So I performed
all the duties of my position, summoning the police, and going for Mr. Veeley, just as I would have done if those hours between me leaving
Mr. Leavenworth for the first time and going down to breakfast in the
morning had been blotted from my consciousness. And this was the principle upon which I based my action at the inquest. Leaving that half-hour and its occurrences out of the question, I
resolved to answer such questions as might be put me as truthfully as
I could; the great fault with men situated as I was usually being that
they lied too much, thus committing themselves on unessential matters. But alas, in thus planning for my own safety, I forgot one thing,
and that was the dangerous position in which I should thus place Mary
Leavenworth as the one benefited by the crime. Not till the inference
was drawn by a juror, from the amount of wine found in Mr. Leavenworth's
glass in the morning, that he had come to his death shortly after my
leaving him, did I realize what an opening I had made for suspicion in
her direction by admitting that I had heard a rustle on the stair a few
minutes after going up. That all present believed it to have been made
by Eleanore, did not reassure me. She was so completely disconnected
with the crime I could not imagine suspicion holding to her for an
instant. But Mary--If a curtain had been let down before me, pictured
with the future as it has since developed, I could not have seen more
plainly what her position would be, if attention were once directed
towards her. So, in the vain endeavor to cover up my blunder, I began
to lie. Forced to admit that a shadow of disagreement had been lately
visible between Mr. Leavenworth and one of his nieces, I threw the
burden of it upon Eleanore, as the one best able to bear it. The
consequences were more serious than I anticipated. Direction had been
given to suspicion which every additional evidence that now came up
seemed by some strange fatality to strengthen. Leavenworth's own pistol had been used in the assassination,
and that too by a person then in the house, but I myself was brought
to acknowledge that Eleanore had learned from me, only a little while
before, how to load, aim, and fire this very pistol--a coincidence
mischievous enough to have been of the devil's own making. Seeing all this, my fear of what the ladies would admit when questioned
became very great. Let them in their innocence acknowledge that, upon my
ascent, Mary had gone to her uncle's room for the purpose of persuading
him not to carry into effect the action he contemplated, and what
consequences might not ensue! But events of which I had at that time no knowledge had occurred to
influence them. Eleanore, with some show of reason, as it seems, not
only suspected her cousin of the crime, but had informed her of the
fact, and Mary, overcome with terror at finding there was more or
less circumstantial evidence supporting the suspicion, decided to deny
whatever told against herself, trusting to Eleanore's generosity not to
be contradicted. Though, by the course
she took, Eleanore was forced to deepen the prejudice already rife
against herself, she not only forbore to contradict her cousin, but when
a true answer would have injured her, actually refused to return any,
a lie being something she could not utter, even to save one especially
endeared to her. This conduct of hers had one effect upon me. It aroused my admiration
and made me feel that here was a woman worth helping if assistance could
be given without danger to myself. Yet I doubt if my sympathy would have
led me into doing anything, if I had not perceived, by the stress laid
upon certain well-known matters, that actual danger hovered about us
all while the letter and key remained in the house. Even before the
handkerchief was produced, I had made up my mind to attempt their
destruction; but when that was brought up and shown, I became so alarmed
I immediately rose and, making my way under some pretence or other to
the floors above, snatched the key from the gas-fixture, the
lighters from the vase, and hastening with them down the hall to Mary
Leavenworth's room, went in under the expectation of finding a fire
there in which to destroy them. But, to my heavy disappointment, there
were only a few smoldering ashes in the grate, and, thwarted in my
design, I stood hesitating what to do, when I heard some one coming
up-stairs. Alive to the consequences of being found in that room at that
time, I cast the lighters into the grate and started for the door. But
in the quick move I made, the key flew from my hand and slid under a
chair. Aghast at the mischance, I paused, but the sound of approaching
steps increasing, I lost all control over myself and fled from the room. I had barely reached my own door when
Eleanore Leavenworth, followed by two servants, appeared at the top of
the staircase and proceeded towards the room I had just left. The sight
reassured me; she would see the key, and take some means of disposing
of it; and indeed I always supposed her to have done so, for no further
word of key or letter ever came to my ears. This may explain why the
questionable position in which Eleanore soon found herself awakened in
me no greater anxiety. I thought the suspicions of the police rested
upon nothing more tangible than the peculiarity of her manner at the
inquest and the discovery of her handkerchief on the scene of the
tragedy. I did not know they possessed what might be called absolute
proof of her connection with the crime. But if I had, I doubt if my
course would have been any different. Mary's peril was the one thing
capable of influencing me, and she did not appear to be in peril. On the
contrary, every one, by common consent, seemed to ignore all appearance
of guilt on her part. Gryce, whom I soon learned to fear, had
given one sign of suspicion, or Mr. Raymond, whom I speedily recognized
as my most persistent though unconscious foe, had betrayed the least
distrust of her, I should have taken warning. But they did not, and,
lulled into a false security by their manner, I let the days go by
without suffering any fears on her account. But not without many
anxieties for myself. Hannah's existence precluded all sense of personal
security. Knowing the determination of the police to find her, I trod
the verge of an awful suspense continually. Meantime the wretched certainty was forcing itself upon me that I had
lost, instead of gained, a hold on Mary Leavenworth. Not only did she
evince the utmost horror of the deed which had made her mistress of
her uncle's wealth, but, owing, as I believed, to the influence of Mr. Raymond, soon gave evidence that she was losing, to a certain extent,
the characteristics of mind and heart which had made me hopeful of
winning her by this deed of blood. Under the terrible restraint forced upon me, I walked my weary
round in a state of mind bordering on frenzy. Many and many a time have
I stopped in my work, wiped my pen and laid it down with the idea that
I could not repress myself another moment, but I have always taken it
up again and gone on with my task. Raymond has sometimes shown his
wonder at my sitting in my dead employer's chair. By keeping the murder constantly before my mind, I
was enabled to restrain myself from any inconsiderate action. At last there came a time when my agony could be no longer suppressed. Raymond, I saw a strange
gentleman standing in the reception room, looking at Mary Leavenworth
in a way that would have made my blood boil, even if I had not heard him
whisper these words: "But you are my wife, and know it, whatever you may
say or do!" It was the lightning-stroke of my life. After what I had done to make
her mine, to hear another claim her as already his own, was stunning,
maddening! I had either to yell in
my fury or deal the man beneath some tremendous blow in my hatred. I did
not dare to shriek, so I struck the blow. Raymond, and hearing that it was, as I expected, Clavering, I flung
caution, reason, common sense, all to the winds, and in a moment of fury
denounced him as the murderer of Mr. The next instant I would have given worlds to recall my words. What had
I done but drawn attention to myself in thus accusing a man against whom
nothing could of course be proved! So, after a night of thought, I did the next best thing: gave a
superstitious reason for my action, and so restored myself to my former
position without eradicating from the mind of Mr. Raymond that vague
doubt of the man which my own safety demanded. But I had no intention of
going any further, nor should I have done so if I had not observed that
for some reason Mr. But
that once seen, revenge took possession of me, and I asked myself if the
burden of this crime could be thrown on this man. Still I do not believe
that any active results would have followed this self-questioning if I
had not overheard a whispered conversation between two of the servants,
in which I learned that Mr. Clavering had been seen to enter the
house on the night of the murder, but was not seen to leave it. With such a fact for a starting-point, what might I not
hope to accomplish? While she remained
alive I saw nothing but ruin before me. I made up my mind to destroy
her and satisfy my hatred of Mr. By what
means could I reach her without deserting my post, or make away with
her without exciting fresh suspicion? The problem seemed insolvable;
but Trueman Harwell had not played the part of a machine so long without
result. Before I had studied the question a day, light broke upon it,
and I saw that the only way to accomplish my plans was to inveigle her
into destroying herself. No sooner had this thought matured than I hastened to act upon it. Knowing the tremendous risk I ran, I took every precaution. Locking
myself up in my room, I wrote her a letter in printed characters--she
having distinctly told me she could not read writing--in which I played
upon her ignorance, foolish fondness, and Irish superstition, by telling
her I dreamed of her every night and wondered if she did of me; was
afraid she didn't, so enclosed her a little charm, which, if she would
use according to directions, would give her the most beautiful visions. These directions were for her first to destroy my letter by burning it,
next to take in her hand the packet I was careful to enclose, swallow
the powder accompanying it, and go to bed. The powder was a deadly dose
of poison and the packet was, as you know, a forged confession falsely
criminating Henry Clavering. Enclosing all these in an envelope in
the corner of which I had marked a cross, I directed it, according to
agreement, to Mrs. Then followed the greatest period of suspense I had yet endured. Though
I had purposely refrained from putting my name to the letter, I felt
that the chances of detection were very great. Let her depart in the
least particular from the course I had marked out for her, and fatal
results must ensue. If she opened the enclosed packet, mistrusted the
powder, took Mrs. Belden into her confidence, or even failed to burn my
letter, all would be lost. I could not be sure of her or know the result
of my scheme except through the newspapers. Do you think I kept watch
of the countenances about me? devoured the telegraphic news, or started
when the bell rang? And when, a few days since, I read that short
paragraph in the paper which assured me that my efforts had at least
produced the death of the woman I feared, do you think I experienced any
sense of relief? In six hours had come the summons from Mr. Gryce,
and--let these prison walls, this confession itself, tell the rest. I am
no longer capable of speech or action. THE OUTCOME OF A GREAT CRIME


    "Leave her to Heaven
    And to those thorns that
    In her bosom lodge
    To prick and sting her." --Hamlet

    "For she is wise, if I can judge of her;
    And fair she is, if that mine eyes be true;
    And true she is, as she has proved herself;
    And therefore like herself, wise, fair, and true,
    Shall she be placed in my constant soul." I cried, as I made my way into her presence, "are you
prepared for very good news? News that will brighten these pale cheeks
and give the light back to these eyes, and make life hopeful and sweet
to you once more? Tell me," I urged, stooping over her where she sat,
for she looked ready to faint. "I don't know," she faltered; "I fear your idea of good news and mine
may differ. No news can be good but----"

"What?" I asked, taking her hands in mine with a smile that ought to
have reassured her, it was one of such profound happiness. "Tell me; do
not be afraid." Her dreadful burden had lain upon her so long it had become
a part of her being. How could she realize it was founded on a mistake;
that she had no cause to fear the past, present, or future? But when the truth was made known to her; when, with all the fervor and
gentle tact of which I was capable, I showed her that her suspicions had
been groundless, and that Trueman Harwell, and not Mary, was accountable
for the evidences of crime which had led her into attributing to her
cousin the guilt of her uncle's death, her first words were a prayer to
be taken to the one she had so wronged. I cannot breathe or think till I have begged pardon of her on my
knees. Seeing the state she was in, I deemed it wise to humor her. So,
procuring a carriage, I drove with her to her cousin's home. "Mary will spurn me; she will not even look at me; and she will be
right!" she cried, as we rolled away up the avenue. "An outrage like
this can never be forgiven. But God knows I thought myself justified in
my suspicions. If you knew--"

"I do know," I interposed. "Mary acknowledges that the circumstantial
evidence against her was so overwhelming, she was almost staggered
herself, asking if she could be guiltless with such proofs against her. But----"

"Wait, oh, wait; did Mary say that?" I did not answer; I wanted her to see for herself the extent of that
change. But when, in a few minutes later, the carriage stopped and I
hurried with her into the house which had been the scene of so much
misery, I was hardly prepared for the difference in her own countenance
which the hall light revealed. Her eyes were bright, her cheeks were
brilliant, her brow lifted and free from shadow; so quickly does the ice
of despair melt in the sunshine of hope. Thomas, who had opened the door, was sombrely glad to see his mistress
again. "Miss Leavenworth is in the drawing-room," said he. I nodded, then seeing that Eleanore could scarcely move for agitation,
asked her whether she would go in at once, or wait till she was more
composed. "I will go in at once; I cannot wait." And slipping from my grasp, she
crossed the hall and laid her hand upon the drawing-room curtain, when
it was suddenly lifted from within and Mary stepped out. I did not need to glance their
way to know that Eleanore had fallen at her cousin's feet, and that
her cousin had affrightedly lifted her. I did not need to hear: "My sin
against you is too great; you cannot forgive me!" followed by the low:
"My shame is great enough to lead me to forgive anything!" to know that
the lifelong shadow between these two had dissolved like a cloud, and
that, for the future, bright days of mutual confidence and sympathy were
in store. Yet when, a half-hour or so later, I heard the door of the reception
room, into which I had retired, softly open, and looking up, saw Mary
standing on the threshold, with the light of true humility on her face,
I own that I was surprised at the softening which had taken place in
her haughty beauty. "Blessed is the shame that purifies," I inwardly
murmured, and advancing, held out my hand with a respect and sympathy I
never thought to feel for her again. Blushing deeply, she came and stood by
my side. "I have much to be grateful for; how
much I never realized till to-night; but I cannot speak of it now. What
I wish is for you to come in and help me persuade Eleanore to accept
this fortune from my hands. It is hers, you know; was willed to her, or
would have been if--"

"Wait," said I, in the trepidation which this appeal to me on such a
subject somehow awakened. Is it your
determined purpose to transfer your fortune into your cousin's hands?" Her look was enough without the low, "Ah, how can you ask me?" Clavering was sitting by the side of Eleanore when we entered the
drawing-room. He immediately rose, and drawing me to one side, earnestly
said:

"Before the courtesies of the hour pass between us, Mr. Raymond, allow
me to tender you my apology. You have in your possession a document
which ought never to have been forced upon you. Founded upon a mistake,
the act was an insult which I bitterly regret. If, in consideration of
my mental misery at that time, you can pardon it, I shall feel forever
indebted to you; if not----"

"Mr. The occurrences of that day belong to
a past which I, for one, have made up my mind to forget as soon as
possible. The future promises too richly for us to dwell on bygone
miseries." And with a look of mutual understanding and friendship we hastened to
rejoin the ladies. Of the conversation that followed, it is only necessary to state the
result. Eleanore, remaining firm in her refusal to accept property so
stained by guilt, it was finally agreed upon that it should be devoted
to the erection and sustainment of some charitable institution of
magnitude sufficient to be a recognized benefit to the city and its
unfortunate poor. This settled, our thoughts returned to our friends,
especially to Mr. "He has grieved like a father over us." And, in her spirit of penitence, she would have undertaken the unhappy
task of telling him the truth. But Eleanore, with her accustomed generosity, would not hear of this. "No, Mary," said she; "you have suffered enough. And leaving them there, with the light of growing hope and confidence on
their faces, we went out again into the night, and so into a dream from
which I have never waked, though the shine of her dear eyes have been
now the load-star of my life for many happy, happy months. We are all travelers on the great plain we
call life, and there is nobody quite sure what road to take--not just
dead sure, you know. There are lots of guide-boards on the plain and you
find thousands of people swearing to-day that their guide-board is the
only board that shows the right direction. I go and talk to them and
they say: "You go that way, or you will be damned." I go to another and
they say: "You go this way, or you will be damned." Every Mind True to Itself

In my judgment, every human being should take a road of his own. Every
mind should be true to itself--should think, investigate and conclude
for itself. This is a duty alike incumbent upon pauper and prince. In every age some men carried the torch of progress and handed it
to some other, and it has been carried through all the dark ages of
barbarism, and had it not been for such men we would have been naked
and uncivilized to-night, with pictures of wild beasts tattooed on our
skins, dancing around some dried snake fetish. Gold makes a Barren Landscape

Only a few days ago I was where they wrench the precious metals from
the miserly clutch of the rocks. When I saw the mountains; treeless,
shrubless, flowerless, without even a spire of grass, it seemed to me
that gold had the same effect upon the country that holds it, as upon
the man who lives and labors only for it. It affects the land as it
does the man. It leaves the heart barren without a flower of
kindness--without a blossom of pity. A Grand Achievement

There is nothing grander than to rescue from the leprosy of slander the
reputation of a great and generous name. There is nothing nobler than to
benefit our benefactors. The Divorce of Church and State

The Constitution of the United States was the first decree entered in
the high court of a nation, forever divorcing Church and State. Professors

Instead of dismissing professors for finding something out, let us
rather discharge those who do not. Let each teacher understand that
investigation is not dangerous for him; that his bread is safe, no
matter how much truth he may discover, and that his salary will not be
reduced, simply because he finds that the ancient Jews did not know the
entire history of the world. Developement

I thought after all I had rather belong to a race of people that came
from skulless vertebrae in the dim Laurentian period, that wiggled
without knowing they were wiggling, that began to develope and came up
by a gradual developement until they struck this gentleman in the dugout
coming up slowly--up--up--up--until, for instance, they produced such a
man as Shakespeare--he who harvested all the fields of dramatic thought,
and after whom all others have been only gleaners of straw, he who found
the human intellect dwelling in a hut, touched it with the wand of his
genius and it became a palace--producing him and hundreds of others I
might mention--with the angels of progress leaning over the far horizon
beckoning this race of work and thought--I had rather belong to a race
commencing at the skulless vertebrae producing the gentleman in the
dugout and so on up, than to have descended from a perfect pair, upon
which the Lord has lost money from that day to this. I had rather belong
to a race that is going up than to one that is going down. I would
rather belong to one that commenced at the skulless vertebrae and
started for perfection, than to belong to one that started from
perfection and started for the skulless vertebrae. Poet's Dream

When every church becomes a school, every cathedral a university, every
clergyman a teacher, and all their hearers brave and honest
thinkers, then, and not until then, will the dream of poet, patriot,
philanthropist and philosopher, become a real and blessed truth. The Temple of the Future

We are laying the foundations of the grand temple of the future--not the
temple of all the gods, but of all the people--wherein, with appropriate
rites, will be celebrated the religion of Humanity. We are doing what
little we can to hasten the coming of the day when society shall cease
producing millionaires and mendicants--gorged indolence and famished
industry--truth in rags, and superstition robed and crowned. We are
looking for the time when the useful shall be the honorable; and when
Reason, throned upon the world's brain, shall be the King of Kings, and
God of Gods. The final Goal

We do not expect to accomplish everything in our day; but we want to
do what good we can, and to render all the service possible in the
holy cause of human progress. We know that doing away with gods and
supernatural persons and powers is not an end. It is a means to the end;
the real end being the happiness of man. The Eighteenth Century

At that time the seeds sown by the great Infidels were beginning to
bear fruit in France. The Eighteenth
Century was crowning its gray hairs with the wreath of Progress. On
every hand Science was bearing testimony against the Church. Voltaire
had filled Europe with light; D'Holbach was giving to the _elite_
of Paris the principles contained in his "System of Nature." The
Encyclopedists had attacked superstition with information for the
masses. A few had the
courage to keep their shoes on and let the bush burn. America had set an
example to the world. The word Liberty was in the mouths of men, and
they began to wipe the dust from their knees. The dawn of a new day had
appeared. Ours is the only flag that
has in reality written upon it: Liberty, Fraternity, Equality--the three
grandest words in all the languages of men. Liberty: Give to every man
the fruit of his own labor--the labor of his hand and of his brain. Fraternity: Every man in the right is my brother. Equality: The rights
of all are equal. No race, no color, no previous condition, can change
the rights of men. The Declaration of Independence has at last been
carried out in letter and in spirit. To-day the black man looks upon his
child and says: The avenues of distinction are open to you--upon your
brow may fall the civic wreath. We are celebrating the courage and
wisdom of our fathers, and the glad shout of a free people, the anthem
of a grand nation, commencing at the Atlantic, is following the sun to
the Pacific, across a continent of happy homes. Is it
nothing to fill the world with light, with discovery, with science? Is it nothing to dignify man and exalt the intellect? Is it nothing to
grope your way into the dreary prisons, the damp and dropping dungeons,
the dark and silent cells of superstition, where the souls of men
are chained to floors of stone? Is it nothing to conduct these souls
gradually into the blessed light of day,--to let them see again the
happy fields, the sweet, green earth, and hear the everlasting music of
the waves? Is it nothing to make men wipe the dust from their swollen
knees, the tears from their blanched and furrowed cheeks? Is it nothing
to relieve the heavens of an insatiate monster, and write upon the
eternal dome, glittering with stars, the grand word--Liberty? Ingersoll Not a Politician

I want it perfectly understood that I am not a politician. I believe in
liberty, and I want to see the time when every man, woman and child will
enjoy every human right. Civilization

Civilization is the child of free thought. The new world has drifted
away from the rotten wharf of superstition. The politics of this country
are being settled by the new ideas of individual liberty, and parties
and churches that cannot accept the new truths must perish. Cornell University

With the single exception of Cornell, there is not a college in the
United States where truth has ever been a welcome guest. The moment one
of the teachers denies the inspiration of the Bible, he is discharged. If he discovers a fact inconsistent with that book, so much the worse
for the fact, and especially for the discoverer of the fact. He must not
corrupt the minds of his pupils with demonstrations. He must beware
of every truth that cannot, in some way, be made to harmonize with the
superstitions of the Jews. Church and School Divorced

Our country will never be filled with great institutions of learning
until there is an absolute divorce between church and school. As long
as the mutilated records of a barbarous people are placed by priest and
professor above the reason of mankind, we shall reap but little benefit
from church or school. Laws That Want Repealing

All laws defining and punishing blasphemy--making it a crime to give
your honest ideas about the Bible, or to laugh at the ignorance of
the ancient Jews, or to enjoy yourself on the Sabbath, or to give your
opinion of Jehovah, were passed by impudent bigots, and should be at
once repealed by honest men. Government Secular

Our government should be entirely and purely secular. The religious
views of a candidate should be kept entirely out of sight. He should not
be compelled to give his opinion as to the inspiration of the bible,
the propriety of infant baptism, or the immaculate conception. He should be allowed to settle such
things for himself. In 1876, our forefathers retired God from politics. They said all
power comes from the people. They kept God out of the Constitution, and
allowed each State to settle the question for itself. Candidates Made Hypocrites

Candidates are forced to pretend that they are Catholics with Protestant
proclivities, or Christians with liberal tendencies, or temperance men
who now and then take a glass of wine, or, that although not members of
any church their wives are, and that they subscribe liberally to
all. The result of all this is that we reward hypocrisy and elect men
entirely destitute of real principle; and this will never change until
the people become grand enough to allow each other to do their own
thinking. The Church and the Throne

So our fathers said: "We shall form a secular government, and under the
flag with which we are going to enrich the air, we will allow every man
to worship God as he thinks best." They said: "Religion is an individual
thing between each man and his Creator, and he can worship as he pleases
and as he desires." The history of the world
warned them that the liberty of man was not safe in the clutch and grasp
of any church. They had read of and seen the thumbscrews, the racks and
the dungeons of the inquisition. They knew all about the hypocrisy of
the olden time. They knew that the church had stood side by side with
the throne; that the high priests were hypocrites, and that the kings
were robbers. They also knew that if they gave to any church power, it
would corrupt the best church in the world. And so they said that power
must not reside in a church, nor in a sect, but power must be wherever
humanity is--in the great body of the people. And the officers and
servants of the people must be responsible. And so I say again, as
I said in the commencement, this is the wisest, the profoundest, the
bravest political document that ever was written and signed by man. The Old Idea

What was the old idea? The old idea was that no political power came
from, nor in any manner belonged to, the people. The old idea was that
the political power came from the clouds; that the political power came
in some miraculous way from heaven; that it came down to kings, and
queens, and robbers. The nobles lived upon the
labor of the people; the people had no rights; the nobles stole what
they had and divided with the kings, and the kings pretended to divide
what they stole with God Almighty. The source, then, of political power
was from above. The people were responsible to the nobles, the nobles to
the king, and the people had no political rights whatever, no more than
the wild beasts of the forest. The kings were responsible to God, not to
the people. The kings were responsible to the clouds, not to the toiling
millions they robbed and plundered. Liberty for Politicians

I would like also to liberate the politician. At present, the successful
office-seeker is a good deal like the centre of the earth; he weighs
nothing himself, but draws everything else to him. There are so many
societies, so many churches, so many isms, that it is almost impossible
for an independent man to succeed in a political career. Tax all Church Property

I am in favor of the taxation of all church property. If that property
belongs to God, he is able to pay the tax. If we exempt anything, let
us exempt the home of the widow and orphan. The church has to-day
$600,000,000 or $700,000,000 of property in this country. It must cost
$2,000,000 a week, that is to say $500 a minute to run these churches. You give me this money and if I don't do more good with it than
four times as many churches I'll resign. Let them make the churches
attractive and they'll get more hearers. They will have less empty pews
if they have less empty heads in the pulpit. The time will come when the
preacher will become a teacher. The Source of Power

The Declaration of Independence announces the sublime truth, that all
power comes from the people. This was a denial, and the first denial of
a nation, of the infamous dogma that God confers the right upon one man
to govern others. It was the first grand assertion of the dignity of the
human race. It declared the governed to be the source of power, and in
fact denied the authority of any and all gods. The Best Blood of the Old Word come to the New

The kings of the old world endeavored to parcel out this land to their
favorites. There was too much courage
required for them to take and keep it, and so men had to come here
who were dissatisfied with the old country--who were dissatisfied
with England, dissatisfied with France, with Germany, with Ireland and
Holland. Men came here for liberty,
and on account of certain principles they entertained and held dearer
than life. And they were willing to work, willing to fell the forests,
to fight the savages, willing to go through all the hardships, perils
and dangers of a new country, of a new land; and the consequences was
that our country was settled by brave and adventurous spirits, by men
who had opinions of their own, and were willing to live in the wild
forests for the sake of expressing those opinions, even if they
expressed them only to trees, rocks, and savage men. The best blood of
the old world came to the new. No State Church

Happily for us, there was no church strong enough to dictate to the
rest. Fortunately for us, the colonists not only, but the colonies
differed widely in their religious views. There were the Puritans who
hated the Episcopalians, and Episcopalians who hated the Catholics,
and the Catholics who hated both, while the Quakers held them all in
contempt. There they were of every sort, and color, and kind, and how
was it that they came together? They
wanted to form a new nation. More than that, most of them cordially
hated Great Britain; and they pledged each other to forget these
religious prejudices, for a time at least, and agreed that there should
be only one religion until they got through, and that was the religion
of patriotism. They solemnly agreed that the new nation should not
belong to any particular church, but that it should secure the rights of
all. The Enthusiasts of 1776

These grand men were enthusiasts; and the world has only been raised
by enthusiasts. In every country there have been a few who have given
a national aspiration to the people. The enthusiasts of 1776 were the
builders and framers of this great and splendid government; and they
were the men who saw, although others did not, the golden fringe of the
mantle of glory, that will finally cover this world. They knew, they
felt, they believed they would give a new constellation to the political
heavens--that they would make the Americans a grand people--grand as
the continent upon which they lived. The Church Must Have no Sword

Our fathers founded the first secular government that was ever founded
in this world. The first secular government; the first
government that said every church has exactly the same rights and no
more. In other words our fathers were the first men who had the sense,
had the genius, to know that no church should be allowed to have a
sword; that it should be allowed only to exert its moral influence. I want the power where some one can use
it. As long as a man is responsible to the people there is no fear of
despotism. And when any man talks about
despotism, you may be sure he wants to steal or be up to devilment. If
we have any sense, we have got to have localization of brain. If we have
any power, we must have centralization. We want centralization of the
right kind. The man we choose for our head wants the army in one hand,
the navy in the other; and to execute the supreme will of the supreme
people. In the long run the nation that is honest, the people that are
industrious, will pass the people that are dishonest, the people that
are idle; no matter what grand ancestry they might have had. To work for others is, in reality, the only way in which a man can work
for himself. Speculators cannot make unless
somebody loses. In the realm of speculation, every success has at least
one victim. The harvest reaped by the farmer benefits all and injures
none. For him to succeed, it is not necessary that some one should fail. The same is true of all producers--of all laborers. State Sovereignty

I despise the doctrine of State sovereignty. I believe in the rights
of the States, but not in the sovereignty of the States. Rising above States as the Alps above valleys
are the rights of man. Rising above the rights of the government even in
this Nation are the sublime rights of the people. Governments are good
only so long as they protect human rights. But the rights of a man never
should be sacrificed upon the altar of the State or upon the altar of
the Nation. The King of America

I am not only in favor of free speech, but I am also in favor of an
absolutely honest ballot. There is one king in this country; there
is one emperor; there is one supreme czar; and that is the legally
expressed will of the majority of the people. The man who casts an
illegal vote, the man who refuses to count a legal vote, poisons the
fountain of power, poisons the spring of justice, and is a traitor to
the only king in this land. I have always said, and I say again, that
the more liberty there is given away the more you have. There is room in
this world for us all; there is room enough for all of our thoughts;
out upon the intellectual sea there is room for every sail, and in the
intellectual air there is space for every wing. A man that exercises a
right that he will not give to others is a barbarian. A State that does
not allow free speech is uncivilized, and is a disgrace to the American
Union. I have been told that during the war we had plenty of money. I saw promises for dollars,
but not dollars. And the greenback, unless you have the gold behind it,
is no more a dollar than a bill of fare is a dinner. You cannot make
a paper dollar without taking a dollar's worth of paper. I want it issued by the government, and I
want behind every one of these dollars either a gold or silver dollar,
so that every greenback under the flag can lift up its hand and swear,
"I know that my redeemer liveth." The Wail of Dead Nations

A government founded upon anything except liberty and justice cannot and
ought not to stand. All the wrecks on either side of the stream of time,
all the wrecks of the great cities, and all the nations that have passed
away--all are a warning that no nation founded upon injustice can stand. From the sand-enshrouded Egypt, from the marble wilderness of Athens,
and from every fallen, crumbling stone of the once mighty Rome, comes
a wail, as it were, the cry that no nation founded upon injustice can
permanently stand. What the Republican Party Did

I am a Republican. I will tell you why: This is the only free government
in the world. The Republican party took
the chains from 4,000,000 of people. The Republican party, with the wand
of progress, touched the auction-block and it became a school-house; The
Republican party put down the rebellion, saved the nation, kept the old
banner afloat in the air, and declared that slavery of every kind should
be exterpated from the face of the continent. Doings of Democrats

I am opposed to the Democratic party, and I will tell you why. Every
State that seceded from the United States was a Democratic State. Every
ordinance of secession that was drawn was drawn by a Democrat. Every man
that endeavored to tear the old flag from the heaven that it enriches
was a Democrat. Every man that tried to destroy the nation was a
Democrat. Every enemy this great republic has had for twenty years has
been a Democrat. Every man that shot Union soldiers was a Democrat. Every man that starved Union soldiers and refused them in the extremity
of death, a crust, was a Democrat. Every man that loved slavery better
than liberty was a Democrat. The man that assassinated Abraham Lincoln
was a Democrat. Every man that sympathized with the assassin--every
man glad that the noblest President ever elected was assassinated, was a
Democrat. Every man that wanted the privilege of whipping another man to make him
work for him for nothing and pay him with lashes on his naked back, was
a Democrat. Every man that raised blood-hounds to pursue human beings
was a Democrat. Every man that clutched from shrieking, shuddering,
crouching mothers, babes from their breasts, and sold them into slavery,
was a Democrat. Every man that impaired the credit of the United States,
every man that swore we would never pay the bonds, every man that swore
we would never redeem the greenbacks, every maligner of his country's
credit, every calumniator of his country's honor, was a Democrat. Every
man that resisted the draft, every man that hid in the bushes and shot
at Union men simply because they were endeavoring to enforce the laws
of their country, was a Democrat. Every man that wept over the corpse of
slavery was a Democrat. The flag that will not protect its protectors is a dirty rag that
contaminates the air in which it waves. The government that will not
defend its defenders is a disgrace to the nations of the world. I am
a Republican because the Republican party says, "We will protect the
rights of American citizens at home, and if necessary we will march
an army into any State to protect the rights of the humblest American
citizen in that State." I am a Republican because that party allows
me to be free--allows me to do my own thinking in my own way. I am a
Republican because it is a party grand enough and splendid enough and
sublime enough to invite every human being in favor of liberty and
progress to fight shoulder to shoulder for the advancement of mankind. It invites the Methodist; it invites the Catholic; it invites the
Presbyterian and every kind of sectarian; it invites the free-thinker;
it invites the infidel, provided he is in favor of giving to every other
human being every chance and every right that he claims for himself. I
am a Republican, I tell you. Every man that tried to spread smallpox and yellow fever
in the North, as the instrumentalities of civilized war, was a Democrat. Soldiers, every scar you have got on your heroic bodies was given you
by a Democrat. Every scar, every arm that is lacking, every limb that
is gone, every scar is a souvenir of a Democrat. Every man that was the enemy of human liberty in this country was a
Democrat. Every man that wanted the fruit of all the heroism of all the
ages to turn to ashes upon the lips--every one was a Democrat. Give Every Man a Chance

Now, my friends, thousands of the Southern people, and thousands of the
Northern Democrats, are afraid that the <DW64>s are going to pass them
in the race for life. Democrat, he will do it unless you attend
to your business. The simple fact that you are white cannot save you
always. You have got to be industrious, honest, to cultivate a justice. If you don't the <DW52> race will pass you, as sure as you live. I am
for giving every man a chance. Shall the people that saved this country rule it? Shall the men who
saved the old flag hold it? Shall the men who saved the ship of state
sail it? or shall the rebels walk her quarter-deck, give the orders
and sink it? Shall a solid South, a united South,
united by assassination and murder, a South solidified by the shot-gun;
shall a united South, with the aid of a divided North, shall they
control this great and splendid country? Well, then, the North must
wake up. We are right back where we were in 1861. This is simply a
prolongation of the war. This is the war of the idea, the other was the
war of the musket. The other was the war of cannon, this is the war of
thought, and we have got to beat them in this war of thought, recollect
that. The question is, Shall the men who endeavored to destroy this
country rule it? Shall the men that said, This is not a nation, have
charge of the nation? The Declaration of Independence

The Declaration of Independence is the grandest, the bravest, and
the profoundest political document that was ever signed by the
representatives of the people. It is the embodiment of physical and
moral courage and of political wisdom. I say physical courage, because
it was a declaration of war against the most powerful nation then on the
globe; a declaration of war by thirteen weak, unorganized colonies; a
declaration of war by a few people, without military stores, without
wealth, without strength, against the most powerful kingdom on the
earth; a declaration of war made when the British navy, at that day the
mistress of every sea, was hovering along the coast of America, looking
after defenseless towns and villages to ravage and destroy. It was made
when thousands of English soldiers were upon our soil, and when the
principal cities of America were in the substantial possession of
the enemy. And so, I say, all things considered, it was the bravest
political document ever signed by man. I have a dream that this world is growing better and better every day
and every year; that there is more charity, more justice, more love
every day. I have a dream that prisons will not always curse the earth;
that the shadow of the gallows will not always fall on the land; that
the withered hand of want will not always be stretched out for charity;
that finally wisdom will sit in the legislature, justice in the courts,
charity will occupy all the pulpits, and that finally the world will be
controlled by liberty and love, by justice and charity. That is my
dream, and if it does not come true, it shall not be my fault. The Column of July

I stood, a little while ago, in the city of Paris, where stood the
Bastile, where now stands the column of July, surmounted by the figure
of Liberty. In its right hand is a broken chain, in its left hand a
hammer; upon its shining forehead a glittering star--and as I looked
upon it I said, such is the Republican party of my country. A Nation of Rascals

Samuel J. Tilden says we are a nation of thieves and rascals. If that is
so he ought to be President. But I denounce him as a calumniator of
my country; a maligner of this nation. This country is
covered with asylums for the aged, the helpless, the insane, the orphan,
the wounded soldiers. Thieves and rascals don't build such things. In the cities of the Atlantic coast this summer, they built floating
hospitals, great ships, and took the little children from the
sub-cellars and narrow, dirty streets of New York city, where the
Democratic party is the strongest--took these poor waifs and put them in
these great hospitals out at sea, and let the breezes of ocean kiss the
rose of health back to their pallid cheeks. Rascals and thieves do not
do so. When Chicago burned, railroads were blocked with the charity of
the American people. Thieves and rascals did not do so. We are a Great People

We are a great people. Three millions have increased to fifty--thirteen
states to thirty-eight. We have better homes, and more of the
conveniences of life than any other people upon the face of the globe. The farmers of our country live better than did the kings and princes
two hundred years ago--and they have twice as much sense and heart. Remember that the man who acts best his part--who loves
his friends the best--is most willing to help others--truest to the
obligation--who has the best heart--the most feeling--the deepest
sympathies--and who freely gives to others the rights that he claims for
himself, is the best man. We have disfranchised the aristocrats of the
air, and have given one country to mankind. Mule Equality

Suppose there was a great horse-race here to-day, free to every horse
in the world, and to all the mules, and all the scrubs, and all the
donkeys. At the tap of the drum they come to the line, and the judges
say "it is a go." Let me ask you, what does the blooded horse, rushing
ahead, with nostrils distended, drinking in the breath of his own
swiftness, with his mane flying like a banner of victory, with his veins
standing out all over him, as if a net of life had been cast around
him--with his thin neck, his high withers, his tremulous flanks--what
does he care how many mules and donkeys run on the track? But the
Democratic scrub, with his chuckle-head and lop-ears, with his tail full
of cockle-burs, jumping high and short, and digging in the ground when
he feels the breath of the coming mule on his cockle-bur tail, he is
the chap that jumps the track and says, "I am down on mule equality." My
friends, the Republican party is the blooded horse in this race. There is room in the Republican air for every wing; there is room on
the Republican sea for every sail. Republicanism says to every man: "Let
your soul be like an eagle; fly out in the great dome of thought, and
question the stars for yourself." I am a Republican because it is the only free party that ever existed. It is a party that had a platform as broad as humanity, a platform as
broad as the human race, a party that says you shall have all the
fruit of the labor of your hands, a party that says you may think for
yourself; a party that says no chains for the hands, no fetters for the
soul. Our Government the best on Earth

We all want a good government. We
all want to live in a land where the law is supreme. We desire to live
beneath a flag that will protect every citizen beneath its folds. We
desire to be citizens of a government so great and so grand that it will
command the respect of the civilized world. Most of us are convinced
that our government is the best upon this earth. Will the Second Century of America be as good as the First? Standing here amid the sacred memories of the first, on the golden
threshold of the second, I ask, Will the second century be as good
as the first? I believe it will because we are growing more and more
humane; I believe there is more human kind-ness and a greater desire
to help one another in America, than in all the world besides. The steam
engine--the telegraph--these are but the toys with which science has
been amusing herself. A grander standard of character, of literature and
art. We have now half as many millions of people as we have years. We are struggling more and more to get at the philosophy of
life--trying more and more to answer the questions of the eternal
Sphinx. The second century will be grander than the first. Science found agriculture plowing with a stick--reaping with a
sickle--commerce at the mercy of the treacherous waves and the
inconstant winds--a world without books--without schools--man denying
the authority of reason, employing his ingenuity in the manufacture
of instruments of torture, in building inquisitions and cathedrals. It found the land filled with malicious monks--with persecuting
Protestants, and the burners of men. The glory of science is, that it is
freeing the soul--breaking the mental manacles--getting the brain out
of bondage--giving courage to thought--filling the world with mercy,
justice, and joy. The Tables Turned

For the establishment of facts, the word of man is now considered
far better than the word of God. In the world of science, Jehovah was
superseded by Copernicus, Galileo, and Kepler. All that God told
Moses, admitting the entire account to be true, is dust and ashes
compared to the discoveries of Des Cartes, La Place, and Humboldt. In
matters of fact, the Bible has ceased to be regarded as a standard. Science has succeeded in breaking the chains of theology. A few years
ago, science endeavored to show that it was not inconsistent with the
Bible. The tables have been turned, and now, religion is endeavoring to
prove that the Bible is not inconsistent with science. Science Better than a Creed

It seems to me that a belief in the great truths of science are fully as
essential to salvation, as the creed of any church. We are taught that
a man may be perfectly acceptable to God even if he denies the rotundity
of the earth, the Copernican system, the three laws of Kepler, the
indestructibility of matter and the attraction of gravitation. And we
are also taught that a man may be right upon all these questions, and
yet, for failing to believe in the "scheme of salvation," be eternally
lost. The Religion of Science

Every assertion of individual independence has been a step toward
infidelity. Luther started toward Humboldt,--Wesley, toward John Stuart
Mill. To really reform the church is to destroy it. Every new religion
has a little less superstition than the old, so that the religion of
science is but a question of time. Science not Sectarian

The sciences are not sectarian. People do not persecute each other on
account of disagreements in mathematics. Families are not divided about
botany, and astronomy does not even tend to make a man hate his father
and mother. It is what people do not know, that they persecute each
other about. Science will bring, not a sword, but peace. The Epitaph of all Religions

Science has written over the high altar its mene, mene, tekel,
UPHARSIN--the old words, destined to be the epitaph of all religions? The Real Priest

When we abandon the doctrine that some infinite being created matter
and force, and enacted a code of laws for their government, the idea
of interference will be lost. The real priest will then be, not the
mouth-piece of some pretended deity, but the interpreter of nature. From
that moment the church ceases to exist. The tapers will die out upon the
dusty altar; the moths will eat the fading velvet of pulpit and pew;
the Bible will take its place with the Shastras, Puranas, Vedas, Eddas,
Sagas and Korans, and the fetters of a degrading faith will fall from
the minds of men. Science is Power

From a philosophical point of view, science is knowledge of the laws
of life; of the conditions of happiness; of the facts by which we are
surrounded, and the relations we sustain to men and things--by means
of which, man, so to speak, subjugates nature and bends the elemental
powers to his will, making blind force the servant of his brain. Science Supreme

The element of uncertainty will, in a great measure, be removed from the
domain of the future, and man, gathering courage from a succession of
victories over the obstructions of nature, will attain a serene grandeur
unknown to the disciples of any superstition. The plans of mankind will
no longer be interfered with by the finger of a supposed omnipotence,
and no one will believe that nations or individuals are protected or
destroyed by any deity whatever. Science, freed from the chains of pious
custom and evangelical prejudice, will, within her sphere, be supreme. The mind will investigate without reverence, and publish its conclusions
without fear. Agassiz will no longer hesitate to declare the Mosaic
cosmogony utterly inconsistent with the demonstrated truths of geology,
and will cease pretending any reverence for the Jewish scriptures. The
moment science succeeds in rendering the church powerless for evil, the
real thinkers will be outspoken. The little flags of truce carried by
timid philosophers will disappear, and the cowardly parley will give
place to victory--lasting and universal. Science Opening the Gates of Thought

We are not endeavoring to chain the future, but to free the present. We
are not forging fetters for our children, but we are breaking those our
fathers made for us. We are the advocates of inquiry, of investigation
and thought. This of itself, is an admission that we are not perfectly
satisfied with all our conclusions. Philosophy has not the egotism of
faith. While superstition builds walls and creates obstructions, science
opens all the highways of thought. Stars and Grains of Sand

We do not say that we have discovered all; that our doctrines are the
all in all of truth. We know of no end to the development of man. We
cannot unravel the infinite complications of matter and force. The
history of one monad is as unknown as that of the universe; one drop of
water is as wonderful as all the seas; one leaf, as all the forests; and
one grain of sand, as all the stars. The Trinity of Science

Reason, Observation and Experience--the Holy Trinity of Science--have
taught us that happiness is the only good; that the time to be happy is
now, and the way to be happy is to make others so. In this belief we are content to live and die. If by any possibility
the existence of a power superior to, and independent of, nature shall
be demonstrated, there will then be time enough to kneel. Until then,
let us all stand nobly erect. The Old and the New Old ideas perished in the retort of the
chemist, and useful truths took their places. One by one religious
conceptions have been placed in the crucible of science, and thus far,
nothing but dross has been found. A new world has been discovered by the
microscope; everywhere has been found the infinite; in every direction
man has investigated and explored, and nowhere, in earth or stars,
has been found the footstep of any being superior to or independent
of nature. Nowhere has been discovered the slightest evidence of any
interference from without. The Triumphs of Science

I do not know what inventions are in the brain of the future; I do not
know what garments of glory may be woven for the world in the loom of
years to be; we are just on the edge of the great ocean of discovery. I
do not know what is to be discovered; I do not know what science will do
for us. I do know that science did just take a handful of sand and make
the telescope, and with it read all the starry leaves of heaven; I know
that science took the thunderbolts from the hands of Jupiter, and now
the electric spark, freighted with thought and love, flashes under the
waves of the sea; I know that science stole a tear from the cheek of
unpaid labor, converted it into steam, and created a giant that turns
with tireless arms the countless wheels of toil; I know that science
broke the chains from human limbs and gave us instead the forces of
nature for our slaves; I know that we have made the attraction of
gravitation work for us; we have made the lightnings our messengers; we
have taken advantage of fire and flames and wind and sea; these slaves
have no backs to be whipped; they have no hearts to be lacerated; they
have no children to be stolen, no cradles to be violated. I know that
science has given us better houses; I know it has given us better
pictures and better books; I know it has given us better wives and
better husbands, and more beautiful children. I know it has enriched
a thousand-fold our life; and therefore I am in favor of perfect
intellectual liberty. It found the world at the mercy of disease and famine; men trying to
read their fates in the stars, and to tell their fortunes by signs and
wonders; generals thinking to conquer their enemies by making the sign
of the cross, or by telling a rosary. It found all history full of petty
and ridiculous falsehood, and the Almighty was supposed to spend most
of his time turning sticks into snakes, drowning boys for swimming on
Sunday, and killing little children for the purpose of converting their
parents. It found the earth filled with slaves and tyrants, the people
in all countries downtrodden, half naked, half starved, without hope,
and without reason in the world. Science the only Lever

Such was the condition of man when the morning of science dawned upon
his brain, and before he had heard the sublime declaration that the
universe is governed by law. For the change that has taken place we are
indebted solely to science--the only lever capable of raising mankind. Abject faith is barbarism; reason is civilization. To obey is slavish;
to act from a sense of obligation perceived by the reason, is noble. Ignorance worships mystery; Reason explains it: the one grovels, the
other soars. I have sometimes wished that there were words of pure hatred out of
which I might construct sentences like snakes, out of which I might
construct sentences with mouths fanged, that had forked tongues, out of
which I might construct sentences that writhed and and hissed; then I
could give my opinion of the rebels during the great struggle for the
preservation of this nation. Slavery in the Name of Religion

Just think of it! Our churches and best people, as they call themselves,
defending the institution of slavery. When I was a little boy I used
to see steamers go down the Mississippi river with hundreds of men and
women chained hand to hand, and even children, and men standing about
them with whips in their hands and pistols in their pockets in the name
of liberty, in the name of civilization and in the name of religion! I
used to hear them preach to these slaves in the South and the only text
they ever took was "Servants be obedient unto your masters." That was
the salutation of the most merciful God to a man whose back was bleeding
that was the salutation of the most merciful God to the slave-mother
bending over an empty cradle, to the woman from whose breast a child
had been stolen--"Servants be obedient unto your masters." That was
what they said to a man running for his life and for his liberty through
tangled swamps and listening to the baying of blood-hounds, and when
he listened for them the voice came from heaven:--"Servants be obedient
unto your masters." Think how we have crouched and cringed before wealth even! How
they used to cringe in old times before a man who was rich--there are so
many of them gone into bankruptcy lately that we are losing a little of
our fear. The Patrons of Slavery

It is not possible for the human imagination to conceive of the horrors
of slavery. It has left no possible wrong uncommitted, no possible crime
un-perpetrated. It has been practiced and defended by all nations in
some form. It has been defended
by nearly every pulpit. From the profits derived from the slave trade,
churches have been built, cathedrals reared and priests paid. Slavery
has been blessed by bishop, by cardinal and by pope. It has received the
sanction of statesmen, of kings, of queens. Clergymen have taken their part of the spoil, reciting passages
of scripture in its defense, and judges have taken their portion in the
name of equity and law. A <DW52> Man in Congress

The world has changed! I have had the supreme pleasure of seeing a
man--once a slave--sitting in the seat of his former master in the
Congress of the United States. When I saw that sight, my eyes were
filled with tears. I felt that we had carried out the Declaration of
Independence, that we had given reality to it, and breathed the breath
of life into every word. I felt that our flag would float over and
protect the <DW52> man and his little children--standing straight in
the sun--just the same as though he were white and worth a million! The Zig-zag Strip

I have some excuses to offer for the race to which I belong. My first
excuse is that this is not a very good world to raise folks in anyway. It is not very well adapted to raising magnificent people. There's only
a quarter of it land to start with. It is three times better for raising
fish than folks; and in that one-quarter of land there is not a tenth
part fit to raise people on. You can't raise people without a good
climate. You have got to have the right kind of climate, and you have
got to have certain elements in the soil or you can't raise good people. Do you know that there is only a little zig-zag strip around the world
within which have been produced all men of genius? Black People have Suffered Enough

In my judgment the black people have suffered enough. They have been
slaves for two hundred years. They have been owned two hundred years,
and, more than all, they have been compelled to keep the company of
those who owned them. Think of being compelled to keep the society of
the man who is stealing from you. Think of being compelled to live with
a man that stole your child from the cradle before your very eyes. Think
of being compelled to live with a thief all your life, to spend your
days with a white loafer, and to be under his control. The History of Civilization

The history of civilization is the history of the slow and painful
enfranchisement of the human race. In the olden times the family was a
monarchy, the father being the monarch. The mother and children were the
veriest slaves. The will of the father was the supreme law. He had the
power of life and death. It took thousands of years to civilize this
father, thousands of years to make the condition of the wife and mother
and children even tolerable. A few families constituted a tribe; the
tribe had a chief; the chief was a tyrant; a few tribes formed a nation;
the nation was governed by a king, who was also a tyrant. A strong
nation robbed, plundered and took captive the weaker ones. Is there, in the civilized world, to-day, a clergyman who believes
in the divinity of slavery? Does the Bible teach man to enslave his
brother? If it does, is it not blasphemous to say that it is inspired
of God? If you find the institution of slavery upheld in a book said
to have been written by God, what would you expect to find in a book
inspired by the devil? Would you expect to find that book in favor of
liberty? Modern Christians, ashamed of the God of the Old Testament,
endeavor now to show that slavery was neither commanded nor opposed by
Jehovah. Solemn Defiance

For my part, I never will, I never can, worship a God who upholds the
institution of slavery. I neither want his
heaven, nor fear his hell. The Soldiers of the Republic

The soldiers of the Republic were not seekers after vulgar glory. They
were not animated by the hope of plunder or the love of conquest. They
fought to preserve the blessings of liberty and that their children
might have peace. They were the defenders of humanity, the destroyers
of prejudice, the breakers of chains, and in the name of the future they
slew the monster of their time. They blotted from the statute books laws that
had been passed by hypocrites at the instigation of robbers, and tore
with indignant hands from the Constitution that infamous clause that
made men the catchers of their fellow men. They made it possible for
judges to be just, for statesmen to be human, and for politicians to be
honest. They broke the shackles from the limbs of slaves, from the souls
of martyrs, and from the Northern brain. They kept our country on the
map of the world and our flag in heaven. Seven long years of war--fighting for what? For the principle that
all men were created equal--a truth that nobody ever disputed except
a scoundrel; nobody in the entire history of this world. No man ever
denied that truth who was not a rascal, and at heart a thief; never,
never, and never will. Simply that in
America every man should have a right to life, liberty and the pursuit
of happiness. Nobody ever denied that except a villain; never, never. It has been denied by kings--they were thieves. It has been denied by
statesmen--they were liars. It has been denied by priests, by clergymen,
by cardinals, by bishops and by popes--they were hypocrites. For the idea that all political power is vested
in the great body of the people. They make all the money; do all the
work. They plow the land; cut down the forests; they produce everything
that is produced. Then who shall say what shall be done with what is
produced except the producer? The Revolution Consummated

The soldiers of the Republic finished what the soldiers of the
Revolution commenced. They relighted the torch that fell from their
august hands and filled the world again with light. The soldiers went home to their waiting wives, to their glad children,
and to the girls they loved--they went back to the fields, the shops and
mines. They were
as honest in peace as they had been brave in war. Mocking at poverty,
laughing at reverses, they made a friend of toil. They said: "We saved
the nation's life, and what is life without honor?" They worked and
wrought with all of labor's sons, that every pledge the nation gave
should be redeemed. And their great leader, having put a shining hand of
friendship--a girdle of clasped and happy hands--around the globe, comes
home and finds that every promise made in war has now the ring and gleam
of gold. Manhood worth more than Gold

We say in this country manhood is worth more than gold. We say in this
country that without liberty the Nation is not worth preserving. I
appeal to every laboring man, and I ask him, "Is there another country
on this globe where you can have your equal rights with others?" Now,
then, in every country, no matter how good it is, and no matter how bad
it is--in every country there is something worth preserving, and there
is something that ought to be destroyed. Now recollect that every voter
is in his own right a king; every voter in this country wears a crown;
every voter in this country has in his hands the scepter of authority;
and every voter, poor and rich, wears the purple of authority alike. Recollect it; and the man that will sell his vote is the man that
abdicates the American throne. Grander than the Greek, nobler than the Roman, the soldiers of the
republic, with patriotism as taintless as the air, battled for the
rights of others; for the nobility of labor; fought that mothers might
own their babes; that arrogant idleness should not scar the back of
patient toil, and that our country should not be a many-headed monster
made of warring States, but a Nation, sovereign, great and free. Blood
was water; money, leaves, and life was common air until one flag floated
over a republic without a master and without a slave. Let us Drink to the Living and the Dead

The soldiers of the Union saved the South as well as the North. Their victory made us free and rendered tyranny in
every other land as insecure as snow upon volcano lips. And now let us
drink to the volunteers, to those who sleep in unknown, sunken graves,
whose names are only in the hearts of those they loved and left--of
those who only hear in happy dreams the footsteps of return. Let us
drink to those who died where lipless famine mocked at want--to all the
maimed whose scars give modesty a tongue, to all who dared and gave to
chance the care and keeping of their lives--to all the living and all
the dead--to Sherman, to Sheridan and to Grant, the foremost soldiers of
the world; and last, to Lincoln, whose loving life, like a bow of peace,
spans and arches all the clouds of war. Will the Wounds of the War be Healed? There is still another question: "Will all the wounds of the war be
healed?" The Southern people must submit, not to the
dictation of the North, but to the nation's will and to the verdict of
mankind. They were wrong, and the time will come when they will say
that they have been vanquished by the right. Freedom conquered them, and
freedom will cultivate their fields, educate their children, weave for
them the robes of wealth, execute their laws, and fill their land with
happy homes. Saviours of the Nation

They rolled the stone from the sepulchre of progress, and found therein
two angels clad in shining garments--nationality and liberty. The
soldiers were the Saviours of the Nation. In writing the proclamation of emancipation, Lincoln, greatest
of our mighty dead, whose memory is as gentle as the summer air,--when
reapers sing'mid gathered sheaves,--copied with the pen what Grant and
his brave comrades wrote with swords. General Grant

When the savagery of the lash, the barbarism of the chain, and the
insanity of secession confronted the civilization of our century, the
question, "Will the great republic defend itself?" trembled on the
lips of every lover of mankind. The North, filled with intelligence and
wealth, products of liberty, marshalled her hosts and asked only for
a leader. From civil life a man, silent, thoughtful, poised, and calm;
stepped forth, and with the lips of victory voiced the nation's first
and last demand: "Unconditional and immediate surrender." From that
moment the end was known. That utterance was the real declaration of
real war and in accordance with the dramatic unities of mighty
events, the great soldier who made it, received the final sword of the
rebellion. The soldiers of the republic were not seekers after vulgar
glory; they were not animated by the hope of plunder or the love of
conquest. They fought to preserve the homestead of liberty. MONEY THAT IS MONEY




142. Paper is not Money

Some people tell me that the government can impress its sovereignty on
a piece of paper, and that is money. Well, if it is, what's the use of
wasting it making one dollar bills? It takes no more ink and no more
paper--why not make $1000 bills? Why not make $100,000,000 and all be
billionaires? If the government can make money, what on earth does it
collect taxes for you and me for? Why don't it make what money it wants,
take the taxes out, and give the balance to us? Greenbacker, suppose
the government issued $1,000,000,000 to-morrow, how would you get any of
it? The Debt will be paid

It will be paid. The holders of the debt have got a mortgage on a
continent. They have a mortgage on the honor of the Republican party,
and it is on record. Every blade of grass that grows upon this continent
is a guarantee that the debt will be paid; every field of bannered corn
in the great, glorious West is a guarantee that the debt will be paid;
all the coal put away in the ground, millions of years ago by the old
miser, the sun; is a guarantee that every dollar of that debt will be
paid; all the cattle on the prairies, pastures and plains, every one of
them is a guarantee that this debt will be paid; every pine standing
in the sombre forests of the North, waiting for the woodman's axe, is
a guarantee that this debt will be paid; all the gold and silver hid in
the Sierra Nevadas, waiting for the miner's pick, is a guarantee that
the debt will be paid; every locomotive, with its muscles of iron and
breath of flame, and all the boys and girls bending over their books at
school, every dimpled child in the cradle, every good man and every good
woman, and every man that votes the Republican ticket, is a guarantee
that the debt will be paid. No man can imagine, all the languages of the world cannot express, what
the people of the United States suffered from 1873 to 1879. Men who
considered themselves millionaires found that they were beggars; men
living in palaces, supposing they had enough to give sunshine to the
winter of their age, supposing they had enough to have all they loved
in affluence and comfort, suddenly found that they were mendicants with
bonds, stocks, mortgages, all turned to ashes in their aged, trembling
hands. The chimneys grew cold, the fires in furnaces went out, the poor
families were turned adrift, and the highways of the United States were
crowded with tramps. Into the home of the poor crept the serpent of
temptation, and whispered in the ear of poverty the terrible word
"repudiation." A Voter because a Man

A man does not vote in this country simply because he is rich; he does
not vote in this country simply because he has an education; he does
not vote simply because he has talent or genius; we say that he votes
because he is a man, and that he has his manhood to support; and we
admit in this country that nothing can be more valuable to any human
being than his manhood, and for that reason we put poverty on an
equality with wealth. If you are a German, recollect that this country is kinder to you than
your own fatherland,--no matter what country you came from, remember
that this country is an asylum, and vote as in your conscience you
believe you ought to vote to keep this flag in heaven. I beg every
American to stand with that part of the country that believes in law, in
freedom of speech, in an honest vote, in civilization, in progress, in
human liberty, and in universal justice. Prosperity and Resumption hand in hand

The Republicans of the United States demand a man who knows that
prosperity and resumption, when they come, must come together; that when
they come they will come hand in hand through the golden harvest fields;
hand in hand by the whirling spindles and the turning wheels; hand in
hand past the open furnace doors; hand in hand by the chimneys filled
with eager fire, greeted and grasped by the countless sons of toil. This money has to be dug out of the earth. You cannot make it by passing
resolutions in a political convention. Every Poor Man should Stand by the Government

It is the only Nation where the man clothed in a rag stands upon an
equality with the one wearing purple. It is the only country in the
world where, politically, the hut is upon an equality with the palace. For that reason, every poor man should stand by the government, and
every poor man who does not is a traitor to the best interests of his
children; every poor man who does not is willing his children should
bear the badge of political inferiority; and the only way to make this
government a complete and perfect success is for the poorest man to
think as much of his manhood as the millionaire does of his wealth. I want to tell you that you cannot conceive of what the American people
suffered as they staggered over the desert of bankruptcy from 1873 to
1879. We are too near now to know how grand we were. The poor mechanic said
"No;" the ruined manufacturer said "No;" the once millionaire said "No,
we will settle fair; we will agree to pay whether we ever pay or
not, and we will never soil the American name with the infamous word,
'repudiation.'" Are you not glad
that our flag is covered all over with financial honors? The stars shine
and gleam now because they represent an honest nation. A Government with a Long Arm

I believe in a Government with an arm long enough to reach the collar
of any rascal beneath its flag. I want it with an arm long enough and
a sword sharp enough to strike down tyranny wherever it may raise its
snaky head. I want a nation that can hear the faintest cries of its
humblest citizen. I want a nation that will protect a freedman standing
in the sun by his little cabin, just as quick as it would protect
Vanderbilt in a palace of marble and gold. No Repudiation

Then it was, that the serpent of temptation whispered in the ear of want
that dreadful word "Repudiation." They
appealed to want, to misery, to threatened financial ruin, to the bare
hearthstones, to the army of beggars, We had grandeur enough to say:
"No; we'll settle fair if we don't pay a cent!" Is there a Democrat now who wishes we had taken the advice of
Bayard to scale the bonds? Is there an American, a Democrat here, who
is not glad we escaped the stench and shame of repudiation, and did not
take Democratic advice? Is there a Greenbacker here who is not glad we
didn't do it? He may say he is, but he isn't. I think there is the greatest heroism in living for a thing! There's no
glory in digging potatoes. You don't wear a uniform when you're picking
up stones. You can't have a band of music when you dig potatoes! In,
1873 came the great crash. No one can estimate the anguish of that time! Millionaires found
themselves paupers. The aged man,
who had spent his life in hard labor, and who thought he had accumulated
enough to support himself in his old age, and leave a little something
to his children and grandchildren, found they were all beggars. The
highways were filled with tramps. Promises Don't Pay

If I am fortunate enough to leave a dollar when I die, I want it to be
a good one; I don't wish to have it turn to ashes in the hands of
widowhood, or become a Democratic broken promise in the pocket of the
orphan; I want it money. I saw not long ago a piece of gold bearing the
stamp of the Roman Empire. That Empire is dust, and over it has been
thrown the mantle of oblivion, but that piece of gold is as good as
though Julius Caesar were still riding at the head of the Roman Legion. I want money to that will outlive the Democratic party. They told
us--and they were honest about it--they said, "when we have plenty of
money we are prosperous." And I said: "When we are prosperous, then we
have credit, and, credit inflates the currency. Whenever a man buys a
pound of sugar and says, 'Charge it,' he inflates the currency; whenever
he gives his note, he inflates the currency; whenever his word takes the
place of money, he inflates the currency." The consequence is that when
we are prosperous, credit takes the place of money, and we have what
we call "plenty." But you can't increase prosperity simply by using
promises to pay. I do not wish to trust the wealth of this nation with the demagogues of
the nation. I do not wish to trust the wealth of the country to every
blast of public opinion. I want money as solid as the earth on which we
tread, as bright as the stars that shine above us. The South and the Tariff

Where did this doctrine of a tariff for revenue only come from? The South would like to stab the prosperity of the North. They
had rather trade with Old England than with New England. They had rather
trade with the people who were willing to help them in war than those
who conquered the rebellion. They knew what gave us our strength in
war. They knew all the brooks and creeks and rivers in New England were
putting down the rebellion. They knew that every wheel that turned,
every spindle that revolved, was a soldier in the army of human
progress. They were so lured by the greed of office that
they were willing to trade upon the misfortune of a nation. I don't wish to belong to a party that succeeds only when my country
falls. I don't wish to belong to a party whose banner went up with
the banner of rebellion. I don't wish to belong to a party that was in
partnership with defeat and disaster. I am for Protection

And I will tell you why I am for protection, too. If we were all farmers
we would be stupid. If we were all shoemakers we would be stupid. If
we all followed one business, no matter what it was, we would become
stupid. Protection to American labor diversifies American industry, and
to have it diversified touches and developes every part of the human
brain. Protection protects integrity; it protects intelligence; and
protection raises sense; and by protection we have greater men and
better-looking women and healthier children. Free trade means that our
laborer is upon an equality with the poorest paid labor of this world. The Old Woman of Tewksbury

You Greenbackers are like the old woman in the Tewksbury, Mass.,
Poor-House. She used to be well off, and didn't like her quarters. You
Greenbackers have left your father's house of many mansions and have fed
on shucks about long enough. The Supervisor came into the Poor-House one
day and asked the old lady how she liked it. She said she didn't like
the company, and asked him what he would advise her to do under similar
circumstances. "Do you think anybody is ever prejudiced in their sleep?" I dreamed I died and went to
Heaven. A nice man came to me and asked
me where I was from. Says I, 'From Tewksbury, Mass.' He looked in his
book and said, 'You can't stay here.' "I asked what he would advise me
to do under similar circumstances." 'Well,' he said, 'there's hell down
there, you might try that.' "Well, I went down there, and the men told
me my name wasn't on the book and I couldn't stay there. 'Well,' said I,
'What would you advise me to do under similar circumstances?' 'Said he,
'You'll have to go back to Tewksbury.' And when Green-backers remember
what they once were, you must feel now, when you were forced to join
the Democratic party, as bad as the old lady who had to go back to
Tewksbury. American Muscle, Coined into Gold

I believe in American labor, and I tell you why. The other day a man
told me that we had produced in the United States of America one million
tons of rails. In other
words, the million tons are worth $60,000,000. How much is a ton of iron
worth in the ground? American labor takes 25 cents of
iron in the ground and adds to it $59.75. One million tons of rails, and
the raw material not worth $24,000. We build a ship in the United States
worth $500,000, and the value of the ore in the earth, of the trees in
the great forest, of all that enters into the composition of that ship
bringing $500,000 in gold is only $20,000; $480,000 by American labor,
American muscle, coined into gold; American brains made a legal-tender
the world around. Inflation

I don't blame the man who wanted inflation. I don't blame him for
praying for another period of inflation. "When it comes," said the man
who had a lot of shrunken property on his hands, "blame me, if I don't
unload, you may shoot me." It's a good deal like the game of poker! I
don't suppose any of you know anything about that game! Along towards
morning the fellow who is ahead always wants another deal. The fellow
that is behind says his wife's sick, and he must go home. You ought
to hear that fellow descant on domestic virtue! And the other fellow
accuses him of being a coward and wanting to jump the game. A man whose
dead wood is hung up on the shore in a dry time, wants the water to rise
once more and float it out into the middle of the stream. We have fifty-six thousand
square miles of land--nearly thirty-six million acres. Upon these plains
we can raise enough to feed and clothe twenty million people. Beneath
these prairies were hidden, millions of ages ago, by that old miser, the
sun, thirty-six thousand square miles of coal. The aggregate thickness
of these veins is at least fifteen feet. Think of a column of coal one
mile square and one hundred miles high! What
a sunbeam such a column would be! Think of all this force, willed and
left to us by the dead morning of the world! Think of the fireside of
the future around which will sit the fathers, mothers and children of
the years to be! Think of the sweet and happy faces, the loving and
tender eyes that will glow and gleam in the sacred light of all these
flames! They say that money is a measure of value. A bushel doesn't
measure values. If it measured
values, a bushel of potatoes would be worth as much as a bushel of
diamonds. They used to say,
"there's no use in having a gold yard-stick." You
don't buy the yard-stick. If money bore the same relation to trade as
a yard-stick or half-bushel, you would have the same money when you
got through trading as you had when you begun. A man don't sell
half-bushels. All we want is a little sense about these
things. Some said there
wasn't enough money. That's so; I know what that means myself. They said
if we had more money we'd be more prosperous. The truth is, if we
were more prosperous we'd have more money. They said more money would
facilitate business. Money by Work

How do you get your money? You have got to dig it
out of the ground. In old times there were
some men who thought they could get some way to turn the baser metals
into gold, and old gray-haired men, trembling, tottering on the verge of
the grave, were hunting for something to turn ordinary metals into gold;
they were searching for the fountain of eternal youth, but they did not
find it. No human ear has ever heard the silver gurgle of the spring of
immortal youth. Meat Twice a Year

I have been in countries where the laboring man had meat once a year;
sometimes twice--Christmas and Easter. And I have seen women carrying
upon their heads a burden that no man would like to carry, and at the
same time knitting busily with both hands. And those women lived without
meat; and when I thought of the American laborer I said to myself,
"After all, my country is the best in the world." And when I came back
to the sea and saw the old flag flying in the air, it seemed to me as
though the air from pure joy had burst into blossom. America a Glorious Land

Labor has more to eat and more to wear in the United States than in
any other land of this earth. I want America to produce everything
that Americans need. I want it so if the whole world should declare war
against us, so if we were surrounded by walls of cannon and bayonets and
swords, we could supply all human wants in and of ourselves. I want to
live to see the American woman dressed in American silk; the American
man in everything from hat to boots produced in America by the cunning
hand of the American toiler. How to Spend a Dollar

If you have only a dollar in the world and have got to spend it, spend
it like a man; spend it like a prince, like a king! If you have to spend
it, spend it as though it were a dried leaf, and you were the owner of
unbounded forests. Honesty is Best always and Everywhere

I am next in favor of honest money. I am in favor of gold and silver,
and paper with gold and silver behind it. I believe in silver, because
it is one of the greatest of American products, and I am in favor of
anything that will add to the value of American products. But I want a
silver dollar worth a gold dollar, even if you make it or have to make
it four feet in diameter. No government can afford to be a clipper of
coin. A great Republic cannot afford to stamp a lie upon silver or gold. Honest money, an honest people, an honest Nation. When our money is only
worth 80 cents on the dollar, we feel 20 per cent, below par. When our
money is good we feel good. When our money is at par, that is where we
are. I am a profound believer in the doctrine that for nations as well
as men, honesty is the best, always, everywhere and forever. A Fountain of Greenbacks

There used to be mechanics that tried to make perpetual motion by
combinations of wheels, shifting weights, and rolling balls; but somehow
the machine would never quite run. A perpetual fountain of greenbacks,
of wealth without labor, is just as foolish as a fountain of eternal
youth. The idea that you can produce money without labor is just as
foolish as the idea of perpetual motion. They are old follies under new
names. We had to borrow some money to pay for shot and
shell to shoot Democrats with. We found that we could get along with a
few less Democrats, but not with any less country, and so we borrowed
the money, and the question now is, will we pay it? And which party is
the most apt to pay it, the Republican party, that made the debt--the
party that swore it was constitutional, or the party that said it was
unconstitutional? Whenever a Democrat sees a greenback, the greenback
says to the Democrat, "I am one of the fellows that whipped you." Whenever a Republican sees a greenback, the greenback says to him, "You
and I put down the rebellion and saved the country." Honest Methods

So many presidents of savings banks, even those belonging to the Young
Men's Christian Association, run off with the funds; so many railroad
and insurance companies are in the hands of receivers; there is so much
bankruptcy on every hand, that all capital is held in the nervous clutch
of fear. Slowly, but surely, we are coming back to honest methods in
business. Confidence will return, and then enterprise will unlock the
safe and money will again circulate as of yore; the dollars will leave
their hitting places, and every one will be seeking investment. For my part I do not ask any interference on the part of the government
except to undo the wrong it has done. I do not ask that money be made
out of nothing. I do not ask for the prosperity born of paper. But I do
ask for the remonetization of silver. It was an imposition upon every solvent man; a fraud upon every honest
debtor in the United States. It was done in the
interest of avarice and greed, and should be undone by honest men. RELIGIOUS QUESTIONS




171. Redden your hands with human blood; blast by slander the fair fame
of the innocent; strangle the smiling child upon its mother's knees;
deceive, ruin and desert the beautiful girl who loves and trusts you,
and your case is not hopeless. For all this, and for all these you
may be forgiven. For all this, and for all these, that bankrupt court
established by the gospel, will give you a discharge; but deny the
existence of these divine ghosts, of these gods, and the sweet and
tearful face of Mercy becomes livid with eternal hate. Heaven's golden
gates are shut, and you, with an infinite curse ringing in your
ears, with the brand of infamy upon your brow, commence your endless
wanderings in the lurid gloom of hell--an immortal vagrant--an eternal
outcast--a deathless convict. Faith--A Mixture of Insanity and Ignorance

The doctrine that future happiness depends upon belief is monstrous. It is the infamy of infamies. The notion that faith in Christ is to
be rewarded by an eternity of bliss, while a dependence upon reason,
observation, and experience merits everlasting pain, is too absurd for
refutation, and can be relieved only by that unhappy mixture of insanity
and ignorance; called "faith." The church in the days of Voltaire contended that its servants were the
only legitimate physicians. The priests cured in the name of the church,
and in the name of God--by exorcism, relics, water, salt and oil. Gervasius was good for rheumatism, St. Ovidius
for deafness, St. Apollonia for
toothache, St. Clara for rheum in the eye, St. Devils were driven out with wax tapers, with incence (sp. ), with holy
water, by pronouncing prayers. The church, as late as the middle of the
twelfth century, prohibited good Catholics from having anything to do
with physicians. The Sleep of Persecutors

All the persecutors sleep in peace, and the ashes of those who burned
their brothers in the name of Christ rest in consecrated ground. Whole
libraries could not contain even the names of the wretches who have
filled the world with violence and death in defense of book and creed,
and yet they all died the death of the righteous, and no priest or|
minister describes the agony and fear, the remorse and horror with which
their guilty souls were filled in the last moments of their lives. These
men had never doubted; they accepted the creed; they were not infidels;
they had not denied the divinity of Christ; they had been baptized;
they had partaken of the last supper; they had respected priests; they
admitted that the Holy Ghost had "proceeded;" and these things put
pillows beneath their dying heads and covered them with the drapery of
peace. There is no recorded instance where the uplifted hand of murder has been
paralyzed--no truthful account in all the literature of the world of the
innocent shielded by God. Thousands of crimes are being committed every
day--men are this moment lying in wait for their human prey; wives
are whipped and crushed, driven to insanity and death; little children
begging for mercy, lifting imploringly tear-filled eyes to the brutal
faces of fathers and mothers; sweet girls are deceived, lured, and
outraged; but God has no time to prevent these things--no time to defend
the good and to protect the pure. He is too busy numbering hairs and
watching sparrows. All kinds of criminals, except infidels, meet death with reasonable
serenity. As a rule, there is nothing in the death of a pirate to cast
any discredit on his profession. The murderer upon the scaffold, with
a priest on either side, smilingly exhorts the multitude to meet him in
heaven. The man who has succeeded in making his home a hell meets death
without a quiver, provided he has never expressed any doubt as to the
divinity of Christ or the eternal "procession" of the holy ghost. The
king who has waged cruel and useless war, who has filled countries with
widows and fatherless children, with the maimed and diseased, and who
has succeeded in offering to the Moloch of ambition the best and bravest
of his subjects, dies like a saint. The first Corpse and the first Cathedral

Now and then, in the history of this world, a man of genius, of sense,
of intellectual honesty has appeared. These men have denounced the
superstitions of their day. To see priests
devour the substance of the people filled them with indignation. These
men were honest enough to tell their thoughts. Then they were denounced,
condemned, executed. Some of them escaped the fury of the people who
loved their enemies, and died naturally in their beds. It would not be
for the church to admit that they died peacefully. That would show that
religion was not actually necessary in the last moment. Religion got
much of its power from the terror of death. Superstition is the child of
ignorance and fear. The first
corpse was the first priest. It would not do to have the common people
understand that a man could deny the Bible, refuse to look at the cross,
contend that Christ was only a man, and yet die as calmly as Calvin did
after he had murdered Servetus, or as King David, after advising one son
to kill another. The Sixteenth Century

In the sixteenth century every science was regarded as an outcast and an
enemy, and the church influenced the world, which was under its
power, to believe anything, and the ignorant mob was always too ready,
brutalized by the church, to hang, kill or crucify at their bidding. Such was the result of a few centuries of Christianity. An Orthodox Gentleman

By Orthodox I mean a gentleman who is petrified in his mind, whooping
around intellectually, simply to save the funeral expenses of his soul. A Bold Assertion

The churches point to their decayed saints, and their crumbled Popes
and say, "Do you know more than all the ministers that ever lived?" And without the slightest egotism or blush I say, yes, and the name of
Humboldt outweighs them all. The men who stand in the front rank, the
men who know most of the secrets of nature, the men who know most are
to-day the advanced infidels of this world. I have lived long enough to
see the brand of intellectual inferiority on every orthodox brain. If we admit that some infinite being has controlled the destinies of
persons and peoples, history becomes a most cruel and bloody farce. Age after age, the strong have trampled upon the weak; the crafty
and heartless have ensnared and enslaved the simple and innocent,
and nowhere, in all the annals of mankind, has any god succored the
oppressed. Weak ones Suffering--Heaven deaf

Most of the misery has been endured by the weak, the loving and the
innocent. Women have been treated like poisonous beasts, and little
children trampled upon as though they had been vermin. Numberless altars
have been reddened, even with the blood of babes; beautiful girls have
been given to slimy serpents; whole races of men doomed to centuries
of slavery, and everywhere there has been outrage beyond the power
of genius to express. During all these years the suffering have
supplicated; the withered lips of famine have prayed; the pale victims
have implored, and Heaven has been deaf and blind. Heaven has no Ear, no Hand

Man should cease to expect aid from on high. By this time he should know
that heaven has no ear to hear, and no hand to help. The present is the
necessary child of all the past. There has been no chance, and there can
be no interference. Religion is Tyrannical

Religion does not, and cannot, contemplate man as free. She accepts only
the homage of the prostrate, and scorns the offerings of those who stand
erect. The wide and sunny
fields belong not to her domain. The star-lit heights of genius and
individuality are above and beyond her appreciation and power. Her
subjects cringe at her feet, covered with the dust of obedience. Religion and Facts

What has religion to do with facts? Is there any such thing
as Methodist mathematics, Presbyterian botany, Catholic astronomy or
Baptist biology? What has any form of superstition or religion to do
with a fact or with any science? Nothing but hinder, delay or embarass. I want, then, to free the schools; and I want to free the politicians,
so that a man will not have to pretend he is a Methodist, or his wife
a Baptist, or his grandmother a Catholic; so that he can go through
a campaign, and when he gets through will find none of the dust of
hypocrisy on his knees. Religion not the End of Life

We deny that religion is the end or object of this life. When it is so
considered it becomes destructive of happiness--the real end of life. It becomes a hydra-headed monster, reaching in terrible coils from the
heavens, and thrusting its thousand fangs into the bleeding, quivering
hearts of men. It devours their substance, builds palaces for God, (who
dwells not in temples made with hands,) and allows his children to
die in huts and hovels. It fills the earth with mourning, heaven with
hatred, the present with fear, and all the future with despair. Creeds

Just in proportion that the human race has advanced, the Church has lost
power. No nation ever materially
advanced that held strictly to the religion of its founders. No nation
ever gave itself wholly to the control of the Church without losing its
power, its honor, and existence. Every Church pretends to have found
the exact truth. Every creed is a rock in running
water; humanity sweeps by it. Every creed cries to the universe, "Halt!" A creed is the ignorant Past bullying the enlightened Present. The Worst Religion in the World

The worst religion of the world was the Presbyterianism of Scotland as
it existed in the beginning of the eighteenth century. The kirk had all
the faults of the church of Rome, without a redeeming feature. The kirk
hated music, painting, statuary, and architecture. Anything touched with
humanity--with the dimples of joy--was detested and accursed. God was
to be feared, not loved. Happiness was a snare, and human love was wicked,
weak, and vain. The Presbyterian priest of Scotland was as cruel,
bigoted, and heartless as the familiar of the inquisition. In the beginning of this, the nineteenth century, a boy
seventeen years of age, Thomas Aikenhead, was indicted and tried
at Edinburgh for blasphemy. He had on several occasions, when cold,
jocularly wished himself in hell, that he might get warm. The poor,
frightened boy recanted--begged for mercy; but he was found guilty,
hanged, thrown in a hole at the foot of the scaffold; and his weeping
mother vainly begged that his bruised and bleeding body might be given
to her. Religion Demanding Miracles

The founder of a religion must be able to turn water into wine--cure
with a word the blind and lame, and raise with a simple touch the dead
to life. It was necessary for him to demonstrate to the satisfaction
of his barbarian disciple, that he was superior to nature. In times of
ignorance this was easy to do. The credulity of the savage was almost
boundless. To him the marvelous was the beautiful, the mysterious was
the sublime. Consequently, every religion has for its foundation a
miracle--that is to say, a violation of nature--that is to say, a
falsehood. We Want One Fact

We have heard talk enough. We have listened to all the drowsy, idealess,
vapid sermons that we wish to hear. We have read your Bible and the
works of your best minds. We have heard your prayers, your solemn groans
and your reverential amens. We beg at the doors of your churches for just one little
fact. We pass our hats along your pews and under your pulpits and
implore you for just one fact. We know all about your mouldy wonders and
your stale miracles. The Design Argument

These religious people see nothing but designs everywhere, and personal,
intelligent interference in everything. They insist that the universe
has been created, and that the adaptation of means to ends is perfectly
apparent. They point us to the sunshine, to the flowers, to the April
rain, and to all there is of beauty and of use in the world. Did it ever
occur to them that a cancer is as beautiful in its development as is the
reddest rose? That what they are pleased to call the adaptation of
means to ends, is as apparent in the cancer as in the April rain? By what ingenious methods the
blood is poisoned so that the cancer shall have food! By what wonderful
contrivances the entire system of man is made to pay tribute to this
divine and charming cancer! See by what admirable instrumentalities it
feeds itself from the surrounding quivering, dainty flesh! See how it
gradually but surely expands and grows! By what marvelous mechanism
it is supplied with long and slender roots that reach out to the most
secret nerves of pain for sustenance and life! Down, Forever Down

Down, forever down, with any religion that requires upon its ignorant
altar the sacrifice of the goddess Reason, that compels her to abdicate
forever the shining throne of the soul, strips from her form the
imperial purple, snatches from her hand the sceptre of thought and makes
her the bondwoman of a senseless faith! The Back

Upon this rack I have described, this victim was placed, and those
chains were attached to his ankles and then to his waist, and clergyman,
good men pious men! men that were shocked at the immorality of their
day! they talked about playing cards and the horrible crime of dancing! how such things shocked them; men going to the theatres and seeing a
play written by the grandest genius the world ever has produced--how it
shocked their sublime and tender souls! but they commenced turning this
machine and they kept on turning until the ankles, knees, hips, elbows,
shoulders and wrists were all dislocated and the victim was red with the
sweat of agony, and they had standing by a physician to feel the pulse,
so that the last faint flutter of life would not leave his veins. simply that they might
have the pleasure of racking him once again. That is the spirit, and it
is a spirit born of the doctrine that there is upon the throne of the
universe a being who will eternally damn his children, and they said:
"If God is going to have the supreme happiness of burning them forever,
certainly he might not to begrudge to us the joy of burning them for an
hour or two." That was their doctrine, and when I read these things it
seems to me that I have suffered them myself. An Awful Admission

Just think of going to the day of judgment, if there is one, and
standing up before God and admitting without a blush that you had lived
and died a Scotch Presbyterian. I would expect the next sentence would
be, "Depart ye curged into everlasting fire." CHURCHES AND PRIESTS




195. The Church Forbids Investigation

The first doubt was the womb and cradle of progress, and from the first
doubt, man has continued to advance. Men began to investigate, and the
church began to oppose. The astronomer scanned the heavens, while the
church branded his grand forehead with the word, "Infidel;" and now,
not a glittering star in all the vast expanse bears a Christian name. In spite of all religion, the geologist penetrated the earth, read her
history in books of stone, and found, hidden within her bosom souvenirs
of all the ages. The Church Charges Falsely

Notwithstanding the fact that infidels in all ages have battled for
the rights of man, and have at all times been the fearless advocates
of liberty and justice, we are constantly charged by the Church with
tearing down without building again. The Church in the "Dark Ages"

During that frightful period known as the "Dark Ages," Faith reigned,
with scarcely a rebellious subject. Her temples were "carpeted with
knees," and the wealth of nations adorned her countless shrines. The
great painters prostituted their genius to immortalize her vagaries,
while the poets enshrined them in song. At her bidding, man covered the
earth with blood. The scales of Justice were turned with her gold, and
for her use were invented all the cunning instruments of pain. She built
cathedrals for God, and dungeons for men. She peopled the clouds with
angels and the earth with slaves. For ages, a deadly conflict has been waged between a few brave men and
women of thought and genius upon the one side, and the great ignorant
religious mass on the other. The few have appealed to reason, to honor, to law, to freedom, to the
known, and to happiness here in this world. The many have appealed
to prejudice, to fear, to miracle, to slavery, to the unknown, and
to misery hereafter. The many have said,
"Believe!" The Church and the Tree of Knowledge

The gods dreaded education and knowledge then just as they do now. The
church still faithfully guards the dangerous tree of knowledge, and has
exerted in all ages her utmost power to keep mankind from eating the
fruit thereof. The priests have never ceased repeating the old falsehood
and the old threat: "Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it,
lest ye die." Let the church, or one of its
intellectual saints, perform a miracle, and we will believe. We are told
that nature has a superior. Let this superior, for one single instant,
control nature and we will admit the truth of your assertions. The Heretics Cried, "Halt!" A few infidels--a few heretics cried, "Halt!" to the great rabble of
ignorant devotion, and made it possible for the genius of the nineteenth
century to revolutionize the cruel creeds and superstitions of mankind. The World not so Awful Flat

According to the Christian system this world was the centre of
everything. The stars were made out of what little God happened to have
left when he got the world done. God lived up in the sky, and they said
this earth must rest upon something, and finally science passed its hand
clear under, and there was nothing. It was self-existent in infinite
space. Then the Church began to say they didn't say it was flat, not so
awful flat--it was kind of rounding. According to the ancient Christians God lived from all eternity, and
never worked but six days in His whole life, and then had the impudence
to tell us to be industrious. Christian nations are the warlike nations of this world. Christians have
invented the most destructive weapons of war. Christianity gave us the
revolver, invented the rifle, made the bombshell; and Christian
nations here and there had above all other arts the art of war; and as
Christians they have no respect for the rights of barbarians or for the
rights of any nation or tribe that happens to differ with them. See what
it does in our society; we are divided off into little sects that used
to discuss these questions with fire and sword, with chain and <DW19>,
and that discuss, some of them, even to-day, with misrepresentation and
slander. Every day something happens to show me that the old spirit that
that was in the inquisition still slumbers in the breasts of men. Another Day of Divine Work

I heard of a man going to California over the plains, and there was a
clergyman on board, and he had a great deal to say, and finally he
fell in conversation with the forty-niner, and the latter said to the
clergyman, "Do you believe that God made this world in six days?" They were then going along the Humboldt. Says he, "Don't you think
he could put in another day to advantage right around here?" The Donkey and the Lion

Owing to the attitude of the churches for the last fifteen hundred
years, truth-telling has not been a very lucrative business. As a rule,
hypocrisy has worn the robes, and honesty the rags. You cannot now answer the argument of a man by pointing at
the holes in his coat. Thomas Paine attacked the Church when it was
powerful--when it had what is called honors to bestow--when it was
the keeper of the public conscience--when it was strong and cruel. The
Church waited till he was dead, and then attacked his reputation and his
clothes. Once upon a time a donkey kicked a lion, but the lion was dead. The Orthodox Christian

The highest type of the orthodox Christian does not forget; neither
does he learn. He is a living fossil
embedded in that rock called faith. He makes no effort to better his
condition, because all his strength is exhausted in keeping other people
from improving theirs. The supreme desire of his heart is to force all
others to adopt his creed, and in order to accomplish this object he
denounces free-thinking as a crime, and this crime he calls heresy. When
he had power, heresy was the most terrible and formidable of words. It
meant confiscation, exile, imprisonment, torture, and death. Alms-Dish and Sword

I will not say the Church has been an unmitigated evil in all respects. It has delighted in the production
of extremes. It has furnished murderers for its own martyrs. It has
sometimes fed the body, but has always starved the soul. It has been a
charitable highwayman--a profligate beggar--a generous pirate. It
has produced some angels and a multitude of devils. It has built more
prisons than asylums. It made a hundred orphans while it cared for one. In one hand it has carried the alms-dish and in the other a sword. The Church the Great Robber

The Church has been, and still is, the great robber. She has rifled not
only the pockets but the brains of the world. She is the stone at the
sepulchre of liberty; the upas tree, in whose shade the intellect of man
has withered; the Gorgon beneath whose gaze the human heart has turned
to stone. Under her influence even the Protestant mother expects to be
happy in heaven, while her brave boy, who fell fighting for the rights
of man, shall writhe in hell. The Church Impotent

The Church, impotent and malicious, regrets, not the abuse, but the loss
of her power, and seeks to hold by falsehood what she gained by cruelty
and force, by fire and fear. Christianity cannot live in peace with any
other form of faith. Toleration

Let it be remembered that all churches have persecuted heretics to the
extent of their power. Toleration has increased only when and where the
power of the church has diminished. From Augustine until now the
spirit of the Christians has remained the same. There has been the same
intolerance, the same undying hatred of all who think for themselves,
and the same determination to crush out of the human brain all knowledge
inconsistent with an ignorant creed. Shakespeare's Plays v. Sermons

What would the church people think if the theatrical people should
attempt to suppress the churches? What harm would it do to have an opera
here tonight? It would elevate us more than to hear ten thousand sermons
on the worm that never dies. There is more practical wisdom in one of
the plays of Shakespeare than in all the sacred books ever written. What
wrong would there be to see one of those grand plays on Sunday? There
was a time when the church would not allow you to cook on Sunday. You
had to eat your victuals cold. There was a time they thought the more
miserable you feel the better God feels. Give any orthodox church the power, and to-day they would punish heresy
with whip, and chain, and fire. As long as a church deems a certain
belief essential to salvation, just so long it will kill and burn if it
has the power. Why should the Church pity a man whom her God hates? Why
should she show mercy to a kind and noble heretic whom her God will burn
in eternal fire? Cathedrals and domes, and chimes and chants--temples frescoed and
groined and carved, and gilded with gold--altars and tapers, and
paintings of virgin and babe--censer and chalice--chasuble, paten
and alb--organs, and anthems and incense rising to the winged and
blest--maniple, amice and stole--crosses and crosiers, tiaras
and crowns--mitres and missals and masses--rosaries, relics and
robes--martyrs and saints, and windows stained as with the blood of
Christ--never, never for one moment awed the brave, proud spirit of the
Infidel. He knew that all the pomp and glitter had been purchased with
Liberty--that priceless jewel of the soul. In looking at the cathedral
he remembered the dungeon. The music of the organ was loud enough to
drown the clank of fetters. He could not forget that the taper had
lighted the fagot. He knew that the cross adorned the hilt of the sword,
and so where others worshiped, he wept and scorned. Back to Chaos

Suppose the Church could control the world today, we would go back to
chaos and old night philosophy would be branded as infamous; science
would again press its pale and thoughtful face against the prison bars,
and round the limbs of liberty would climb the bigot's flame. Infinite Impudence of the Church

Who can imagine the infinite impudence of a Church assuming to think for
the human race? Who can imagine the infinite impudence of a Church
that pretends to be the mouthpiece of God, and in his name threatens to
inflict eternal punishment upon those who honestly reject its claims and
scorn its pretensions? By what right does a man, or an organization
of men, or a god, claim to hold a brain in bondage? When a fact can be
demonstrated, force is unnecessary; when it cannot be demonstrated, an
appeal to force is infamous. In the presence of the unknown all have an
equal right to think. Wanted!--A New Method

The world is covered with forts to protect Christians from Christians,
and every sea is covered with iron monsters ready to blow Christian
brains into eternal froth. Millions upon millions are annually expended
in the effort to construct still more deadly and terrible engines of
death. Industry is crippled, honest toil is robbed, and even beggary is
taxed to defray the expenses of Christian warfare. There must be some
other way to reform this world. The Kirk of Scotland

The Church was ignorant, bloody, and relentless. In Scotland the "Kirk"
was at the summit of its power. It was a full sister of the Spanish
Inquisition. It was the enemy of
happiness, the hater of joy, and the despiser of religious liberty. It
taught parents to murder their children rather than to allow them to
propagate error. If the mother held opinions of which the infamous
"Kirk" disapproved, her children were taken from her arms, her babe from
her very bosom, and she was not allowed to see them, or to write them a
word. It would not allow shipwrecked sailors to be rescued from drowning
on Sunday. It sought to annihilate pleasure, to pollute the heart by
filling it with religious cruelty and gloom, and to change mankind into
a vast horde of pious, heartless fiends. One of the most famous Scotch
divines said: "The Kirk holds that religious toleration is not far from
blasphemy." The Church Looks Back

The Church is, and always has been, incapable of a forward movement. The Church has already reduced Spain to a
guitar, Italy to a hand-organ, and Ireland to exile. Diogenes

The Church used painting, music and architecture, simply to degrade
mankind. There have been at all
times brave spirits that dared even the gods. Some proud head has always
been above the waves. In every age some Diogenes has sacrificed to all
the gods. True genius never cowers, and there is always some Samson
feeling for the pillars of authority. The Church and War

It does seem as though the most zealous Christian must at times
entertain some doubt as to the divine origin of his religion. For
eighteen hundred years the doctrine has been preached. For more than
a thousand years the Church had, to a great extent, the control of the
civilized world, and what has been the result? Are the Christian nations
patterns of charity and forbearance? On the contrary, their principal
business is to destroy each other. More than five millions of Christians
are trained, educated, and drilled to murder their fellow-christians. Every nation is groaning under a vast debt incurred in carrying on war
against other Christians. The Call to Preach

An old deacon, wishing to get rid of an unpopular preacher, advised him
to give up the ministry and turn his attention to something else. The
preacher replied that he could not conscientiously desert the pulpit, as
he had had a "call" to the ministry. To which the deacon replied, "That
may be so, but it's very unfortunate for you, that when God called you
to preach, he forgot to call anybody to hear you." Burning Servetus

The maker of the Presbyterian creed caused the fugitive Servetus to be
arrested for blasphemy. He was
convicted and condemned to death by fire. On the morning of the fatal
day, Calvin saw him, and Servetus, the victim, asked forgiveness of
Calvin, the murderer. Servetus was bound to the stake, and the <DW19>s
were lighted. The wind carried the flames somewhat away from his body,
so that he slowly roasted for hours. Vainly he implored a speedy death. At last the flames climbed round his form; through smoke and fire his
murderers saw a white, heroic face. And there they watched until a man
became a charred and shriveled mass. Liberty was banished from Geneva,
and nothing but Presbyterianism was left. Freedom for the Clergy

One of the first things I wish to do is to free the orthodox clergy. I
am a great friend of theirs, and in spite of all they may say against
me, I am going to do them a great and lasting service. Upon their necks
are visible the marks of the collar, and upon their backs those of the
lash. They are not allowed to read and think for themselves. They are
taught like parrots, and the best are those who repeat, with the fewest
mistakes, the sentences they have been taught. They sit like owls upon
some dead limb of the tree of knowledge, and hoot the same old hoots
that have been hooted for eighteen hundred years. The Pulpit Weakening

There was a time when a falsehood, fulminated from the pulpit, smote
like a sword; but, the supply having greatly exceeded the demand,
clerical misrepresentation has at last become almost an innocent
amusement. Remembering that only a few years ago men, women, and even
children, were imprisoned, tortured and burned, for having expressed
in an exceedingly mild and gentle way, the ideas entertained by me, I
congratulate myself that calumny is now the pulpit's last resort. Origin of the Priesthood

This was the origin of the priesthood. The priest pretended to stand
between the wrath of the gods and the helplessness of man. He was man's
attorney at the court of heaven. He carried to the invisible world a
flag of truce, a protest and a request. He came back with a command,
with authority and with power. Man fell upon his knees before his own
servant, and the priest, taking advantage of the awe inspired by his
supposed influence with the gods, made of his fellow-man a cringing
hypocrite and slave. The Clergy on Heaven

The clergy, however, balance all the real ills of this life with the
expected joys of the next. We are assured that all is perfection in
heaven--there the skies are cloudless--there all is serenity and peace. Here empires may be overthrown; dynasties may be extinguished in blood;
millions of slaves may toil 'neath the fierce rays of the sun, and the
cruel strokes of the lash; yet all is happiness in heaven. Pestilences
may strew the earth with corpses of the loved; the survivors may bend
above them in agony--yet the placid bosom of heaven is unruffled. Children may expire vainly asking for bread; babes may be devoured by
serpents, while the gods sit smiling in the clouds. The Parson, the Crane and the Fish

A devout clergyman sought every opportunity to impress upon the mind
of his son the fact, that God takes care of all his creatures; that the
falling sparrow attracts his attention, and that his loving-kindness is
over all his works. Happening, one day, to see a crane wading in quest
of food, the good man pointed out to his son the perfect adaptation of
the crane to get his living in that manner. "See," said he, "how his
legs are formed for wading! Observe how
nicely he folds his feet when putting them in or drawing them out of
the water! He is thus enabled
to approach the fish without giving them any notice of his arrival. My son," said he, "it is impossible to look at that bird without
recognizing the design, as well as the goodness of God, in thus
providing the means of subsistence." "Yes," replied the boy, "I think I
see the goodness of God, at least so far as the crane is concerned; but,
after all, father, don't you think the arrangement a little tough on the
fish?" Give me the storm of tempest and action, rather than the dead calm of
ignorance and faith. Banish me from Eden when you will; but first let me
eat of the fruit of the tree of knowledge! The Pulpit's Cry of Fear

From every pulpit comes the same cry, born of the same fear: "Lest
they eat and become as gods, knowing good and evil." For this reason,
religion hates science, faith detests reason, theology is the sworn
enemy of philosophy, and the church with its flaming sword still guards
the hated tree, and like its supposed founder, curses to the lowest
depths the brave thinkers who eat and become as gods. Restive Clergymen

Some of the clergy have the independence to break away, and the
intellect to maintain themselves as free men, but the most are compelled
to submit to the dictation of the orthodox, and the dead. They are
not employed to give their thoughts, but simply to repeat the ideas of
others. They are not expected to give even the doubts that may suggest
themselves, but are required to walk in the narrow, verdureless path
trodden by the ignorance of the past. The forests and fields on either
side are nothing to them. The Parson Factory at Andover

They have in Massachusetts, at a place called Andover, a kind of
minister-factory; and every professor in that factory takes an oath once
in every five years--that is as long as an oath will last--that not only
has he not during the last five years, but so help him God, he will not
during the next five years intellectually advance; and probably there is
no oath he could easier keep. Since the foundation of that institution
there has not been one case of perjury. They believe the same creed they
first taught when the foundation stone was laid, and now when they send
out a minister they brand him as hardware from Sheffield and Birmingham. And every man who knows where he was educated knows his creed, knows
every argument of his creed, every book that he reads, and just what he
amounts to intellectually, and knows he will shrink and shrivel. A Charge to Presbyteries

Go on, presbyteries and synods, go on! Thrust the heretics out of the
Church--that is to say, throw away your brains,--put out your eyes. Every
deserter from your camp is a recruit for the army of progress. Cling to
the ignorant dogmas of the past; read the 109th Psalm; gloat over the
slaughter of mothers and babes; thank God for total depravity; shower
your honors upon hypocrites, and silence every minister who is touched
with that heresy called genius. Turn out the
astronomers, the geologists, the naturalists, the chemists, and all the
honest scientists. With a whip of scorpions, drive them all out. Nature the True Bible

The true Bible appeals to man in the name of demonstration. It has no fear of being read, of being contradicted,
of being investigated and understood. It does not pretend to be holy, or
sacred; it simply claims to be true. It challenges the scrutiny of
all, and implores every reader to verify every line for himself. It is
incapable of being blasphemed. This book appeals to all the surroundings
of man. Each thing that exists testifies of its perfection. The earth,
with its heart of fire and crowns of snow; with its forests and plains,
its rocks and seas; with its every wave and cloud; with its every leaf
and bud and flower, confirms its every word, and the solemn stars,
shining in the infinite abysses, are the eternal witnesses of its truth. Inspiration

I will tell you what I mean by inspiration. I go and look at the sea,
and the sea says something to me; it makes an impression upon my mind. That impression depends, first, upon my experience; secondly, upon
my intellectual capacity. He has a
different brain, he has had a different experience, he has different
memories and different hopes. The sea may speak to him of joy and to me
of grief and sorrow. The sea cannot tell the same thing to two beings,
because no two human beings have had the same experience. So, when I
look upon a flower, or a star, or a painting, or a statue, the more I
know about sculpture the more that statue speaks to me. The more I have
had of human experience, the more I have read, the greater brain I have,
the more the star says to me. In other words, nature says to me all that
I am capable of understanding. Think of a God wicked and malicious enough to inspire this prayer in
the 109th Psalm. Had this
inspired psalm been found in some temple erected for the worship of
snakes, or in the possession of some cannibal king, written with blood
upon the dried skins of babes, there would have been a perfect harmony
between its surroundings and its sentiments. I Don't Believe the Bible

Now, I read the Bible, and I find that God so loved this world that he
made up his mind to damn the most of us. I have read this book, and what
shall I say of it? I believe it is generally better to be honest. Now,
I don't believe the Bible. They say that if you
do you will regret it when you come to die. If that be true, I know a
great many religious people who will have no cause to regret it--they
don't tell their honest convictions about the Bible. The Bible the Real Persecutor

The Bible was the real persecutor. The Bible burned heretics, built
dungeons, founded the Inquisition, and trampled upon all the liberties
of men. How long, O how long will mankind worship a book? How long will
they grovel in the dust before the ignorant legends of the barbaric
past? How long, O how long will they pursue phantoms in a darkness
deeper than death? Immoralities of the Bible

The believers in the Bible are loud in their denunciation of what they
are pleased to call the immoral literature of the world; and yet few
books have been published containing more moral filth than this inspired
word of God. These stories are not redeemed by a single flash of wit or
humor. They never rise above the dull details of stupid vice. For one,
I cannot afford to soil my pages with extracts from them; and all such
portions of the Scriptures I leave to be examined, written upon, and
explained by the clergy. Clergymen may know some way by which they can
extract honey from these flowers. Until these passages are expunged from
the Old Testament, it is not a fit book to be read by either old or
young. It contains pages that no minister in the United States would
read to his congregation for any reward whatever. There are chapters
that no gentleman would read in the presence of a lady. There are
chapters that no father would read to his child. There are narratives
utterly unfit to be told; and the time will come when mankind will
wonder that such a book was ever called inspired. The Bible Stands in the Way

But as long as the Bible is considered as the work of God, it will be
hard to make all men too good and pure to imitate it; and as long as it
is imitated there will be vile and filthy books. The literature of
our country will not be sweet and clean until the Bible ceases to be
regarded as the production of a god. The Bible False

In the days of Thomas Paine the Church believed and taught that every
word in the Bible was absolutely true. Since his day it has been proven
false in its cosmogony, false in its astronomy, false in its chronology,
false in its history, and so far as the Old Testament is concerned,
false in almost everything. There are but few, if any, scientific men
who apprehend that the Bible is literally true. Who on earth at this
day would pretend to settle any scientific question by a text from
the Bible? The old belief is confined to the ignorant and zealous. The Church itself will before long be driven to occupy the position of
Thomas Paine. The Man I Love

I love any man who gave me, or helped to give me, the liberty I enjoy
to-night. I love every man who helped put our flag in heaven. I love
every man who has lifted his voice in all the ages for liberty, for a
chainless body, and a fetterless brain. I love every man who has given
to every other human being every right that he claimed for himself. I
love every man who thought more of principle than he did of position. I
love the men who have trampled crowns beneath their feet that they might
do something for mankind. Whale, Jonah and All

The best minds of the orthodox world, to-day, are endeavoring to prove
the existence of a personal Deity. You are no longer asked to swallow the Bible whole, whale,
Jonah and all; you are simply required to believe in God, and pay your
pew-rent. There is not now an enlightened minister in the world who will
seriously contend that Samson's strength was in his hair, or that the
necromancers of Egypt could turn water into blood, and pieces of wood
into serpents. Damned for Laughing at Samson

For my part, I would infinitely prefer to know all the results of
scientific investigation, than to be inspired as Moses was. Supposing
the Bible to be true; why is it any worse or more wicked for free
thinkers to deny it, than for priests to deny the doctrine of Evolution,
or the dynamic theory of heat? Why should we be damned for laughing at
Samson and his foxes, while others, holding the Nebular Hypothesis in
utter contempt, go straight to heaven? The Man, Not the Book, Inspired

Now when I come to a book, for instance I read the writings of
Shakespeare--Shakespeare, the greatest human being who ever existed upon
this globe. All that I have sense enough to
understand. Let another read him who knows
nothing of the drama, who knows nothing of the impersonation of passion;
what does he get from him? In other words, every man gets
from a book, a flower, a star, or the sea, what he is able to get from
his intellectual development and experience. Do you then believe that
the Bible is a different book to every human being that receives it? Can God, then, through the Bible, make the same revelation to two
men? Because the man who reads is the man who inspires. Inspiration is in the man and not in the book. The Bible a Chain

The real oppressor, enslaver and corrupter of the people is the Bible. That book is the chain that binds, the dungeon that holds the clergy. That book spreads the pall of superstition over the colleges and
schools. That book puts out the eyes of science, and makes honest
investigation a crime. That book unmans the politician and degrades the
people. That book fills the world with bigotry, hypocrisy and fear. Absurd and Foolish Fables

Volumes might be written upon the infinite absurdity of this most
incredible, wicked and foolish of all the fables contained in that
repository of the impossible, called the Bible. To me it is a matter
of amazement, that it ever was for a moment believed by any intelligent
human being. The Bible the Work of Man

Is it not infinitely more reasonable to say that this book is the work
of man, that it is filled with mingled truth and error, with mistakes
and facts, and reflects, too faithfully perhaps, the "very form and
pressure of its time?" If there are mistakes in the Bible, certainly
they were made by man. If there is anything contrary to nature, it
was written by man. If there is anything immoral, cruel, heartless
or infamous, it certainly was never written by a being worthy of the
adoration of mankind. Something to Admire, not Laugh at

It strikes me that God might write a book that would not necessarily
excite the laughter of his children. In fact, I think it would be
safe to say that a real God could produce a work that would excite the
admiration of mankind. An Intellectual Deformity

The man who now regards the Old Testament as, in any sense, a sacred or
inspired book, is, in my judgment, an intellectual and moral deformity. There is in it so much that is cruel, ignorant, and ferocious, that it
is to me a matter of amazement that it was ever thought to be the work
of a most merciful Deity. The Bible a Poor Product

Admitting that the Bible is the Book of God, is that his only good job? Will not a man be damned as quick for denying the equator as denying
the Bible? Will he not be damned as quick for denying geology as for
denying the scheme of salvation? When the Bible was first written it was
not believed. Had they known as much about science as we know now, that
Bible would not have been written. The Bible the Battle Ground of Sects

Every sect is a certificate that God has not plainly revealed his will
to man. To each reader the Bible conveys a different meaning. About the
meaning of this book, called a revelation, there have been ages of war,
and centuries of sword and flame. If written by an infinite God, he must
have known that these results must follow; and thus knowing, he must be
responsible for all. The Bible Childish

Paine thought the barbarities of the Old Testament inconsistent with
what he deemed the real character of God. He believed that murder,
massacre and indiscriminate slaughter had never been commanded by
the Deity. He regarded much of the Bible as childish, unimportant
and foolish. Paine
attacked the Bible precisely in the same spirit in which he had attacked
the pretensions of kings. All the pomp in the
world could not make him cower. His reason knew no "Holy of Holies,"
except the abode of Truth. Where Moses got the Pentateuch

Nothing can be clearer than that Moses received from the Egyptians the
principal parts of his narrative, making such changes and additions as
were necessary to satisfy the peculiar superstitions of his own people. God's Letter to His Children

According to the theologians, God, the Father of us all, wrote a letter
to his children. The children have always differed somewhat as to the
meaning of this letter. In consequence of these honest differences,
these brothers began to cut out each other's hearts. In every land,
where this letter from God has been read, the children to whom and for
whom it was written have been filled with hatred and malice. They have
imprisoned and murdered each other, and the wives and children of each
other. In the name of God every possible crime has been committed, every
conceivable outrage has been perpetrated. Brave men, tender and loving
women, beautiful girls, and prattling babes have been exterminated in
the name of Jesus Christ. Examination a Crime

The Church has burned honesty and rewarded hypocrisy. And all this,
because it was commanded by a book--a book that men had been taught
implicitly to believe, long before they knew one word that was in it. They had been taught that to doubt the truth of this book--to examine
it, even--was a crime of such enormity that it could not be forgiven,
either in this world or in the next. All that is necessary, as it seems to me, to convince any reasonable
person that the Bible is simply and purely of human invention--of
barbarian invention--is to read it. Read it as you would any other book;
think of it as you would any other; get the bandage of reverence from
your eyes; drive from your heart the phantom of fear; push from the
throne of your brain the cowled form of superstition--then read the Holy
Bible, and you will be amazed that you ever, for one moment, supposed a
being of infinite wisdom, goodness and purity, to be the author of such
ignorance and such atrocity. An Infallible Book Makes Slaves

Whether the Bible is false or true, is of no consequence in comparison
with the mental freedom of the race. As long as man
believes the Bible to be infallible, that book is his master. The
civilization of this century is not the child of faith, but of
unbelief--the result of free thought. Can a Sane Man Believe in Inspiration? What man who ever thinks, can believe that blood can appease God? And
yet our entire system of religion is based on that belief. The Jews
pacified Jehovah with the blood of animals, and according to the
Christian system, the blood of Jesus softened the heart of God a little,
and rendered possible the salvation of a fortunate few. It is hard to
conceive how any sane man can read the Bible and still believe in the
doctrine of inspiration. An Inspiration Test

The Bible was originally written in the Hebrew language, and the Hebrew
language at that time had no vowels in writing. It was written entirely
with consonants, and without being divided into chapters and verses, and
there was no system of punctuation whatever. After you go home to-night
write an English sentence or two with only consonants close together,
and you will find that it will take twice as much inspiration to read it
as it did to write it. The Real Bible

The real Bible is not the work of inspired men, nor prophets, nor
evangelists, nor of Christs. The real Bible has not yet been written,
but is being written. Every man who finds a fact adds a word to this
great book. The Bad Passages in the Bible not Inspired

The bad passages in the Bible are not inspired. No God ever upheld
human slavery, polygamy or a war of extermination. No God ever ordered
a soldier to sheathe his sword in the breast of a mother. No God ever
ordered a warrior to butcher a smiling, prattling babe. No God ever said, be subject to the powers that be. No
God ever endeavored to make man a slave and woman a beast of burden. There are thousands of good passages in the Bible. There are in it wise laws, good customs, some lofty and splendid things. And I do not care whether they are inspired or not, so they are true. But what I do insist upon is that the bad is not inspired. Too much Pictorial

There is no hope for you. It is just as bad to deny hell as it is to
deny heaven. The Garden of Eden is pictorial; a pictorial snake and
a pictorial woman, I suppose, and a pictorial man, and may be it was a
pictorial sin. One Plow worth a Million Sermons

Man must learn to rely upon himself. Reading Bibles will not protect
him from the blasts of winter, but houses, fire and clothing will. To
prevent famine one plow is worth a million sermons, and even patent
medicines will cure more diseases than all the prayers uttered since the
beginning of the world. The Infidels of 1776

By the efforts of these infidels--Paine, Jefferson and Franklin--the
name of God was left out of the Constitution of the United States. They
knew that if an infinite being was put in, no room would be left for the
people. They knew that if any church was made the mistress of the state,
that mistress, like all others, would corrupt, weaken, and destroy. Washington wished a church, established by law, in Virginia. He was
prevented by Thomas Jefferson. It was only a little while ago that
people were compelled to attend church by law in the Eastern States,
and taxes were raised for the support of churches the same as for the
construction of highways and bridges. The great principle enunciated
in the Constitution has silently repealed most of these laws. In the
presence of this great instrument the constitutions of the States grew
small and mean, and in a few years every law that puts a chain upon the
mind, except in Delaware, will be repealed, and for these our children
may thank the infidels of 1776. The Legitimate Influence of Religion

Religion should have the influence upon mankind that its goodness, that
its morality, its justice, its charity, its reason and its argument give
it, and no more. Religion should have the effect upon mankind that it
necessarily has, and no more. Infidels the Flowers of the World

The infidels have been the brave and thoughtful men; the flower of all
the world; the pioneers and heralds of the blessed day of liberty and
love; the generous spirits of the unworthy past; the seers and
prophets of our race; the great chivalric souls, proud victors on the
battle-fields of thought, the creditors of all the years to be. The Noblest Sons of, Earth

Who at the present day can imagine the courage, the devotion to
principle, the intellectual and moral grandeur it once required to be an
infidel, to brave the Church, her racks, her fagots, her dungeons, her
tongues of fire--to defy and scorn her heaven and her hell--her devil
and her God? They were the noblest sons of earth. They were the real
saviors of our race, the destroyers of superstition, and the creators
of Science. They were the real Titans who bared their grand foreheads to
all the thunderbolts of all the gods. How Ingersoll became an Infidel

I may say right here that the Christian idea that any God can make me
His friend by killing mine is about as great a mistake as could be made. They seem to have the idea that just as soon as God kills all the people
that a person loves, he will then begin to love the Lord. What drew
my attention first to these questions was the doctrine of eternal
punishment. This was so abhorrent to my mind that I began to hate the
book in which it was taught. Then, in reading law, going back to find
the origin of laws, I found one had to go but a little way before the
legislator and priest united. This led me to study a good many of the
religions of the world. At first I was greatly astonished to find most
of them better than ours. I then studied our own system to the best of
my ability, and found that people were palming off upon children
and upon one another as the inspired words of God a book that upheld
slavery, polygamy, and almost every other crime. Whether I am right or
wrong, I became convinced that the Bible is not an inspired book, and
then the only question for me to settle was as to whether I should say
what I believed or not. This realty was not the question in my mind,
because, before even thinking of such a question, I expressed my belief,
and I simply claim that right, and expect to exercise it as long as I
live. I may be damned for it in the next world, but it is a great source
of pleasure to me in this. Why should it be taken for granted that the men who devoted their lives
to the liberation of their fellowmen should have been hissed at in
the hour of death by the snakes of conscience, while men who defended
slavery--practiced polygamy--justified the stealing of babes from the
breasts of mothers, and lashed the naked back of unpaid labor, are
supposed to have passed smilingly from earth to the embraces of the
angels? Why should we think that the brave thinkers, the investigators,
the honest men must have left the crumbling shore of time in dread and
fear, while the instigators of the massacre of St. Bartholomew, the
inventors and users of thumb screws, of iron boots and racks, the
burners and tearers of human flesh, the stealers, the whippers, and the
enslavers of men, the buyers and beaters of maidens, mothers, and babes,
the founders of the inquisition, the makers of chains, the builders of
dungeons, the calumniators of the living, the slanderers of the
dead, and even the murderers of Jesus Christ, all died in the odor of
sanctity, with white, forgiven hands folded upon the breasts of peace,
while the destroyers of prejudice, the breakers of fetters, the creators
of light, died surrounded by the fierce fiends of God? Infidelity is Liberty

Infidelity is liberty; all religion is slavery. In every creed man is
the slave of God--woman is the slave of man and the sweet children are
the slaves of all. We do not want creeds; we want knowledge--we want
happiness. The World in Debt to Infidels

What would the world be if infidels had never been? Did all the priests of Rome increase the mental wealth of man as much
as Bruno? Did all the priests of France do as great a work for the
civilization of the world as Diderot and Voltaire? Did all the ministers
of Scotland add as much to the sum of human knowledge as David Hume? Have all the clergymen, monks, friars, ministers, priests, bishops,
cardinals, and popes, from the day of Pentecost to the last election,
done as much for human liberty as Thomas Paine? Infidels the Pioneers of Progress

The history of intellectual progress is written in the lives of
infidels. Political rights have been preserved by traitors--the liberty
of the mind by heretics. To attack the king was treason--to dispute the
priest was blasphemy. The throne and the altar were twins--vultures from the same
egg. It was James I. who said: "No bishop, no king." He might have said:
"No cross, no crown." The king owned the bodies, and the priest the
souls, of men. One lived on taxes, the other on alms. One was a robber,
the other a beggar. The king made laws, the priest made creeds. With bowed backs the people
received the burdens of the one, and, with wonder's open mouth, the
dogmas of the other. If any aspired to be free, they were slaughtered by
the king, and every priest was a Herod who slaughtered the children
of the brain. The king ruled by force, the priest by fear, and both by
both. The king said to the people: "God made you peasants, and He made
me king. He made rags and hovels for you, robes and palaces for me. And the priest said: "God made you ignorant and
vile. If you do not obey me, God will punish
you here and torment you hereafter. Infidels the Great Discoverers

Infidels are the intellectual discoverers. They sail the unknown seas,
and in the realms of thought they touch the shores of other worlds. An
infidel is the finder of a new fact--one who in the mental sky has seen
another star. He is an intellectual capitalist, and for that reason
excites the envy of theological paupers. The Altar of Reason

Virtue is a subordination, of the passions to the intellect. It is to
act in accordance with your highest convictions. It does not consist in
believing, but in doing. This is the sublime truth that the Infidels in
all ages have uttered. They have handed the torch from one to the other
through all the years that have fled. Upon the altar of reason they have
kept the sacred fire, and through the long midnight of faith they fed
the divine flame. GODS AND DEVILS




275. Every Nation has Created a God

Each nation has created a God, and the God has always resembled his
creators. He hated and loved what they hated and loved. Each God was
intensely patriotic, and detested all nations but his own. All these
gods demanded praise, flattery and worship. Most of them were pleased
with sacrifice, and the smell of innocent blood has ever been considered
a divine perfume. All these gods have insisted on having a vast number
of priests, and the priests have always insisted upon being supported
by the people; and the principle business of these priests has been
to boast that their God could easily vanquish all the other gods put
together. Gods with Back-Hair

Man, having always been the physical superior of woman, accounts for
the fact that most of the high gods have been males. Had women been the
physical superior; the powers supposed to be the rulers of Nature would
have been woman, and instead of being represented in the apparel of man,
they would have luxuriated in trains, low-necked dresses, laces and
back-hair. Creation the Decomposition of the Infinite

Admitting that a god did create the universe, the question then arises,
of what did he create it? Nothing,
considered in the light of a raw material, is a most decided failure. It
follows, then, that the god must have made the universe out of himself,
he being the only existence. The universe is material, and if it was
made of god, the god must have been material. With this very thought in
his mind, Anaximander of Miletus, said: "Creation is the decomposition
of the infinite." The Gods Are as the People Are

No god was ever in advance of the nation that created him. The <DW64>s
represented their deities with black skins and curly hair: The Mongolian
gave to his a yellow complexion and dark almond-shaped eyes. The Jews
were not allowed to paint theirs, or we should have seen Jehovah with
a full beard, an oval face, and an aquiline nose. Zeus was a perfect
Greek, and Jove looked as though a member of the Roman senate. The gods
of Egypt had the patient face and placid look of the loving people who
made them. The gods of northern countries were represented warmly clad
in robes of fur; those of the tropics were naked. The gods of India
were often mounted upon elephants; those of some islanders were great
swimmers, and the deities of the Arctic zone were passionately fond of
whale's blubber. Gods Shouldn't Make Mistakes

Generally the devotee has modeled them after himself, and has given them
hands, heads, feet, eyes, ears, and organs of speech. Each nation made
its gods and devils not only speak its language, but put in their mouths
the same mistakes in history, geography, astronomy, and in all matters
of fact, generally made by the people. Miracles

No one, in the world's whole history, ever attempted to substantiate a
truth by a miracle. Nothing but
falsehood ever attested itself by signs and wonders. No miracle ever was
performed, and no sane man ever thought he had performed one, and until
one is performed, there can be no evidence of the existence of any power
superior to, and independent of nature. Plenty of Gods on Hand

Man has never been at a loss for gods. He has worshipped almost
everything, including the vilest and most disgusting beasts. He has
worshipped fire, earth, air, water, light, stars, and for hundreds, of
ages prostrated himself before enormous snakes. Savage tribes often make
gods of articles they get from civilized people. The Todas worship
a cowbell. The Kodas worship two silver plates, which they regard as
husband and wife, and another tribe manufactured a god out of a king of
hearts. The Devil Difficulty

In the olden times the existence of devils was universally admitted. The
people had no doubt upon that subject, and from such belief it followed
as a matter of course, that a person, in order to vanquish these devils,
had either to be a god, or to be assisted by one. All founders of
religions have established their claims to divine origin by controlling
evil spirits, and suspending the laws of nature. Casting out devils was
a certificate of divinity. A prophet, unable to cope with the powers of
darkness, was regarded with contempt. The utterance of the highest and
noblest sentiments, the most blameless and holy life, commanded but
little respect, unless accompanied by power to work miracles and command
spirits. If he was God, of course
the devil knew that fact, and yet, according to this account, the devil
took the omnipotent God and placed him upon a pinnacle of the temple,
and endeavored to induce him, to dash himself against the earth. Failing
in that, he took the creator, owner and governor of the universe up into
an exceeding high mountain, and offered him this world--this grain of
sand--if he, the God of all the worlds, would fall down and worship
him, a poor devil, without even a tax title to one foot of dirt! Is it
possible the devil was such an idiot? Should any great credit be given
to this deity for not being caught with such chaff? The
devil--the prince of sharpers--the king of cunning--the master of
finesse, trying to bribe God with a grain of sand that belonged to God! Industrious Deities

Few nations have been so poor as to have but one god. Gods were made
so easily, and the raw material cost so little, that generally the god
market was fairly glutted, and heaven crammed with these phantoms. These
gods not only attended to the skies, but were supposed to interfere in
all the affairs of men. All was supposed to be under their
immediate control. Nothing was too small--nothing too large; the falling
of sparrows and the motions of the planets were alike attended to by
these industrious and observing deities. God in Idleness

If a god created the universe, then, there must have been a time when he
commenced to create. Back of that time there must have been an eternity,
during which there had existed nothing--absolutely nothing--except this
supposed god. According to this theory, this god spent an eternity, so
to speak, in an infinite vacuum, and in perfect idleness. Fancy a Devil Drowning a World

One of these gods, according to the account, drowned an entire world,
with the exception of eight persons. The old, the young, the beautiful
and the helpless were remorselessly devoured by the shoreless sea. This,
the most fearful tragedy that the imagination of ignorant priests ever
conceived, was the act, not of a devil, but of a god, so-called, whom
men ignorantly worship unto this day. What a stain such an act would
leave upon the character of a devil! Some Gods Very Particular About Little Things

From their starry thrones they frequently came to the earth for the
purpose of imparting information to man. It is related of one that he
came amid thunderings and lightnings in order to tell the people that
they should not cook a kid in its mother's milk. Some left their shining
abodes to tell women that they should, or should not, have children, to
inform a priest how to cut and wear his apron, and to give directions as
to the proper manner of cleaning the intestines of a bird. 288 The Gods of To-day the Scorn of To-morrow

Nations, like individuals, have their periods of youth, of manhood and
decay. The same inexorable destiny awaits them
all. The gods created by the nations must perish with their creators. They were created by men, and like men, they must pass away. The deities
of one age are the by-words of the next. No Evidence of a God in Nature

The best minds, even in the religious world, admit that in the material
nature there is no evidence of what they are pleased to call a god. They find their evidence in the phenomena of intelligence, and very
innocently assert that intelligence is above, and in fact, opposed to
nature. They insist that man, at least, is a special creation; that
he has somewhere in his brain a divine spark, a little portion of the
"Great First Cause." They say that matter cannot produce thought; but
that thought can produce matter. They tell us that man has intelligence,
and therefore there must be an intelligence greater than his. Why not
say, God has intelligence, therefore there must be an intelligence
greater than his? So far as we know, there is no intelligence apart
from matter. We cannot conceive of thought, except as produced within a
brain. Great Variety in Gods

Gods have been manufactured after numberless models., and according to
the most grotesque fashions. Some have a thousand arms, some a hundred
heads, some are adorned with necklaces of living snakes, some are armed
with clubs, some with sword and shield, some with bucklers, and some
have wings as a cherub; some were invisible, some would show themselves
entire, and some would only show their backs; some were jealous, some
were foolish, some turned themselves into men, some into swans, some
into bulls, some into doves, and some into Holy-Ghosts, and made love
to the beautiful daughters of men: Some were married--all ought to have
been--and some were considered as old bachelors from all eternity. Some
had children, and the children were turned into gods and worshiped as
their fathers had been. Most of these gods were revengeful, savage,
lustful, and ignorant. As they generally depended upon their priests for
information, their ignorance can hardly excite our astonishment. God Grows Smaller

"But," says the religionist, "you cannot explain everything; and that
which you cannot explain, that which you do not comprehend, is my God." We are understanding more every day;
consequently your God is growing smaller every day. Give the Devil His Due

If the account given in Genesis is really true, ought we not, after all,
to thank this serpent? He was the first schoolmaster, the first advocate
of learning, the first enemy of ignorance, the first to whisper in human
ears the sacred word liberty, the creator of ambition, the author of
modesty, of inquiry, of doubt, of investigation, of progress and of
civilization. Casting out Devils

Even Christ, the supposed son of God, taught that persons were possessed
of evil spirits, and frequently, according to the account, gave proof of
his divine origin and mission by frightening droves of devils out of his
unfortunate countrymen. Casting out devils was his principal employment,
and the devils thus banished generally took occasion to acknowledge him
as the true Messiah; which was not only very kind of them, but quite
fortunate for him. On the Horns of a Dilemma

The history of religion is simply the story of man's efforts in all ages
to avoid one of two great powers, and to pacify the other. Both powers
have inspired little else than abject fear. The cold, calculating sneer
of the devil, and the frown of God, were equally terrible. In any event,
man's fate was to be arbitrarily fixed forever by an unknown power
superior to all law, and to all fact. The Devil and the Swine

How are you going to prove a miracle? How would you go to work to prove
that the devil entered into a drove of swine? Who saw it, and who would
know a devil if he did see him? Some tell me that it is the desire of God that I should worship Him? If he is in want and I can assist Him and will
not, I would be an ingrate and an infamous wretch. But I am satisfied
that I cannot by any possibility assist the infinite. I can help feed the hungry, clothe the naked, enlighten
ignorance. I can help at least, in some degree, toward covering this
world with a mantle of joy I may be wrong, but I do not believe that
there is any being in this universe who gives rain for praise, who gives
sunshine for prayer, or who blesses a man simply because he kneels. If the infinite "Father" allows a majority of his children to live in
ignorance and wretchedness now, what evidence is there that he will ever
improve their condition? Can the conduct
of infinite wisdom, power and love ever change? Is the infinite capable
of any improvement whatever? According to the theologians, God prepared this globe expressly for the
habitation of his loved children, and yet he filled the forests with
ferocious beasts; placed serpents in every path; stuffed the world
with earthquakes, and adorned its surface with mountains of flame. Notwithstanding all this, we are told that the world is perfect; that
it was created by a perfect being, and is therefore necessarily perfect. The next moment, these same persons will tell us that the world was
cursed; covered with brambles, thistles and thorns, and that man was
doomed to disease and death, simply because our poor, dear mother ate an
apple contrary to the command of an arbitrary God. The Devils better than the Gods

Our ancestors not only had their God-factories, but they made devils
as well. These devils were generally disgraced and fallen gods. These
devils generally sympathized with man. In nearly all the theologies,
mythologies and religions, the devils have been much more humane and
merciful than the gods. No devil ever gave one of his generals an order
to kill children and to rip open the bodies of pregnant women. Such
barbarities were always ordered by the good gods! The pestilences were
sent by the most merciful gods! The frightful famine, during which the
dying child with pallid lips sucked the withered bosom of a dead
mother, was sent by the loving gods. No devil was ever charged with such
fiendish brutality. Is it possible that an infinite God created this world simply to be the
dwelling-place of slaves and serfs? simply for the purpose of raising
orthodox Christians? That he did a few miracles to astonish them; that
all the evils of life are simply his punishments, and that he is finally
going to turn heaven into a kind of religious museum filled with Baptist
barnacles, petrified Presbyterians and Methodist mummies? I want no
heaven for which I must give my reason; no happiness in exchange for
my liberty, and no immortality that demands the surrender of my
individuality. Better rot in the windowless tomb, to which there is no
door but the red mouth of the pallid worm, than wear the jeweled collar
even of a god. It is impossible to conceive of a more thoroughly despicable, hateful,
and arrogant being, than the Jewish god. In the mythology of the world he has no parallel. He, only, is
never touched by agony and tears. He cares neither for love nor music,
beauty nor joy. A false friend, an unjust judge, a braggart, hypocrite,
and tyrant. Compared with Jehovah, Pharaoh was a benefactor, and the
tyranny of Egypt was freedom to those who suffered the liberty of God. HEAVEN AND HELL




302. Hope of a Future Life

For my part I know nothing of any other state of existence, either
before or after this, and I have never become personally acquainted with
anybody who did. There may be another life, and if there is the best
way to prepare for it is by making somebody happy in this. God certainly
cannot afford to put a man in hell who has made a little heaven in this
world. I would like to see how things come
out in this world when I am dead. There are some people I should like to
see again, but if there is no other life I shall never know it. I am Immortal

So far as I am concerned I am immortal; that is to say, I can't
recollect when I did not exist, and there never will be a time when I
will remember that I do not exist. I would like to have several millions
of dollars, and I may say I have a lively hope that some day I may be
rich; but to tell you the truth I have very little evidence of it. Our
hope of immortality does not come from any religions, but nearly all
religions come from that hope. The Old Testament, instead of telling
us that we are immortal, tells us how we lost immortality. You will
recollect that if Adam and Eve could have gotten to the tree of life,
they would have eaten of its fruit and would have lived forever; but for
the purpose of preventing immortality God turned them out of the Garden
of Eden, and put certain angels with swords or sabres at the gate to
keep them from getting back. The Old Testament proves, if it proves
anything, which I do not think it does, that there is no life after
this; and the New Testament is not very specific on the subject. There
were a great many opportunities for the Savior and his apostles to
tell us about another world, but they didn't improve them to any great
extent; and the only evidence so far as I know about another life is,
first, that we have no evidence; and, secondly, that we are rather sorry
that we have not, and wish we had. And suppose, after all, that death does end all. Next to eternal joy,
next to being forever with those we love and those who have loved us,
next to that is to be wrapped in the dreamless drapery of eternal peace. Upon the shadowy shore of death
the sea of trouble casts no wave. Eyes that have been curtained by the
everlasting dark will never know again the touch of tears. Lips that
have been touched by the eternal silence will never utter another word
of grief. And I had
rather think of those I have loved, and those I have lost, as having
returned to earth, as having become a part of the elemental wealth of
the the world. I would rather think of them as unconscious dust. I would
rather think of them as gurgling in the stream, floating in the cloud,
bursting into light upon the shores of worlds. I would rather think
of them thus than to have even a suspicion that their souls had been
clutched by an orthodox God. The Old World Ignorant of Destiny

Moses differed from most of the makers of sacred books by his failure
to say anything of a future life, by failing to promise heaven, and to
threaten hell. Upon the subject of a future state, there is not one
word in the Pentateuch. Probably at that early day God did not deem
it important to make a revelation as to the eternal destiny of man. He seems to have thought that he could control the Jews, at least, by
rewards and punishments in this world, and so he kept the frightful
realities of eternal joy and torment a profound secret from the people
of his choice. He thought it far more important to tell the Jews their
origin than to enlighten them as to their destiny. Where the Doctrine of Hell was born

I honestly believe that the doctrine of hell was born in the glittering
eyes of snakes that run in frightful coils watching for their prey. I
believe it was born in the yelping and howling and growling and snarling
of wild beasts. I believe it was born in the grin of hyenas and in the
malicious clatter of depraved apes. I despise it, I defy it, and I hate
it; and when the great ship freighted with the world goes down in
the night of death, chaos and disaster, I will not be guilty of the
ineffable meanness of pushing from my breast my wife and children and
paddling off in some orthodox canoe. I will go down with those I love
and with those who love me. I will go down with the ship and with my
race. Nothing can make me believe that there is any being that is going to
burn and torment and damn his children forever. The Grand Companionships of Hell

Since hanging has got to be a means of grace, I would prefer hell. I had
a thousand times rather associate with the pagan philosophers than with
the inquisitors of the middle ages. I certainly should prefer the worst
man in Greek or Roman history to John Calvin, and I can imagine no man
in the world that I would not rather sit on the same bench with than the
puritan fathers and the founders of orthodox churches. I would trade off
my harp any minute for a seat in the other country. All the poets will
be in perdition, and the greatest thinkers, and, I should think, most
of the women whose society would tend to increase the happiness of
man, nearly all the painters, nearly all the sculptors, nearly all
the writers of plays, nearly all the great actors, most of the best
musicians, and nearly all the good fellows--the persons who know good
stories, who can sing songs, or who will loan a friend a dollar. They will mostly all be in that country, and if I did not live there
permanently, I certainly would want it so I could spend my winter months
there. Let me put one case and I will be through with this branch of the
subject. The husband is a good
fellow and the wife a splendid woman. They live and love each other and
all at once he is taken sick, and they watch day after day and night
after night around his bedside until their property is wasted and
finally she has to go to work, and she works through eyes blinded with
tears, and the sentinel of love watches at the bedside of her prince,
and at the least breath or the least motion she is awake; and she
attends him night after night and day after day for years, and finally
he dies, and she has him in her arms and covers his wasted face with the
tears of agony and love. He dies, and
she buries him and puts flowers above his grave, and she goes there in
the twilight of evening and she takes her children, and tells her little
boys and girls through her tears how brave and how true and how tender
their father was, and finally she dies and goes to hell, because she was
not a believer; and he goes to the battlements of heaven and looks over
and sees the woman who loved him with all the wealth of her love, and
whose tears made his dead face holy and sacred, and he looks upon her
in the agonies of hell without having his happiness diminished in the
least. With all due respect to everybody I say, damn any such doctrine
as that. The Drama of Damnation

When you come to die, as you look back upon the record of your life, no
matter how many men you have wrecked and ruined, and no matter how many
women you have deceived and deserted--all that may be forgiven you;
but if you recollect that you have laughed at God's book you will see
through the shadows of death, the leering looks of fiends and the forked
tongues of devils. For instance, it
is the day of judgment. When the man is called up by the recording
secretary, or whoever does the cross-examining, he says to his soul:
"Where are you from?" "Well, I don't like to talk about myself." "Well, I was a good fellow; I loved
my wife; I loved my children. My home was my heaven; my fireside was my
paradise, and to sit there and see the lights and shadows falling on the
faces of those I love, that to me was a perpetual joy. I never gave one
of them a solitary moment of pain. I don't owe a dollar in the world,
and I left enough to pay my funeral expenses and keep the wolf of want
from the door of the house I loved. That is the kind of a man I am." They were always expecting to be happy simply because somebody else was
to be damned." "Well, did you believe that rib story?" To tell you the
God's truth, that was a little more than I could swallow." "Yes, sir, and to the Young Men's Christian
Association." "Did you
ever run off with any of the money?" "I don't like to tell, sir." "What kind of a bank did you have?" "How much did you
run off with?" "Did you take anything
else along with you?" "Did you have a wife and children of your own?" "Oh, yes; but such was my confidence in God that I
believed he would take care of them." I believed all of it, sir; I often used to be sorry that there were
not harder stories yet in the Bible, so that I could show what my faith
could do." Annihilation rather than be a God

No God has a right to make a man he intends to drown. Eternal wisdom has
no right to make a poor investment, no right to engage in a speculation
that will not finally pay a dividend. No God has a right to make
a failure, and surely a man who is to be damned forever is not a
conspicuous success. Yet upon love's breast, the Church has placed that
asp; around the child of immortality the Church has coiled the worm that
never dies. For my part I want no heaven, if there is to be a hell. I
would rather be annihilated than be a god and know that one human soul
would have to suffer eternal agony. "All that have Red Hair shall be Damned." I admit that most Christians are honest--always have admitted it. I
admit that most ministers are honest, and that they are doing the best
they can in their way for the good of mankind; but their doctrines are
hurtful; they do harm in the world; and I am going to do what I can
against their doctrines. They preach this infamy: "He that believes
shall be saved, and he that believeth not shall be damned." Every word
of that text has been an instrument of torture; every letter in that
text has been a sword thrust into the bleeding and quivering heart of
man; every letter has been a dungeon; every line has been a chain; and
that infamous sentence has covered this world with blood. I deny that
"whoso believes shall be saved, and he that believeth not shall be
damned." No man can control his belief; you might as well say, "All that
have red hair shall be damned." The Conscience of a Hyena

But, after all, what I really want to do is to destroy the idea of
eternal punishment. That
doctrine fills hell with honest men, and heaven with intellectual and
moral paupers. That doctrine allows people to sin on a credit. That
doctrine allows the basest to be eternally happy and the most honorable
to suffer eternal pain. I think of all doctrines it is the most
infinitely infamous, and would disgrace the lowest savage, and any man
who believes it, and has imagination enough to understand it, has the
heart of a serpent and the conscience of a hyena. I Leave the Dead

But for me I leave the dead where nature leaves them, and whatever
flower of hope springs up in my heart I will cherish. But I cannot
believe that there is any being in this universe who has created a
soul for eternal pain, and I would rather that every God would destroy
himself, I would rather that we all should go back to the eternal chaos,
to the black and starless night, than that just one soul should suffer
eternal agony. Swedenborg did one thing for which I feel almost grateful. He gave an
account of having met John Calvin in hell. Nothing connected with the
supernatural could be more natural than this. The only thing detracting
from the value of this report is, that if there is a hell, we know
without visiting the place that John Calvin must be there. GOVERNING GREAT MEN




315. Jesus Christ

And let me say here once for all, that for the man Christ I have
infinite respect. Let me say once for all that the place where man has
died for man is holy ground. Let me say once for all, to that great and
serene man I gladly pay--I _gladly_ pay the tribute of my admiration and
my tears. He was an infidel in his
time. He was regarded as a blasphemer, and his life was destroyed by
hypocrites who have in all ages done what they could to trample freedom
out of the human mind. Had I lived at that time I would have been his
friend. And should he come again he will not find a better friend than
I will be. For the theological creation I have
a different feeling. If he was in fact God, he knew there was no such
thing as death; he knew that what we call death was but the eternal
opening of the golden gates of everlasting joy. And it took no heroism
to face a death that was simply eternal life. The Emperor Constantine, who lifted Christianity into power, murdered
his wife Fausta and his eldest son Crispus the same year that he
convened the council of Nice to decide whether Jesus Christ was a man or
the son of God. The council decided that Christ was substantial with
the Father. We are thus indebted to a wife
murderer for settling the vexed question of the divinity of the Savior. Theodosius called a council at Constantinople in 381, and this council
decided that the Holy Ghost proceeded from the Father. Theodosius,
the younger, assembled another council at Ephesus to ascertain who the
Virgin Mary really was, and it was solemnly decided in the year 431 that
she was the mother of God. In 451 it was decided by a council held at
Chalcedon, called together by the Emperor Marcian, that Christ had two
natures--the human and divine. In 680, in another general council, held
at Constantinople, convened by order of Pognatius, it was also decided
that Christ had two wills, and in the year 1274 it was decided at the
council of Lyons that the Holy Ghost proceeded not only from the Father,
but from the Son as well. Had it not been for these councils we might
have been without a trinity even unto this day. When we take into
consideration the fact that a belief in the trinity is absolutely
essential to salvation, how unfortunate it was for the world that this
doctrine was not established until the year 1274. Think of the millions
that dropped into hell while these questions were being discussed. The church never has pretended that Jefferson or Franklin died in fear. Franklin wrote no books against the fables of the ancient Jews. He
thought it useless to cast the pearls of thought before the swine of
ignorance and fear. He was the father of a
great party. He gave his views in letters and to trusted friends. He
was a Virginian, author of the Declaration of Independence, founder of a
university, father of a political party, President of the United States,
a statesman and philosopher. He was too powerful for the churches of
his day. Paine was a foreigner, a citizen of the world. He had done these things openly, and what
he had said could not be answered. His arguments were so good that his
character was bad. The Emperor, stained with every crime, is supposed to have died like a
Christian. We hear nothing of fiends leering at him in the shadows of
death. He does not see the forms of his murdered wife and son covered
with the blood he shed. From his white and shriveled lips issued no
shrieks of terror. He does not cover his glazed eyes with thin and
trembling hands to shut out the visions of hell. His chamber is filled
with the rustle of wings waiting to bear his soul to the thrilling
realms of joy. Against the Emperor Constantine the church has hurled no
anathema. She has accepted the story of his vision in the clouds, and
his holy memory has been guarded by priest and pope. Diderot

Diderot was born in 1713. His parents were in what may be called the
humbler walks of life. Like Voltaire, he was educated by the Jesuits. He
had in him something of the vagabond, and was for several years almost a
beggar in Paris. He was endeavoring to live by his pen. In that day and
generation a man without a patron, endeavoring to live by literature,
was necessarily almost a beggar. He nearly starved--frequently going
for days without food. Afterward, when he had something himself, he was
generous as the air. No man ever was more willing to give, and no man
less willing to receive, than Diderot. His motto was, "Incredulity
is the first step toward philosophy." He had the vices of most
Christians--was nearly as immoral as the majority of priests. His vices
he shared in common--his virtues were his own--All who knew him united
in saying that he had the pity of a woman, the generosity of a prince,
the self-denial of an anchorite, the courage of Caesar, an insatiate
thirst foi knowledge, and the enthusiasm of a poet. He attacked with
every power of his mind the superstition of his day. He was in favor of universal
education--the church despised it. He wished to put the knowledge of
the whole world within reach of the poorest. He wished to drive from
the gate of the Garden of Eden the cherubim of superstition, so that
the child of Adam might return to eat once more the fruit of the tree
of knowledge. His poor little desk was
ransacked by the police, searching for manuscripts in which something
might be found that would justify the imprisonment of such a dangerous
man. Whoever, in 1750, wished to increase the knowledge of mankind was
regarded as the enemy of social order. Benedict Spinoza

One of the greatest thinkers of the world was Benedict Spinoza--a Jew,
born at Amsterdam in 1638. He asked the rabbis so many questions, and insisted to such a degree on
what he called reason, that his room was preferred to his company. His Jewish brethren excommunicated him from the synagogue. Under the
terrible curse of their religion he was made an outcast from every
Jewish home. His own father could not give him shelter, and his mother,
after the curse had been pronounced, could not give him bread, could not
even speak to him, without becoming an outcast herself. All the cruelty
of Jehovah was in this curse. Spinoza was but twenty-four years old
when he found himself without friends and without kindred. He earned his bread with willing hands, and cheerfully
divided his poor crust with those below. He tried to solve the problem
of existence. According to him the universe did not commence to
be. It is; from eternity it was; and to eternity it will be. He insisted
that God is inside, not outside, of what we call substance. Thomas Paine

Poverty was his mother--Necessity his master. He had more brains than
books; more sense than education; more courage than politeness;
more strength than polish. He had no veneration for old mistakes--no
admiration for ancient lies. He loved the truth for the truth's
sake, and for man's sake. He saw oppression on every hand; injustice
everywhere; hypocrisy at the altar, venality on the bench, tyranny on
the throne; and with a splendid courage he espoused the cause of the
weak against the strong--of the enslaved many against the titled few. The Greatest of all Political Writers

In my judgment, Thomas Paine was the best political writer that ever
lived. "What he wrote was pure nature, and his soul and his pen ever
went together." Ceremony, pageantry, and all the paraphernalia of
power, had no effect upon him. He examined into the why and wherefore of
things. He was perfectly radical in his mode of thought. Nothing short
of the bed-rock satisfied him. His enthusiasm for what he believed to
be right knew no bounds. During all the dark scenes of the Revolution,
never for one moment did he despair. Year after year his brave words
were ringing through the land, and by the bivouac fires the weary
soldiers read the inspiring words of "Common Sense," filled with ideas
sharper than their swords, and consecrated themselves anew to the cause
of Freedom. The Writings of Paine

The writings of Paine are gemmed with compact statements that carry
conviction to the dullest. Day and night he labored for America, until
there was a government of the people and for the people. At the close
of the Revolution no one stood higher than Thomas Paine. Had he been
willing to live a hypocrite, he would have been respectable, he at least
could have died surrounded by other hypocrites, and at his death there
would have been an imposing funeral, with miles of carriages, filled
with hypocrites, and above his hypocritical dust there would have been a
hypocritical monument covered with lies. The truth is, he died as he had lived. Some ministers were impolite
enough to visit him against his will. Several of them he ordered
from his room. A couple of Catholic priests, in all the meekness of
hypocrisy, called that they might enjoy the agonies of a dying friend
of man. Thomas Paine, rising in his bed, the few embers of expiring life
blown into flame by the breath of indignation, had the goodness to curse
them both. His physician, who seems to have been a meddling fool, just
as the cold hand of death was touching the patriot's heart, whispered
in the dull ear of the dying man: "Do you believe, or do you wish to
believe, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God?" And the reply was: "I
have no wish to believe on that subject." These were the last remembered
words of Thomas Paine. He died as serenely as ever Christian passed
away. He died in the full possession of his mind, and on the very brink
and edge of death proclaimed the doctrines of his life. Paine Believed in God

Thomas Paine was a champion in both hemispheres of human liberty; one of
the founders and fathers of the Republic; one of the foremost men of his
age. He never wrote a word in favor of injustice. He was a despiser of
slavery. He wast in the widest and
best sense, a friend of all his race. His head was as clear as his heart
was good, and he had the courage to speak his honest thought. He was
the first man to write these words: "The United States of America." He furnished every thought
that now glitters in the Declaration of Independence. He believed in one
God and no more. He was a believer even in special providence, and he
hoped for immortality. The Intellectual Hera

Thomas Paine was one of the intellectual heroes--one of the men to whom
we are indebted. His name is associated forever with the Great Republic. As long as free government exists he will be remembered, admired and
honored. He lived a long, laborious and useful life. The world is better
for his having lived. For the sake of truth he accepted hatred and
reproach for his portion. His friends
were untrue to him because he was true to himself, and true to them. He
lost the respect of what is called society, but kept his own. His life
is what the world calls failure and what history calls success. If to
love your fellow-men more than self is goodness, Thomas Paine was good. If to be in advance of your time--to be a pioneer in the direction of
right--is greatness. If to avow your principles and discharge your
duty in the presence of death is heroic, Thomas Paine was a hero. At the
age of seventy-three, death touched his tired heart. He died in the land
his genius defended--under the flag he gave to the skies. Slander cannot
touch him now--hatred cannot reach him more. He sleeps in the sanctuary
of the tomb, beneath the quiet of the stars. Paine, Franklin, Jefferson

In our country there were three infidels--Paine, Franklin and Jefferson. The colonies were full of superstition, the Puritans with the spirit
of persecution. Laws savage, ignorant, and malignant had been passed in
every colony for the purpose of destroying intellectual liberty. The toleration acts of
Maryland tolerated only Christians--not infidels, not thinkers, not
investigators. The charity of Roger Williams was not extended to those
who denied the Bible, or suspected the divinity of Christ. It was not
based upon the rights of man, but upon the rights of believers, who
differed in non-essential points. David Hume

On the 26th of April, 1711, David Hume was born. David Hume was one of
the few Scotchmen of his day who were not owned by the church. He had
the manliness to examine historical and religious questions for himself,
and the courage to give his conclusions to the world. He was singularly
capable of governing himself. He was a philosopher, and lived a calm
and cheerful life, unstained by an unjust act, free from all excess,
and devoted in a reasonable degree to benefiting his fellow-men. After
examining the Bible he became convinced that it was not true. For
failing to suppress his real opinion, for failing to tell a deliberate
falsehood, he brought upon him the hatred of the church. Voltaire

Voltaire was the intellectual autocrat of his time. From his throne at
the foot of the Alps he pointed the finger of scorn at every hypocrite
in Europe. He left the quiver of ridicule without an arrow. He was the
pioneer of his century. Through the
shadows of faith and fable, through the darkness of myth and miracle,
through the midnight of Christianity, through the blackness of bigotry,
past cathedral and dungeon, past rack and stake, past altar and throne,
he carried, with brave and chivalric hands, the torch of reason. John Calvin

Calvin was of a pallid, bloodless complexion, thin, sickly, irritable,
gloomy, impatient, egotistic, tyrannical, heartless, and infamous. He
was a strange compound of revengeful morality, malicious forgiveness,
ferocious charity, egotistic humility, and a kind of hellish justice. In other words, he was as near like the God of the Old Testament as his
health permitted. Calvin's Five Fetters

This man forged five fetters for the brain. That is to say, predestination, particular redemption, total
depravity, irresistible grace, and the perseverance of the saints. About
the neck of each follower he put a collar bristling with these five iron
points. The presence of all these points on the collar is still the test
of orthodoxy in the church he founded. This man, when in the flush of
youth, was elected to the office of preacher in Geneva. He at once,
in union with Farel, drew up a condensed statement of the Presbyterian
doctrine, and all the citizens of Geneva, on pain of banishment, were
compelled to take an oath that they believed this statement. Of this
proceeding Calvin very innocently remarked that it produced great
satisfaction. A man named Caroli had the audacity to dispute with
Calvin. Humboldt

Humboldt breathed the atmosphere of investigation. Old ideas were
abandoned; old creeds, hallowed by centuries, were thrown aside; thought
became courageous; the athlete, Reason, challenged to mortal combat the
monsters of superstition. Humbolt's Travels

Europe becoming too small for his genius, he visited the tropics. He
sailed along the gigantic Amazon--the mysterious Orinoco--traversed the
Pampas--climbed the Andes until he stood upon the crags of Chimborazo,
more than eighteen thousand feet above the level of the sea, and climbed
on until blood flowed from his eyes and lips. For nearly five years he
pursued his investigations in the new world, accompanied by the intrepid
Bonplandi. He was the best intellectual
organ of these new revelations of science. He was calm, reflective and
eloquent; filled with a sense of the beautiful, and the love of truth. His collections were immense, and valuable beyond calculation to every
science. He endured innumerable hardships, braved countless dangers in
unknown and savage lands, and exhausted his fortune for the advancement
of true learning. Humboldt's Illustrious Companions

Humboldt was the friend and companion of the greatest poets, historians,
philologists, artists, statesmen, critics, and logicians of his time. He was the companion of Schiller, who believed that man would be
regenerated through the influence of the Beautiful of Goethe, the grand
patriarch of German literature; of Weiland, who has been called
the Voltaire of Germany; of Herder, who wrote the outlines of a
philosophical history of man; of Kotzebue, who lived in the world of
romance; of Schleiermacher, the pantheist; of Schlegel, who gave to
his countrymen the enchanted realm of Shakespeare; of the sublime Kant,
author of the first work published in Germany on Pure Reason; of Fichte,
the infinite idealist; of Schopenhauer, the European Buddhist who
followed the great Gautama to the painless and dreamless Nirwana, and
of hundreds of others, whose names are familiar to and honored by the
scientific world. Humboldt the Apostle of Science

Upon his return to Europe he was hailed as the second Columbus; as the
scientific discover of America; as the revealer of a new world; as the
great demonstrator of the sublime truth, that the universe is governed
by law. I have seen a picture of the old man, sitting upon a mountain
side--above him the eternal snow--below, the smiling valley of the
tropics, filled with vine and palm; his chin upon his breast, his
eyes deep, thoughtful and calm his forehead majestic--grander than the
mountain upon which he sat--crowned with the snow of his whitened hair,
he looked the intellectual autocrat of this world. Not satisfied with
his discoveries in America, he crossed the steppes of Asia, the wastes
of

Siberia, the great Ural range adding to the knowledge of mankind at
every step. H is energy acknowledged no obstacle, his life knew no
leisure; every day was filled with labor and with thought. He was one
of the apostles of science, and he served his divine master with
a self-sacrificing zeal that knew no abatement; with an ardor that
constantly increased, and with a devotion unwavering and constant as the
polar star. Ingersoll Muses by Napoleon's Tomb

A little while ago I stood by the grave of the old Napoleon--a
magnificent tomb of gilt and gold, fit almost for a dead deity--and
gazed upon the sarcophagus of black Egyptian marble, where rest at last
the ashes of the restless man. I leaned over the balustrade and thought
about the career of the greatest soldier of the modern world. I saw him
walking upon the banks of the Seine, contemplating suicide--I saw him
at Toulon--I saw him putting down the mob in the streets of Paris--I saw
him at the head of the army of Italy--I saw him crossing the bridge of
Lodi with the tri-color in his hand--I saw him in Egypt in the shadows
of the pyramids--I saw him conquer the Alps and mingle the eagles of
France with the eagles of the crags. I saw him at Marengo--at Ulm and
Austerlitz. I saw him in Russia, where the infantry of the snow and the
cavalry of the wild blast scattered his legions like Winter's withered
leaves. I saw him at Leipsic in defeat and disaster--driven by a million
bayonets back upon Paris--clutched like a wild beast--banished to Elba. I saw him escape and retake an empire by the force of his genius. I saw
him upon the frightful field of Waterloo, where chance and fate combined
to wreck the fortunes of their former king. Helena,
with his hands crossed behind him, gazing out upon the sad and solemn
sea. I thought of the orphans and widows he had made--of the tears that
had been shed for his glory, and of the only woman who ever loved him,
pushed from his heart by the cold hand of ambition. And I said I would
rather have been a French peasant, and worn wooden shoes. I would rather
have lived in a hut with a vine growing over the door, and the grapes
growing purple in the kisses of the Autumn sun. I would rather have been
that poor peasant with my loving wife by my side, knitting as the day
died out of the sky--with my children upon my knees and their arms about
me; I would rather have been that man and gone down to the tongueless
silence of the dreamless dust, than to have been that imperial
impersonation of force and murder known as Napoleon the Great. And so I
would, ten thousand times. Eulogy on J. G. Blaine

This is a grand year--a year filled with recollections of the
Revolution; filled with the proud and tender memories of the past; with
the sacred legends of liberty; a year in which the sons of freedom will
drink from the fountains of enthusiasm; a year in which the people call
for a man who has preserved in Congress what our soldiers won upon
the field; a year in which they call for the man who has torn from the
throat of treason the tongue of slander--for the man who has snatched
the mask of Democracy from the hideous face of rebellion; for this man
who, like an intellectual athlete, has stood in the arena of debate and
challenged all comers, and who is still a total stranger to defeat. Like
an armed warrior, like a plumed knight, James G. Blaine marched down the
halls of the American Congress and threw his shining lance full and
fair against the brazen foreheads of the defamers of his country and the
maligners of her honor. For the Republican party to desert this gallant
leader now is as though an army should desert their General upon the
field of battle. James G. Blaine is now and has been for years the
bearer of the sacred standard of the Republican party. A Model Leader

The Republicans of the United States want a man who knows that this
Government should protect every citizen, at home and abroad; who knows
that any Government that will not defend its defenders and protect its
protectors is a disgrace to the map of the world. They demand a man who
believes in the eternal separation and divorcement of church and school. They demand a man whose political reputation is as spotless as a star;
but they do not demand that their candidate shall have a certificate of
moral character signed by a Confederate Congress. The man who has, in
full, heaped and rounded measure, all these splendid qualifications is
the present grand and gallant leader of the Republican party--James G.
Blaine. Our country, crowned with the vast and marvelous achievements
of its first century, asks for a man worthy of the past and prophetic
of her future; asks for a man who has the audacity of genius; asks for
a man who is the grandest combination of heart, conscience and brain
beneath her flag. Such a man is James G. Blaine. Abraham Lincoln

This world has not been fit to live in fifty years. There is no liberty
in it--very little. Why, it is only a few years ago that all the
Christian nations were engaged in the slave trade. It was not until 1808
that England abolished the slave trade, and up to that time her priests
in her churches and her judges on her benches owned stock in slave
ships, and luxuriated on the profits of piracy and murder; and when a
man stood up and denounced it they mobbed him as though he had been a
common burglar or a horse thief. It was not until the 28th
day of August, 1833, that England abolished slavery in her colonies; and
it was not until the 1st day of January, 1862, that Abraham Lincoln, by
direction of the entire North, wiped that infamy out of this country;
and I never speak of Abraham Lincoln but I want to say that he was, in
my judgment, in many respects the grandest man ever President of the
United States. I say that upon his tomb there ought to be this line--and
I know of no other man deserving it so well as he: "Here lies one who
having been clothed with almost absolute power never abused it except on
the side of mercy." Swedenborg

Swedenborg was a man of great intellect, of vast acquirements, and of
honest intentions; and I think it equally clear that upon one subject,
at least, his mind was touched, shattered and shaken. Misled by
analogies, imposed upon by the bishop, deceived by the woman, borne to
other worlds upon the wings of dreams, living in the twilight of reason
and the dawn of insanity, he regarded every fact as a patched and ragged
garment with a lining of the costliest silk, and insisted that the wrong
side, even of the silk, was far more beautiful than the right. Jeremy Bentham

The glory of Bentham is, that he gave the true basis of morals, and
furnished the statesmen with the star and compass of this sentence: "The
greatest happiness of the greatest number." Charles Fourier

Fourier sustained about the same relation to this world that Swedenborg
did to the other. There must be something wrong about the brain of one
who solemnly asserts that "the elephant, the ox and the diamond were
created by the Sun; the horse, the lily, and the ruby, by Saturn; the
cow, the jonquil and the topaz, by Jupiter; and the dog, the violet
and the opal stones by the earth itself." And yet, forgetting these
aberrations of the mind, this lunacy of a great and loving soul, for
one, that's in tender-est regard the memory of Charles Fourier, one of
the best and noblest of our race. Auguste Comte

There was in the brain of the great Frenchman--Auguste Comte--the dawn
of that happy day in which humanity will be the only religion, good the
only God, happiness the only object, restitution the only atonement,
mistake the only sin, and affection guided by intelligence, the only
savior of mankind. This dawn enriched his poverty, illuminated the
darkness of his life, peopled his loneliness with the happy millions yet
to be, and filled his eyes with proud and tender tears. When everything
connected with Napoleon, except his crimes, shall be forgotten, Auguste
Comte will be lovingly remembered as a benefactor of the human race. Herbert Spencer

Herbert Spencer relies upon evidence, upon demonstration, upon
experience; and occupies himself with one world at a time. He perceives
that there is a mental horizon that we cannot pierce, and that beyond
that is the unknown, possibly the unknowable. He endeavors to examine
only that which is capable of being examined, and considers the
theological method as not only useless, but hurtful. After all God is
but a guess, throned and established by arrogance and assertion. Turning his attention to those things that have in some way affected
the condition of mankind, Spencer leaves the unknowable to priests and
believers. Robert Collyer

I have the honor of a slight acquaintance with Robert Collyer. I have
read with pleasure some of his exquisite productions. He has a brain
full of the dawn, the head of a philosopher, the imagination of a poet
and the sincere heart of a child. Had such men as Robert Collyer and
John Stuart Mill been present at the burning of Servetus, they would
have extinguished the flames with their tears. Had the presbytery of
Chicago been there, they would have quietly turned their backs, solemnly
divided their coat tails, and warmed themselves. John Milton

England was filled with Puritan gloom and Episcopal ceremony. All
religious conceptions were of the grossest nature. The ideas of crazy
fanatics and extravagant poets were taken as sober facts. Milton had
clothed Christianity in the soiled and faded finery of the gods--had
added to the story of Christ the fables of Mythology, He gave to the
Protestant Church the most outrageously material ideas of the Deity. He turned all the angels into soldiers--made heaven a battlefield, put
Christ in uniform, and described God as a militia general. His works
were considered by the Protestants nearly as sacred as the Bible
itself, and the imagination of the people was thoroughly polluted by the
horrible imagery, the sublime absurdity of the blind Milton. Ernst Haeckel

Amongst the bravest, side by side with the greatest of the world in
Germany, the land of science--stands Ernst Haeckel, who may be said
not only to have demonstrated the theories of Darwin, but the monistic
conception of the world. He has endeavored--and I think with complete
success--to show that there is not, and never was, and never can be,
the creator of anything. Haeckel is one of the bitterest enemies of the
church, and is, therefore, one of the bravest friends of man. Professor Swing, a Dove amongst Vultures

Professor Swing was too good a man to stay in the Presbyterian Church. He was a rose amongst thistles; he was a dove amongst vultures; and they
hunted him out, and I am glad he came out. I have the greatest respect
for Professor Swing, but I want him to tell whether the 109th Psalm is
inspired. Queen Victoria and George Eliot

Compare George Eliot with Queen Victoria. The Queen is clad in garments
given her by blind fortune and unreasoning chance, while George Eliot
wears robes of glory woven in the loom of her own genius. The time is coming when men will be rated at their real
worth; when we shall care nothing for an officer if he does not fill his
place. Bough on Rabbi Bien

I will not answer Rabbi Bien, and I will tell you why. Because he has
taken himself outside of all the limits of a gentleman; because he has
taken upon himself to traduce American women in language the beastliest
I ever read; and any man who says that the American women are not just
as good women as any God can make, and pick his mind to-day, is an
unappreciative barbarian. I will let him alone because he denounced all
the men in this country, all the members of Congress, all the members
of the Senate, all the Judges on the bench, as thieves and robbers. I
pronounce him a vulgar falsifier, and let him alone. General Garfield

No man has been nominated for the office since I was born, by either
party, who had more brains and more heart than James A. Garfield. He
was a soldier, he is a statesman. In time of peace he preferred the
avocations of peace; when the bugle of war blew in his ears he withdrew
from his work and fought for the flag, and then he went back to the
avocation of peace. And I say to-day that a man who, in a time of
profound peace, makes up his mind that he would like to kill folks for
a living is no better, to say the least of it, than the man who loves
peace in the time of peace, and who, when his country is attacked,
rushes to the rescue of her flag. "Wealthy in Integrity; In Brain a Millionaire." James A. Garfield is to-day a poor man, and you know that there is not
money enough in this magnificent street to buy the honor and manhood of
James A. Garfield. Money cannot make such a man, and I will swear to you
that money cannot buy him. James A. Garfield to-day wears the glorious
robe of honest poverty. He is a poor man; but I like to say it here in
Wall street; I like to say it surrounded by the millions of America; I
like to say it in the midst of banks, and bonds, and stocks; I love to
say it where gold is piled--that, although a poor man, he is rich in
honor, in integrity he is wealthy, and in brain he is a millionaire. Garfield a Certificate of the Splendor of the American Constitution

Garfield is a certificate of the splendor of our Government, that says
to every poor boy: "All the avenues of honor are open to you." He is a scholar; he is a statesman; he was a
soldier; he is a patriot; and above all he is a magnificent man, and if
every man in New York knew him as well as I do, Garfield would not lose
a hundred votes in this city. W. Hiram Thomas

The best thing that has come from the other side is from Dr. I
regard him as by far the grandest intellect in the Methodist Church. He
is intellectually a wide and tender man. I cannot conceive of an article
being written in a better spirit. He finds a little fault with me for
not being exactly fair. Thomas
the probability is I never should have laid myself liable to criticism. There is some human nature in me, and I find it exceedingly difficult
to preserve at all times perfect serenity. I have the greatest possible
respect for Dr. Thomas, and must heartily thank him for his perfect
fairness. MISCELLANEOUS




355. Heresy and Orthodoxy

It has always been the man ahead that has been called the heretic. Heresy is the last and best thought always! Heresy extends the
hospitality of the brain to a new idea; that is what the rotting says to
flax growing; that is what the dweller in the swamp says to the man on
the sun-lit hill; that is what the man in the darkness cries out to the
grand man upon whose forehead is shining the dawn of a grander day; that
is what the coffin says to the cradle. Orthodoxy is a kind of shroud,
and heresy is a banner--Orthodoxy is a fog and Heresy a star shining
forever upon the cradle of truth. I do not mean simply in religion, I
mean in everything and the idea I wish to impress upon you is that you
should keep your minds open to all the influences of nature, you should
keep your minds open to reason; hear what a man has to say, and do not
let the turtle-shell of bigotry grow above your brain. Give everybody a
chance and an opportunity; that is all. We used to worship the golden calf, and the worst you can say of us now,
is, we worship the gold of the calf, and even the calves are beginning
to see this distinction. We used to go down on our knees to every man
that held office, now he must fill it if he wishes any respect. We care
nothing for the rich, except what will they do with their money? How does he fill it?--that is the question. And there is rapidly growing
up in the world an aristocracy of heart and brain--the only aristocracy
that has a right to exist. Truth will Bear the Test

If a man has a diamond that has been examined by the lapidaries of the
world, and some ignorant stonecutter told him that it is nothing but
an ordinary rock, he laughs at him; but if it has not been examined
by lapidaries, and he is a little suspicious himself that it is not
genuine, it makes him mad. Any doctrine that will not bear investigation
is not a fit tenant for the mind of an honest man. Any man who is afraid
to have his doctrine investigated is not only a coward but a hypocrite. Paring Nails

Why should we in this age of the world be dominated by the dead? Why
should barbarian Jews who went down to death and dust three thousand
years ago, control the living world? Why should we care for the
superstition of men who began the sabbath by paring their nails,
"beginning at the fourth finger, then going to the second, then to the
fifth, then to the third, and ending with the thumb?" How pleasing to
God this must have been. There may be a God

There may be for aught I know, somewhere in the unknown shoreless vast,
some being whose dreams are constellations and within whose thought the
infinite exists. About this being, if such an one exists, I have nothing
to say. He has written no books, inspired no barbarians, required no
worship, and has prepared no hell in which to burn the honest seeker
after truth. The People are Beginning to Think

The people are beginning to think, to reason and to investigate. Slowly,
painfully, but surely, the gods are being driven from the earth. Only
upon rare occasions are they, even by the most religious, supposed to
interfere in the affairs of men. In most matters we are at last supposed
to be free. Since the invention of steamships and railways, so that the
products of all countries can be easily interchanged, the gods have quit
the business of producing famine. Unchained Thought

For the vagaries of the clouds the infidels propose to substitute the
realities of earth; for superstition, the splendid demonstrations and
achievements of science; and for theological tyranny, the chainless
liberty of thought. Man the Victor of the Future

If abuses are destroyed, man must destroy them. If slaves are freed, man
must free them. If new truths are discovered, man must discover them. If the naked are clothed; if the hungry are fed; if justice is done;
if labor is rewarded; if superstition is driven from the mind; if the
defenseless are protected, and if the right finally triumphs, all must
be the work of man. The grand victories of the future must be won by
man, and by man alone. The Sacred Sabbath

Of all the superstitious of mankind, this insanity about the "sacred
Sabbath" is the most absurd. The idea of feeling it a duty to be solemn
and sad one-seventh of the time! To think that we can please an infinite
being by staying in some dark and sombre room, instead of walking in the
perfumed fields! Why should God hate to see a man happy? Why should it
excite his wrath to see a family in the woods, by some babbling stream,
talking, laughing and loving? Nature works on that "sacred" day. The
earth turns, the rivers run, the trees grow, buds burst into flower, and
birds fill the air with song. Why should we look sad, and think about
death, and hear about-hell? Why should that day be filled with gloom
instead of joy? Make the Sabbath Merry

Freethinkers should make the Sabbath a day of mirth and music; a day to
spend with wife and child--a day of games, and books, and dreams--a day
to put fresh flowers above our sleeping dead--a day of memory and hope,
of love and rest. Away to the Hills and the Sea

A poor mechanic, working all the week in dust and noise, needs a day of
rest and joy, a day to visit stream and wood--a day to live with wife
and child; a day in which to laugh at care, and gather hope and strength
for toils to come. And his weary wife needs a breath of sunny air, away
from street and wall, amid the hills or by the margin of the sea, where
she can sit and prattle with her babe, and fill with happy dreams the
long, glad day. Melancholy Sundays

When I was a little fellow most everybody thought that some days were
too sacred for the young ones to enjoy themselves in. Sunday used to commence Saturday night at sundown, under
the old text, "The evening and the morning were the first day." They
commenced then, I think, to get a good ready. When the sun went down
Saturday night, darkness ten thousand times deeper than ordinary night
fell upon that house. The boy that looked the sickest was regarded as
the most pious. You could not crack hickory nuts that night, and if you
were caught chewing gum it was another evidence of the total depravity
of the human heart. We would sometimes
sing, "Another day has passed." Everybody looked as though they had the
dyspesia--you know lots of people think they are pious, just because
they are bilious, as Mr. It was a solemn night, and the next
morning the solemnity had increased. Then we went to church, and the
minister was in a pulpit about twenty feet high. If it was in the winter
there was no fire; it was not thought proper to be comfortable while you
were thanking the Lord. The minister commenced at firstly and ran up to
about twenty-fourthly, and then he divided it up again; and then he
made some concluding remarks, and then he said lastly, and when he said
lastly he was about half through. Moses took Egyptian Law for his Model

It has been contended for many years that the ten commandments are the
foundation of all ideas of justice and of law. Eminent jurists have
bowed to popular prejudice, and deformed their works by statements to
the effect that the Mosaic laws are the fountains from which sprang all
ideas of right and wrong. Nothing can be more stupidly false than such
assertions. Thousands of years before Moses was born, the Egyptians
had a code of laws. They had laws against blasphemy, murder, adultery,
larceny, perjury, laws for the collection of debts, and the enforcement
of contracts. A False Standard of Success

It is not necessary to be rich, nor powerful, nor great, to be a
success; and neither is it necessary to have your name between the
putrid lips of rumor to be great. We have had a false standard of
success. In the years when I was a little boy we read in our books that
no fellow was a success that did not make a fortune or get a big office,
and he generally was a man that slept about three hours a night. They
never put down in the books the gentlemen who succeeded in life and yet
slept all they wanted to. Toilers and Idlers

You can divide mankind into two classes: the laborers and the idlers,
the supporters and the supported, the honest and the dishonest. Every
man is dishonest who lives upon the unpaid labor of others, no matter
if he occupies a throne. The laborers
should have equal-rights before the world and before the law. And I want
every farmer to consider every man who labors either with hand or brain
as his brother. Until genius and labor formed a partnership there was
no such thing as prosperity among men. Every reaper and mower, every
agricultural implement, has elevated the work of the farmer, and his
vocation grows grander with every invention. In the olden time the
agriculturist was ignorant; he knew nothing of machinery, he was the
slave of superstition. The Sad Wilderness History

While reading the Pentateuch, I am filled with indignation, pity and
horror. Nothing can be sadder than the history of the starved and
frightened wretches who wandered over the desolate crags and sands of
wilderness and desert, the prey of famine, sword and plague. Ignorant
and superstitious to the last degree, governed by falsehood, plundered
by hypocrisy, they were the sport of priests, and the food of fear. God
was their greatest enemy, and death their only friend. Law Much Older than Sinai

Laws spring from the instinct of self-preservation. Industry objected
to supporting idleness, and laws were made against theft. Laws were made
against murder, because a very large majority of the people have always
objected to being murdered. All fundamental laws were born simply of the
instinct of self-defence. Long before the Jewish savages assembled at
the foot of Sinai, laws had been made and enforced, not only in Egypt
and India, but by every tribe that ever existed. God raised the black flag, and
commanded his soldiers to kill even the smiling infant in its mother's
arms. Who is the blasphemer; the man who denies the existence of God, or
he who covers the robes of the infinite with innocent blood? Standing Tip for God

We are told in the Pentateuch that God, the father of us all, gave
thousands of maidens, after having killed their fathers, their mothers,
and their brothers, to satisfy the brutal lusts of savage men. If there
be a God, I pray him to write in his book, opposite my name, that I
denied this lie for him. Matter and Force

The statement in the beginning God created the heaven and the earth, I
cannot accept. It is contrary to my reason, and I cannot believe it. It
appears reasonable for me that force has existed from eternity. Force
cannot, as it appears to me, exist apart from matter. Force, in its
nature, is forever active, and without matter it could not act; and so
I think matter must have existed forever. To conceive of matter without
force, or of force without matter, or of a time when neither existed,
or of a being who existed for an eternity without either, and who out of
nothing created both, is to me utterly impossible. It may be that I am led to these conclusions by "total depravity," or
that I lack the necessary humility of spirit to satisfactorily harmonize
Haeckel and Moses; or that I am carried away by pride, blinded by
reason, given over to hardness of heart that I might be damned, but I
never can believe that the earth was covered with leaves, and buds, and
flowers, and fruits, before the sun with glittering spear had driven
back the hosts of night. We are told that God made man; and the question naturally arises, how
was this done? Was it by a process of "evolution," "development;" the
"transmission of acquired habits;" the "survival of the fittest," or was
the necessary amount of clay kneaded to the proper consistency, and then
by the hands of God moulded into form? Modern science tells that man has
been evolved, through countless epochs, from the lower forms; that he
is the result of almost an infinite number of actions, reactions,
experiences, states, forms, wants and adaptations. General Joshua

My own opinion is that General Joshua knew no more about the motions of
the earth than he did mercy and justice. If he had known that the earth
turned upon its axis at the rate of a thousand miles an hour, and swept
in its course about the sun at the rate of sixty-eight thousand miles
an hour, he would have doubled the hailstones, spoken of in the same
chapter, that the Lord cast down from heaven, and allowed the sun and
moon to rise and set in the usual way. This getting up so early in the morning is a relic of barbarism. It has
made hundreds of thousands of young men curse business. There is no need
of getting up at three or four o'clock in the winter morning. The farmer
who persists in dragging his wife and children from their beds ought to
be visited by a missionary. It is time enough to rise after the sun has
set the example. Why
not feed them more the night before? In the old
times they used to get up about three o'clock in the morning, and go to
work long before the sun had risen with "healing upon his wings," and as
a just punishment they all had the ague; and they ought to have it now. Sleep is the best medicine
in the world. There is no such thing as health, without plenty of sleep. When you work, work;
and when you get through take a good, long and refreshing sleep. Never Rise at Four O'Clock

The man who cannot get a living upon Illinois soil without rising before
daylight ought to starve. Eight hours a day is enough for any farmer to
work except in harvest time. When you rise at four and work till dark
what is life worth? Of what use are all the improvements in farming? Of what use is all the improved machinery unless it tends to give the
farmer a little more leisure? What is harvesting now, compared with what
it was in the old time? Think of the days of reaping, of cradling, of
raking and binding and mowing. Think of threshing with the flail and
winnowing with the wind. And now think of the reapers and mowers, the
binders and threshing machines, the plows and cultivators, upon which
the farmer rides protected from the sun. If, with all these advantages,
you cannot get a living without rising in the middle of the night, go
into some other business. The Hermit is Mad

A hermit is a mad man. Without friends and wife and child, there is
nothing left worth living for. They
are filled with egotism and envy, with vanity and hatred. People who
live much alone become narrow and suspicious. They are apt to be the
property of one idea. They begin to think there is no use in anything. They look upon the happiness of others as a kind of folly. They hate
joyous folks, because, way down in their hearts, they envy them. Duke Orang-Outang

I think we came from the lower animals. I am not dead sure of it, but
think so. When I first read about it I didn't like it. My heart was
filled with sympathy for those people who leave nothing to be proud of
except ancestors. I thought how terrible this will be upon the nobility
of the old world. Think of their being forced to trace their ancestry
back to the Duke Orang-Outang or to the Princess Chimpanzee. After
thinking it all over I came to the conclusion that I liked that
doctrine. I read about
rudimentary bones and muscles. I was told that everybody had rudimentary
muscles extending from the ear into the cheek. I was told: "They are the remains of muscles; they became rudimentary
from the lack of use." They are the muscles
with which your ancestors used to flap their ears. Well, at first I was
greatly astonished, and afterward I was more astonished to find they had
become rudimentary. Self-Made Men

It is often said of this or that man that he is a self-made man--that
he was born of the poorest and humblest parents, and that with every
obstacle to overcome he became great. Most of the intellectual giants of the world
have been nursed at the sad but loving breast of poverty. Most of those
who have climbed highest on the shining ladder of fame commenced at the
lowest round. They were reared in the straw thatched cottages of Europe;
in the log houses of America; in the factories of the great cities; in
the midst of toil; in the smoke and din of labor. The One Window in the Ark

A cubit is twenty-two inches; so that the ark was five hundred and fifty
feet long, ninety-one feet and eight inches wide, and fifty-five feet
high. The ark was divided into three stories, and had on top, one window
twenty-two inches square. Ventillation must have been one of Jehovah's
hobbies. Think of a ship larger than the Great Eastern with only one
window, and that but twenty-two inches square! No Ante-Diluvian Camp-Meetings! It is a little curious that when God wished to reform the ante-diluvian
world he said nothing about hell; that he had no revivals, no
camp-meetings, no tracts, no out-pourings of the Holy Ghost, no
baptisms, no noon prayer meetings, and never mentioned the great
doctrine of salvation by faith. If the orthodox creeds of the world are
true, all those people went to hell without ever having heard that such
a place existed. If eternal torment is a fact, surely these miserable
wretches ought to have been warned. They were threatened only with water
when they were in fact doomed to eternal fire! Hard Work in the Ark

Eight persons did all the work. They attended to the wants of 175,000
birds, 3,616 beasts, 1,300 reptiles, and 2,000,000 insects, saying
nothing of countless animalculae. Can we believe that the inspired writer had any idea of the size of the
sun? Draw a circle five inches in diameter, and by its side thrust a pin
through the paper. The hole made by the pin will sustain about the same
relation to the circle that the earth does to the sun. Did he know that
the sun was eight hundred and sixty thousand miles in diameter; that it
was enveloped in an ocean of fire thousands of miles in depth, hotter
even than the Christian's hell? Did he know that the volume of the Earth
is less than one-millionth of that of the sun? Did he know of the one
hundred and four planets belonging to our solar system, all children of
the sun? Did he know of Jupiter eighty-five thousand miles in diameter,
hundreds of times as large as our earth, turning on his axis at the rate
of twenty-five thousand miles an hour accompanied by four moons making
the tour of his orbit once only in fifty years? Something for Nothing

It is impossible for me to conceive of something being created for
nothing. Nothing, regarded in the light of raw material, is a decided
failure. Neither is it
possible to think of force disconnected with matter. You cannot imagine
matter going back to absolute nothing. Neither can you imagine nothing
being changed into something. You may be eternally damned if you do not
say that you can conceive these things, but you cannot conceive them. Polygamy

Polygamy is just as pure in Utah as it could have been in the promised
land. Love and virtue are the same the whole world around, and justice
is the same in every star. All the languages of the world are not
sufficient to express the filth of polygamy. It makes of man a beast,
of woman a trembling slave. It destroys the fireside, makes virtue an
outcast, takes from human speech its sweetest words, and leaves the
heart a den, where crawl and hiss the slimy serpents of most loathsome
lust. The good family is the unit
of good government. The virtues grow about the holy hearth of home--they
cluster, bloom, and shed their perfume round the fireside where the
one man loves the one woman. Lover--husband--wife--mother--father--child--home!--without these sacred
words the world is but a lair, and men and women merely beasts. The Colonel in the Kitchen--How to Cook a Beefsteak

There ought to be a law making it a crime, punishable by imprisonment,
to fry a beefsteak. Broil it; it is just as easy, and when broiled it
is delicious. Fried beefsteak is not fit for a wild beast. You can broil
even on a stove. Shut the front damper--open the back one, and then take
off a griddle. There will then be a draft down through this opening. Put
on your steak, using a wire broiler, and not a particle of smoke will
touch it, for the reason that the smoke goes down. If you try to broil
it with the front damper open the smoke will rise. For broiling, coal,
even soft coal, makes a better fire than wood. Do not huddle together in a little room
around a red-hot stove, with every window fastened down. Do not live in
this poisoned atmosphere, and then, when one of your children dies, put
a piece in the papers commencing with, "Whereas, it has pleased divine
Providence to remove from our midst--." Have plenty of air, and plenty
of warmth. Do not imagine anything is unhealthy
simply because it is pleasant. Cooking a Fine Art

Cooking is one of the fine arts. Give your wives and daughters things to
cook, and things to cook with, and they will soon become most excellent
cooks. The man whose arteries
and veins are filled with rich blood made of good and well cooked food,
has pluck, courage, endurance and noble impulses. Remember that your
wife should have things to cook with. Scathing Impeachment of Intemperance

Intemperance cuts down youth in its vigor, manhood in its strength, and
age in its weakness. It breaks the father's heart, bereaves the doting
mother, extinguishes natural affections, erases conjugal loves, blots
out filial attachments, blights parental hope, and brings down mourning
age in sorrow to the grave. It produces weakness, not strength;
sickness, not health; death, not life. It makes wives widows; children
orphans; fathers fiends, and all of them paupers and beggars. It feeds
rheumatism, nurses gout, welcomes epidemics, invites cholera, imports
pestilence and embraces consumption. It covers the land with idleness,
misery and crime. It fills your jails, supplies your almshouses and
demands your asylums. It engenders controversies, fosters quarrels, and
cherishes riots. It crowds your penitentiaries and furnishes victims to
your scaffolds. It is the life blood of the gambler, the element of
the burglar, the prop of the highwayman and the support of the midnight
incendiary. It countenances the liar, respects the thief, esteems
the blasphemer. It violates obligations, reverences fraud, and honors
infamy. It defames benevolence, hates love, scorns virtue and slanders
innocence. It incites the father to butcher his helpless offspring,
helps the husband to massacre his wife, and the child to grind the
parricidal ax. It burns up men, consumes women, detests life, curses God,
and despises heaven. It suborns witnesses, nurses perjury, defiles
the jury box, and stains the judicial ermine. It degrades the citizen,
debases the legislator, dishonors statesmen, and disarms the patriot. It
brings shame, not honor; terror, not safety; despair, not hope; misery,
not happiness; and with the malevolence of a fiend, it calmly surveys
its frightful desolation, and unsatisfied with its havoc, it poisons
felicity, kills peace, ruins morals, blights confidence, slays
reputation, and wipes out national honors, then curses the world and
laughs at its ruin. Liberty Defined

The French convention gave the best definition of liberty I have ever
read: "The liberty of one citizen ceases only where the liberty of
another citizen commences." I ask you
to-day to make a declaration of individual independence. And if you are
independent, be just. Allow everybody else to make his declaration of
individual independence. Allow your wife, allow your husband, allow
your children to make theirs. It is a grand thing to be the owner of
yourself. It is a grand thing to protect the rights of others. It is a
sublime thing to be free and just. Free, Honest Thought

I am going to say what little I can to make the American people brave
enough and generous enough and kind enough to give everybody else the
rights they have themselves. Can there ever be any progress in this
world to amount to anything until we have liberty? The thoughts of a man
who is not free are not worth much--not much. A man who thinks with the
club of a creed above his head--a man who thinks casting his eye askance
at the flames of hell, is not apt to have very good thoughts. And for
my part, I would not care to have any status or social position even in
heaven if I had to admit that I never would have been there only I got
scared. When we are frightened we do not think very well. If you want to
get at the honest thoughts of a man he must free. If he is not free you
will not get his honest thought. Ingersoll Prefers Shoemakers to Princes

The other day there came shoemakers, potters, workers in wood and iron,
from Europe, and they were received in the city of New York as though
they had been princes. They had been sent by the great republic of
France to examine into the arts and manufactures of the great republic
of America. They looked a thousand times better to me than the Edward
Alberts and Albert Edwards--the royal vermin, that live on the body
politic. And I would think much more of our government if it would fete
and feast them, instead of wining and dining the imbeciles of a royal
line. I never saw a dignified man that was not after all an
old idiot Dignity is a mask; a dignified man is afraid that you will
know he does not know everything. A man of sense and argument is always
willing to admit what he don't know--why?--because there is so much
that he does know; and that is the first step towards learning
anything--willingness to admit what you don't know, and when you don't
understand a thing, ask--no matter how small and silly it may look to
other people--ask, and after that you know. A man never is in a state of
mind that he can learn until he gets that dignified nonsense out of him. The time is coming when a man will be rated at his real worth, and that
by his brain and heart. We care nothing now about an officer unless he
fills his place. The time will come when no matter how much money a man
has he will not be respected unless he is using it for the benefit of
his fellow-men. Three millions have increased to fifty--thirteen
States to thirty-eight. We have better homes, and more of the
conveniences of life than any other people upon the face of the globe. The farmers of our country live better than did the kings and princes
two hundred years ago--and they have twice as much sense and heart. Remember that the man who acts best his part--who loves
his friends the best--is most willing to help others--truest to the
obligation--who has the best heart--the most feeling--the deepest
sympathies--and who freely gives to others the rights that he claims for
himself, is the true nobleman. We have disfranchised the aristocrats of
the air and have given one country to mankind. Wanted!--More Manliness

I had a thousand times rather have a farm and be independent, than to be
President of the United States, without independence, filled with
doubt and trembling, feeling of the popular pulse, resorting to art and
artifice, inquiring about the wind of opinion, and succeeding at last in
losing my self-respect without gaining the respect of others. Man needs
more manliness, more real independence. This we can do by labor, and in this way we can preserve our
independence. We should try and choose that business or profession the
pursuit of which will give us the most happiness. We can be happy without being rich--without holding office--without
being famous. I am not sure that we can be happy with wealth, with
office, or with fame. Education of Nature

It has been a favorite idea with me that our forefathers were educated
by nature; that they grew grand as the continent upon which they landed;
that the great rivers--the wide plains--the splendid lakes--the lonely
forests--the sublime mountains--that all these things stole into and
became a part of their being, and they grew great as the country in
which they lived. They began to hate the narrow, contracted views of
Europe. The Worker Wearing the Purple

I want to see a workingman have a good house, painted white, grass in
the front yard, carpets on the floor and pictures on the wall. I want to
see him a man feeling that he is a king by the divine right of living in
the Republic. And every man here is just a little bit a king, you know. Every man here is a part of the sovereign power. Every man wears a
little of purple; every man has a little of crown and a little of
sceptre; and every man that will sell his vote for money or be ruled by
prejudice is unfit to be an American citizen. Flowers

Beautify your grounds with plants and flowers and vines. Remember that everything of beauty tends to the elevation of
man. Every little morning-glory whose purple bosom is thrilled with the
amorous kisses of the sun tends to put a blossom in your heart. Do not
judge of the value of everything by the market reports. Every flower
about a house certifies to the refinement of somebody. Every vine,
climbing and blossoming, tells of love and joy. The grave is not a throne, and a corpse is not a king. The living have
a right to control this world. I think a good deal more of to day than
I do of yesterday, and I think more of to-morrow than I do of this day;
because it is nearly gone--that is the way I feel. The time to be happy
is now; the way to be happy is to make somebody else happy and the place
to be happy is here. The School House a Fort

Education is the most radical thing in the world. To teach the alphabet is to inaugurate a revolution. To build a school
house is to construct a fort. We are Getting Free

We are getting free. We are
investigating with the microscope and the telescope. We are digging
into the earth and finding souvenirs of all the ages. We are finding out
something about the laws of health and disease. We are adding years to
the span of human life and we are making the world fit to live in. That is what we are doing, and every man that has an honest thought and
expresses it helps, and every man that tries to keep honest thought from
being expressed is an obstruction and a hindrance. The Solid Rock

I have made up my mind that if there is a God He will be merciful to the
merciful. That He will forgive the forgiving;
upon that rock I stand. That every man should be true to himself, and
that there is no world, no star, in which honesty is a crime; and upon
that rock I stand. An honest man, a good, kind, sweet woman, or a happy
child, has nothing to fear, neither in this world nor the world to come;
and upon that rock I stand. INGERSOLL'S FIVE GOSPELS




408. The Gospel of Cheerfulness

I believe in the gospel of cheerfulness; the gospel of good nature; in
the gospel of good health. Let us pay some attention to our bodies; take
care of our bodies, and our souls will take care of themselves. I believe the time will come when the public thought will be so
great and grand that it will be looked upon as infamous to perpetuate
disease. I believe the time will come when men will not fill the future
with consumption and with insanity. I believe the time will come when
with studying ourselves and understanding the laws of health, we will
say we are under obligations to put the flags of health in the cheeks of
our children. Even if I got to Heaven, and had a harp, I would hate to
look back upon my children and see them diseased, deformed, crazed, all
suffering the penalty of crimes that I had committed. The Gospel of Liberty

And I believe, too, in the gospel of liberty,---of giving to others what
we claim. And I believe there is room everywhere for thought, and
the more liberty you give away the more you will have. In liberty
extravagance is economy. Let us be just, let us be generous to each
other. The Gospel of 'Good Living

I believe in the gospel of good living. You cannot make any God happy by
fasting. Let us have good food, and let us have it well cooked; it is
a thousand times better to know how to cook it than it is to understand
any theology in the world. I
believe in the gospel of good houses; in the gospel of water and soap. The Gospel of Intelligence

I believe in the gospel of intelligence. That is the only lever capable
of raising mankind. I believe in the gospel of intelligence; in the
gospel of education. The school-house is my cathedral; the universe
is my Bible. And no God can put a man into hell in another world who has
made a little heaven in this. God cannot make miserable a man who has
made somebody else happy. God can not hate anybody who is capable of
loving his neighbor. So I believe in this great gospel of generosity. Ah, but they say it won't do. My gospel
of health will prolong life; my gospel of intelligence, my gospel of
loving, my gospel of good-fellowship will cover the world with happy
homes. My doctrine will put carpets upon your floors, pictures upon your
walls. My doctrine will put books upon your shelves, ideas in your mind. My doctrine will relieve the world of the abnormal monsters born of the
ignorance of superstition. My doctrine will give us health, wealth, and
happiness. The Gospel of Justice

I believe in the gospel of justice,--that we must reap what we sow. Smith, and God forgive me,
how does that help Smith? If I by slander cover some poor girl with
the leprosy of some imputed crime, and she withers away like a blighted
flower, and afterwards I get forgiveness, how does that help her? If
there is another world, we have got to settle; no bankruptcy court
there. Among the ancient Jews if you committed a crime you
had to kill a sheep; now they say, "Charge it. For every crime you commit you must answer to yourself and
to the one you injure. And if you have ever clothed another with
unhappiness as with a garment cf pain, you will never be quite as
happy as though you hadn't done that thing. No forgiveness, eternal,
inexorable, everlasting justice--that is what I believe in. And if it goes hard with me, I will stand it. And I will stick to my
logic, and I will bear it like a man. GEMS FROM THE CONTROVERSIAL GASKET

     Latest Utterances of Colonel Robert G. Ingersoll,
     in a Controversy with Judge Jere 8. Black,
     on "The Christian Religion"




413. The Origin of the Controversy

Several months ago, _The North American Review_ asked me to write an
article, saying that it would be published if some one would furnish a
reply. I wrote the article that appeared in the August number, and by
me it was entitled "Is All of the Bible Inspired?" Not until the
article was written did I know who was expected to answer. I make this
explanation for the purpose of dissipating the impression that Mr. To have struck his shield with my lance might
have given birth to the impression that I was somewhat doubtful as to
the correctness of my position. I naturally expected an answer from some
professional theologian, and was surprised to find that a reply had been
written by a "policeman," who imagined that he had answered my arguments
by simply telling me that my statements were false. It is somewhat
unfortunate that in a discussion like this any one should resort to the
slightest personal detraction. The theme is great enough to engage the
highest faculties of the human mind, and in the investigation of such a
subject vituperation is singularly and vulgarly out of place. Arguments
cannot be answered with insults. It is unfortunate that the intellectual
arena should be entered by a "policeman," who has more confidence in
concussion than discussion. Good nature is often
mistaken for virtue, and good health sometimes passes for genius. In the examination of a great and
important question, every one should be serene, slow-pulsed, and calm. Black's reply, feeling that so
grand a subject should not be blown and tainted with malicious words, I
proceed to answer as best I may the arguments he has urged. Of course it is still claimed that we are a Christian people, indebted
to something we call Christianity, for all the progress we have made. There is still a vast difference of opinion as to what Christianity
really is, although many wavering sects have been discussing that
question, with fire and sword through centuries of creed and crime. Every new sect has been denounced at its birth as illegitimate, as
something born out of orthodox wedlock, and that should have been
allowed to perish on the steps where it was found. Summary of Evangelical Belief

Among the evangelical churches there is a substantial agreement
upon what they consider the fundamental truths of the gospel. These
fundamental truths, as I understand them, are:--That there is a personal
God, the creator of the material universe; that he made man of the dust,
and woman from part of the man; that the man and woman were tempted by
the devil; that they were turned out of the garden of Eden; that, about
fifteen hundred years afterward, God's patience having been exhausted by
the wickedness of mankind, He drowned His children, with the exception
of eight persons; that afterward He selected from their descendants
Abraham, and through him the Jewish people; that He gave laws to these
people, and tried to govern them in all things; that He made known His
will in many ways; that He wrought a vast number of miracles; that
He inspired men to write the Bible; that, in the fullness of time, it
having been found impossible to reform mankind, this God came upon earth
as a child born of the Virgin Mary; that He lived in Palestine; that He
preached for about three years, going from place to place, occasionally
raising the dead, curing the blind and the halt; that He was
crucified--for the crime of blasphemy, as the Jews supposed, but, that
as a matter of fact, He was offered as a sacrifice for the sins of
all who might have faith in Him; that He was raised from the dead and
ascended into heaven, where He now is, making intercession for His
followers; that He will forgive the sins of all who believe on Him,
and that those who do not believe will be consigned to the dungeons of
eternal pain. These--(it may be with the addition of the sacraments of
Baptism and the Last Supper)--constitute what is generally known as the
Christian religion. A Profound Change in the World of Thought

A profound change has taken place in the world of thought. The pews are
trying to set themselves somewhat above the pulpit. The layman discusses
theology with the minister, and smiles. Christians excuse themselves
for belonging to the church by denying a part of the creed. The idea
is abroad that they who know the most of nature believe the least about
theology. The sciences are regarded as infidels, and facts as scoffers. Thousands of most excellent people avoid churches, and, with few
exceptions, only those attend prayer meetings who wish to be alone. The
pulpit is losing because the people are rising. The Believer in the Inspiration of the Bible has too Much to Believe

But the believer in the inspiration of the Bible is compelled to declare
that there was a time when slavery was right--when men could buy and
women sell their babes. He is compelled to insist that there was a time
when polygamy was the highest form of virtue; when wars of extermination
were waged with the sword of mercy; when religious toleration was a
crime, and when death was the just penalty for having expressed an
honest thought. He must maintain that Jehovah is just as bad now as he
was four thousand years ago, or that he was just as good then as he is
now, but that human conditions have so changed that slavery, polygamy,
religious persecutions and wars of conquest are now perfectly devilish. Once they were right--once they were commanded by God himself; now, they
are prohibited. There has been such a change in the conditions of man
that, at the present time, the devil is in favor of slavery, polygamy,
religious persecution and wars of conquest. That is to say, the devil
entertains the same opinion to-day that Jehovah held four thousand
years ago, but in the meantime Jehovah has remained exactly the
same--changeless and incapable of change. A Frank Admission

It is most cheerfully admitted that a vast number of people not only
believe these things, but hold them in exceeding reverence, and imagine
them to be of the utmost importance to mankind. They regard the Bible as
the only light that God has given for the guidance of His children; that
it is the one star in nature's sky--the foundation of all morality, of
all law, of all order, and of all individual and national progress. They
regard it as the only means we have for ascertaining the will of God,
the origin of man, and the destiny of the soul. The mistake has hindered in countless ways the civilization of
man. The Bible Should be Better than any other Book

In all ages of which any record has been preserved, there have been
those who gave their ideas of justice, charity, liberty, love, and
law. Now, if the Bible is really the work of God, it should contain the
grandest and sublimest truths. It should, in all respects, excel the
works of man. Within that book should be found the best and loftiest
definitions of justice; the truest conceptions of human liberty; the
clearest outlines of duty; the tenderest, the highest, and the noblest
thoughts,--not that the human mind has produced, but that the human mind
is capable of receiving. Upon every page should be found the luminous
evidence of its divine origin. Unless it contains grander and more
wonderful things than man has written, we are not only justified in
saying, but we are compelled to say, that it was written by no being
superior to man. A Serious Charge

The Bible has been the fortress and the defense of nearly every crime. No civilized country could re-enact its laws. And in many respects its
moral code is abhorrent to every good and tender man. It is admitted,
however, that many of its precepts are pure, that many of its laws are
wise and just, and that many of its statements are absolutely true. If the Bible is Not Verbally Inspired, What Then? It may be said that it is unfair to call attention to certain bad things
in the Bible, while the good are not so much as mentioned. To this it
may be replied that a divine being would not put bad things in a book. Certainly a being of infinite intelligence, power, and goodness could
never fall below the ideal of "depraved and barbarous" man. It will not
do, after we find that the Bible upholds what we now call crimes, to say
that it is not verbally inspired. If the words are not inspired, what
is? It may be said that the thoughts are inspired. But this would
include only the thoughts expressed without words. If the ideas are
inspired, they must be contained in and expressed only by inspired
words; that is to say, the arrangement of the words, with relation to
each other, must have been inspired. A Hindu Example

Suppose that we should now discover a Hindu book of equal antiquity with
the Old Testament, containing a defense of slavery, polygamy, wars of
extermination, and religious persecution, would we regard it as evidence
that the writers were inspired by an infinitely wise and merciful God? A Test Fairly Applied

Suppose we knew that after "inspired" men had finished the Bible, the
devil had got possession of it and wrote a few passages, what part of
the sacred Scriptures would Christians now pick out as being probably
his work? Which of the following passages would naturally be selected
as having been written by the devil--"Love thy neighbor as thyself," or
"Kill all the males among the little ones, and kill every woman; but all
the women children keep alive for yourselves?" It will hardly be claimed at this day, that the passages in the
Bible upholding slavery, polygamy, war, and religious persecution are
evidences of the inspiration of that book. Suppose that there had been
nothing in the Old Testament upholding these crimes would any modern
Christian suspect that it was not inspired on account of that omission? Suppose that there had been nothing in the Old Testament but laws in
favor of these crimes, would any intelligent Christian now contend that
it was the work of the true God? Proofs of Civilization

We know that there was a time in the history of almost every nation when
slavery, polygamy, and wars of extermination were regarded as divine
institutions; when women were looked upon as beasts of burden, and when,
among some people, it was considered the duty of the husband to murder
the wife for differing with him on the subject of religion. Nations that
entertain these views to-day are regarded as savage, and, probably, with
the exception of the South Sea islanders, the Feejees, some citizens
of Delaware, and a few tribes in Central Africa, no human beings can be
found degraded enough to agree upon these subjects with the Jehovah of
the ancient Jews. The only evidence we have, or can have, that a
nation has ceased to be savage is the fact that it has abandoned these
doctrines. To every one, except the theologian, it is perfectly easy to
account for the mistakes, atrocities, and crimes of the past, by
saying that civilization is a slow and painful growth; that the moral
perceptions are cultivated through ages of tyranny, of want, of crime,
and of heroism; that it requires centuries for man to put out the eyes
of self and hold in lofty and in equal poise the scales of justice;
that conscience is born of suffering; that mercy is the child of the
imagination--of the power to put oneself in the sufferers place, and
that man advances only as he becomes acquainted with his surroundings,
with the mutual obligations of life, and learns to take advantage of the
forces of nature. A Persian Gospel

Do not misunderstand me. My position is that the cruel passages in
the Old Testament are not inspired; that slavery, polygamy, wars of
extermination, and religious persecution always have been, are, and
forever will be, abhorred and cursed by the honest, virtuous, and the
loving; that the innocent cannot justly suffer for the guilty, and that
vicarious vice and vicarious virtue are equally absurd; that eternal
punishment is eternal revenge; that only the natural can happen; that
miracles prove the dishonesty of the few and the credulity of the many;
and that, according to Matthew, Mark, and Luke, salvation does not
depend upon belief, nor the atonement, nor a "second birth," but that
these gospels are in exact harmony with the declaration of the great
Persian: "Taking the first footstep with the good thought, the second
with the good word, and the third with the good deed, I entered
paradise." The dogmas of the past no longer reach the level of the
highest thought, nor satisfy the hunger of the heart. While dusty
faiths, embalmed and sepulchered in ancient texts, remain the same,
the sympathies of men enlarge; the brain no longer kills its young; the
happy lips give liberty to honest thoughts; the mental firmament expands
and lifts; the broken clouds drift by; the hideous dreams, the foul,
misshapen children of the monstrous night, dissolve and fade. Man the Author of all Books

So far as we know, man is the author of all books. If a book had been
found on the earth by the first man, he might have regarded it as the
work of God; but as men were here a good while before any books were
found, and as man has produced a great many books, the probability is
that the Bible is no exception. God and Brahma

Can we believe that God ever said of any: "Let his children be
fatherless and his wife a widow; let his children be continually
vagabonds, and beg; let them seek their bread also out of their desolate
places; let the extortioner catch all that he hath and let the stranger
spoil his labor, let there be none to extend mercy unto him, neither let
there be any to favor his fatherless children." If he ever said these
words, surely he had never heard this line, this strain of music, from
the Hindu: "Sweet is the lute to those who have not heard the prattle of
their own children." Jehovah, "from the clouds and darkness of Sinai,"
said to the Jews: "Thou shalt have no other gods before me.... Thou
shalt not bow down thyself to them nor serve them; for I, the Lord thy
God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquities of the fathers upon the
children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me." Contrast this with the words put by the Hindu in the mouth of Brahma:
"I am the same to all mankind. They who honestly serve other gods,
involuntarily worship me. I am he who partaketh of all worship, and I
am the reward of all worshipers." The first, a
dungeon where crawl the things begot of jealous slime; the other, great
as the domed firmament inlaid with suns. Matthew, Mark, and Luke

And I here take occasion to say, that with most of the teachings of the
gospels of Matthew, Mark, and Luke I most heartily agree. The miraculous
parts must, of course, be thrown aside. I admit that the necessity of
belief, the atonement, and the scheme of salvation are all set forth
in the Gospel of John,--a gospel, in my opinion, not written until long
after the others. Christianity Takes no Step in Advance

All the languages of the world have not words of horror enough to
paint the agonies of man when the church had power. Tiberius, Caligula,
Claudius, Nero, Domitian, and Commodus were not as cruel, false,
and base as many of the Christian Popes. Opposite the names of these
imperial criminals write John the XII., Leo the VIII., Boniface the VII.,
Benedict the IX., Innocent the III., and Alexander the VI. Was it under
these pontiffs that the "church penetrated the moral darkness like a
new sun," and covered the globe with institutions of mercy? Rome was far
better when Pagan than when Catholic. It was better to allow gladiators
and criminals to fight than to burn honest men. The greatest of Romans
denounced the cruelties of the arena. Seneca condemned the combats even
of wild beasts. He was tender enough to say that "we should have a bond
of sympathy for all sentiment beings, knowing that only the depraved
and base take pleasure in the sight of blood and suffering." Aurelius
compelled the gladiators to fight with blunted swords. Roman lawyers
declared that all men are by nature free and equal. Woman, under Pagan
rule in Rome, become as free as man. Zeno, long before the birth of
Christ, taught that virtue alone establishes a difference between men. We know that the Civil Law is the foundation of our codes. We know that
fragments of Greek and Roman art--a few manuscripts saved from Christian
destruction, some inventions and discoveries of the Moors--were the
seeds of modern civilization. Christianity, for a thousand years,
taught memory to forget and reason to believe. Not one step was taken in
advance. Over the manuscripts of philosophers and poets, priests, with
their ignorant tongues thrust out, devoutly scrawled the forgeries of
faith. Christianity a Mixture of Good and Evil

Mr. Black attributes to me the following expression: "Christianity is
pernicious in its moral effect, darkens the mind, narrows the soul,
arrests the progress of human society, and hinders civilization." Strange, that he is only able to answer what I did
not say. I endeavored to show that the passages in the Old Testament
upholding slavery, polygamy, wars of extermination, and religious
intolerance had filled the world with blood and crime. I admitted
that there are many wise and good things in the Old Testament. I also
insisted that the doctrine of the atonement--that is to say, of moral
bankruptcy--the idea that a certain belief is necessary to salvation,
and the frightful dogma of eternal pain, had narrowed the soul, had
darkened the mind, and had arrested the progress of human society. Like
other religions, Christianity is a mixture of good and evil. The church
has made more orphans than it has fed. It has never built asylums enough
to hold the insane of its own making. Jehovah, Epictetus and Cicero

If the Bible is really inspired, Jehovah commanded the Jewish people to
buy the children of the strangers that sojourned among them, and ordered
that the children thus bought should be an inheritance for the children
of the Jews, and that they should be bondmen and bondwomen forever. Yet
Epictetus, a man to whom no revelation was ever made, a man whose soul
followed only the light of nature, and who had never heard of the Jewish
God, was great enough to say: "Will you not remember that your servants
are by nature your brothers, the children of God? In saying that you
have bought them, you look down on the earth and into the pit, on the
wretched law of men long since dead,--but you see not the laws of the
Gods." We find that Jehovah, speaking to his chosen people, assured them
that their bondmen and bondmaids must be "of the heathen that were
round about them." "Of them," said Jehovah, "shall ye buy bondmen
and bondmaids." And yet Cicero, a pagan, Cicero, who had never been
enlightened by reading the Old Testament, had the moral grandeur to
declare: "They who say that we should love our fellow-citizens, but not
foreigners, destroy the universal brotherhood of mankind, with which
benevolence and justice would perish forever." The Atonement

In countless ways the Christian world has endeavored, for nearly two
thousand years, to explain the atonement, and every effort has ended in
an an mission that it cannot be understood, and a declaration that it
must be believed. Is it not immoral to teach that man can sin, that he
can harden his heart and pollute his soul, and that, by repenting
and believing something that he does not comprehend, he can avoid the
consequences of his crimes? Has the promise and hope of forgiveness ever
prevented the commission of a sin? Should men be taught that sin gives
happiness here; that they ought to bear the evils of a virtuous life in
this world for the sake of joy in the next; that they can repent between
the last sin and the last breath; that after repentance every stain
of the soul is washed away by the innocent blood of another; that the
serpent of regret will not hiss in the ear of memory; that the saved
will not even pity the victims of their own crimes; that the goodness
of another can be transferred to them; and that sins forgiven cease to
affect the unhappy wretches sinned against? Sin as a Debt

The Church says that the sinner is in debt to God, and that the
obligation is discharged by the Saviour. The best that can possibly be
said of such a transaction is, that the debt is transferred, not paid. The truth is, that a sinner is in debt to the person he has injured. If a man injures his neighbor, it is not enough for him to get the
forgiveness of God, but he must have the forgiveness of his neighbor. If a man puts his hand in the fire and God forgives him, his hand will
smart exactly the same. You must, after all, reap what you sow. No god
can give you wheat when you sow tares, and no devil can give you tares
when you sow wheat. The Logic of the Coffin

As to the doctrine of the atonement, Mr. Black has nothing to offer
except the barren statement that it is believed by the wisest and the
best. A Mohammedan, speaking in Constantinople, will say the same of the
Koran. A Brahman, in a Hindu temple, will make the same remark, and so
will the American Indian, when he endeavors to enforce something upon
the young of his tribe. He will say: "The best, the greatest of our
tribe have believed in this." This is the argument of the cemetery, the
philosophy of epitaphs, the logic of the coffin. We are the greatest and
wisest and most virtuous of mankind? This statement, that it has been
believed by the best, is made in connection with an admission that it
cannot be fathomed by the wisest. It is not claimed that a thing is
necessarily false because it is not understood, but I do claim that
it is not necessarily true because it cannot be comprehended. I still
insist that "the plan of redemption," as usually preached, is absurd,
unjust, and immoral. Judas Iscariot

For nearly two thousand years Judas Iscariot has been execrated by
mankind; and yet, if the doctrine of the atonement is true, upon his
treachery hung the plan of salvation. Suppose Judas had known of this
plan--known that he was selected by Christ for that very purpose, that
Christ was depending on him. And suppose that he also knew that only
by betraying Christ could he save either himself or others; what ought
Judas to have done? Are you willing to rely upon an argument that
justifies the treachery of that wretch? The Standard of Right

According to Mr. Black, the man who does not believe in a supreme being
acknowledges no standard of right and wrong in this world, and therefore
can have no theory of rewards and punishments in the next. Is it
possible that only those who believe in the God who persecuted for
opinion's sake have any standard of right and wrong? Were the greatest
men of all antiquity without this standard? In the eyes of intelligent
men of Greece and Rome, were all deeds, whether good or evil, morally
alike? Is it necessary to believe in the existence of an infinite
intelligence before you can have any standard of right and wrong? Is it
possible that a being cannot be just or virtuous unless he believes in
some being infinitely superior to himself? If this doctrine be true, how
can God be just or virtuous? Does He believe in some being superior to
himself? If man were incapable of suffering, if man could not
feel pain, the word "conscience" never would have passed his lips. The
man who puts himself in the place of another, whose imagination has been
cultivated to the point of feeling the agonies suffered by another, is
the man of conscience. Black says, "We have neither jurisdiction or capacity to rejudge
the justice of God." In other words, we have no right to think upon
this subject, no right to examine the questions most vitally affecting
human-kind. We are simply to accept the ignorant statements of barbarian
dead. This question cannot be settled by saying that "it would be a
mere waste of time and space to enumerate the proofs which show that the
universe was created by a pre-existent and self-conscious being." The
time and space should have been "wasted," and the proofs should have
been enumerated. These "proofs" are what the wisest and greatest are
trying to find. It cares nothing
for the opinions of the "great," nothing for the prejudices of the many,
and least of all, for the superstitions of the dead. In the world of
science--a fact is a legal tender. Assertions and miracles are base and
spurious coins. We have the right to rejudge the justice even of a god. No one should throw away his reason--the fruit of all experience. It is
the intellectual capital of the soul, the only light, the only guide,
and without it the brain becomes the palace of an idiot king, attended
by a retinue of thieves and hypocrites. The Liberty of the Bible

This is the religious liberty of the Bible. If you had lived in
Palestine, and if the wife of your bosom, dearer to you than your
own soul, had said: "I like the religion of India better than that of
Palestine," it would have been your duty to kill her. "Your eye must not
pity her, your hand must be first upon her, and afterwards the hand of
all the people." If she had said: "Let us worship the sun--the sun that
clothes the earth in garments of green--the sun, the great fireside of
the world--the sun that covers the hills and valleys with flowers--that
gave me your face, and made it possible for me to look into the eyes
of my babe,--let us worship the sun," it was your duty to kill her. You
must throw the first stone, and when against her bosom--a bosom filled
with love for you--you had thrown the jagged and cruel rock, and had
seen the red stream of her life oozing from the dumb lips of death,
you could then look up and receive the congratulations of the God whose
commandment you had obeyed. Is it possible that a being of infinite
mercy ordered a husband to kill his wife for the crime of having
expressed, an opinion on the subject of religion? Has there been found
upon the records of the savage world anything more perfectly fiendish
than this commandment of Jehovah? This is justified on the ground that
"blasphemy was a breach of political allegiance, and idolatry an act of
overt treason." We can understand how a human king stands in need of the
service of his people. We can understand how the desertion of any of
his soldiers weakens his army; but were the king infinite in power,
his strength would still remain the same, and under no conceivable
circumstances could the enemy triumph. Slavery in Heaven

According to Mr. Black, there will be slavery in Heaven, and fast by
the throne of God will be the auction-block, and the streets of the New
Jerusalem will be adorned with the whipping-post, while the music of
the harp will be supplemented by the crack of the driver's whip. Black, "incorporate him into his family,
tame him, teach him to think, and give him a knowledge of the true
principles of human liberty and government, he would confer upon him a
most beneficent boon." Black is too late with his protest against
the freedom of his fellow-men. Russia has emancipated her serfs; the slave trade is prosecuted only
by thieves and pirates; Spain feels upon her cheek the burning blush
of shame; Brazil, with proud and happy eyes, is looking for the dawn of
freedom's day; the people of the South rejoice that slavery is no more,
and every good and honest man (excepting Mr. Black) of every land and
clime hopes that the limbs of men will never feel again the weary weight
of chains. Jehovah Breaking His Own Laws

A very curious thing about these Commandments is that their supposed
author violated nearly every one. From Sinai, according to the account,
He said: "Thou shalt not kill," and yet He ordered the murder of
millions; "Thou shalt not commit adultery," and He gave captured maidens
to gratify the lust of captors; "Thou shalt not steal," and yet He gave
to Jewish marauders the flocks and herds of others; "Thou shalt not
covet thy neighbor's house, nor his wife," and yet He allowed His chosen
people to destroy the homes of neighbors and to steal their wives;
"Honor thy father and mother," and yet this same God had thousands of
fathers butchered, and with the sword of war killed children yet unborn;
"Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor," and yet
He sent abroad "lying spirits" to deceive His own prophets, and in a
hundred ways paid tribute to deceit. So far as we know, Jehovah kept
only one of these Commandments--He worshiped no other god. I know as little as anyone else about the "pla" of the universe; and as
to the "design," I know just as little. It will not do to say that the
universe was designed, and therefore there must be a designer. There
must first be proof that it was "designed." It will not do to say that
the universe has a "plan," and then assert that there must have been an
infinite maker. The idea that a design must have a beginning, and that a
designer need not, is a simple expression of human ignorance. We find
a watch, and we say: "So curious and wonderful a thing must have had a
maker." We find the watchmaker, and we say: "So curious and wonderful a
thing as man must have had a maker." We find God and we then say: "He is
so wonderful that he must _not_ have had a maker." In other words, all
things a little wonderful must have been created, but it is possible for
something to be so wonderful that it always existed. One would suppose
that just as the wonder increased the necessity for a creator increased,
because it is the wonder of the thing that suggests the idea of
creation. Is it possible that a designer exists from all eternity
without design? Was there no design in having an infinite designer? For
me, it is hard to see the plan or design in earthquakes and pestilences. It is somewhat difficult to discern the design or the benevolence in so
making the world that billions of animals live only on the agonies of
others. The justice of God is not visible to me in the history of this
world. When I think of the suffering and death, of the poverty and
crime, of the cruelty and malice, of the heartlessness of this "design"
and "plan," where beak and claw and tooth tear and rend the quivering
flesh of weakness and despair, I cannot convince myself that it is the
result of infinite wisdom, benevolence, and justice. What we Know of the Infinite

Of course, upon a question like this, nothing can be absolutely known. We live on an atom called Earth, and what we know of the infinite is
almost infinitely limited; but, little as we know, all have an equal
right to give their honest thought. Life is a shadowy, strange,
and winding road on which we travel for a little way--a few short
steps--just from the cradle, with its lullaby of love, to the low and
quiet wayside inn, where all at last must sleep, and where the only
salutation is--Good-night. The Universe Self-Existent

The universe, according to my idea, is, always was, and forever will
be. It did not "come into being;" it is the one eternal being--the only
thing that ever did, does, or can exist. We know nothing of what we call the laws of Nature except as we gather
the idea of law from the uniformity of phenomena springing from like
conditions. To make myself clear: Water always runs down hill. The
theist says that this happens because there is behind the phenomenon an
active law. As a matter of fact law is this side of the phenomenon. Law
does not cause the phenomenon, but the phenomenon causes the idea of law
in our minds, and this idea is produced from the fact that under like
circumstances the same phenomena always happens. Black probably
thinks that the difference in the weight of rocks and clouds was created
by law; that parallel lines fail to imite only because it is illegal;
that diameter and circumference could have been so made that it would
be a greater distance across than around a circle, that a straight line
could inclose a triangle if not prevented by law, and that a little
legislation could make it possible for two bodies to occupy the same
space at the same time. It seems to me that law can not be the cause of
phenomena, but it is an effect produced in our minds by their succession
and resemblance. To put a God back of the universe compels us to admit
that there was a time when nothing existed except this God; that this
God had lived from eternity in an infinite vacuum and in an absolute
idleness. The mind of every thoughtful man is forced to one of these two
conclusions, either that the universe is self-existent or that it
was created by a self-existent being. To my mied there are far more
difficulties in the second hypothesis than in the first. Jehovah's Promise Broken

If Jehovah was in fact God, He knew the end from the beginning. He knew
that his Bible would be a breastwork behind which tyranny and hypocrisy
would crouch; that it would be quoted by tyrants; that it would be the
defense of robbers called kings and of hypocrites called priests. He
knew that He had taught the Jewish people but little of importance. He
knew that He found them free and left them captives. He knew that He
had never fulfilled the promises made to them. He knew that while other
nations had advanced in art and science his chosen people were savage
still. He promised them the world, and gave them a desert. He promised
them liberty, and He made them slaves. He promised them victory, and He
gave them defeat. He said they should be kings, and He made them
serfs. He promised them universal empire, and gave them exile. When one
finishes the Old Testament, he is compelled to say: Nothing can add to
the misery of a nation whose King is Jehovah! Character Bather than Creed

For a thousand years the torch of progress was extinguished in the blood
of Christ, and His disciples, moved by ignorant zeal, by insane, cruel
creeds, destroyed with flame and sword a hundred millions of their
fellow-men. But if cathedrals had been
universities--if dungeons of the Inquisition had been laboratories--if
Christians had believed in character instead of creed--if they had taken
from the Bible all the good and thrown away the wicked and absurd--if
domes of temples had been observatories--if priests had been
philosophers--if missionaries had taught the useful arts--if astrology
had been astronomy--if the black art had been chemistry--if superstition
had been science--if religion had been humanity--it would have been a
heaven filled with love, with liberty, and joy. Mohammed the Prophet of God

Mohammed was a poor man, a driver of camels. He was without education,
without influence, and without wealth, and yet in a few years he
consolidated thousands of tribes, and millions of men confess that there
is "one God, and Mohammed is his prophet." His success was a thousand
times greater during his life than that of Christ. He was not crucified;
he was a conqueror. "Of all men, he exercised the greatest influence
upon the human race." Never in the world's history did a religion
spread with the rapidity of his. It burst like a storm over the fairest
portions of the globe. Black is right in his position that
rapidity is secured only by the direct aid of the Divine Being,
then Mohammed was most certainly the prophet of God. As to wars of
extermination and slavery, Mohammed agreed with Mr. Black, and upon
polygamy with Jehovah. As to religious toleration, he was great enough
to say that "men holding to any form of faith might be saved, provided
they were virtuous." In this he was far in advance both of Jehovah and
Mr. Wanted!--A Little More Legislation

We are informed by Mr. Black that "polygamy is neither commanded or
prohibited in the Old Testament--that it is only discouraged." It seems
to me that a little legislation on that subject might have tended to its
"discouragement." Black assures us "consists of certain immutable rules to govern the
conduct of all men at all times and at all places in their private and
personal relations with others," not one word is found on the subject of
polygamy. There is nothing "discouraging" in the Ten Commandments, nor
in the records of any conversation Jehovah is claimed to have had with
Moses upon Sinai. The life of Abraham, the story of Jacob and Laban,
the duty of a brother to be the husband of the widow of his deceased
brother, the life of David, taken in connection with the practice of
one who is claimed to have been the wisest of men--all these things are
probably relied on to show that polygamy was at least "discouraged." Certainly Jehovah had time to instruct Moses as to the infamy of
polygamy. He could have spared a few moments from a description of
patterns of tongs and basins for a subject so important as this. A
few-words in favor of the one wife and one husband--in favor of the
virtuous and loving home--might have taken the place of instructions
as to cutting the garments of priests and fashioning candlesticks and
ounces of gold. If he had left out simply the order that rams' skins
should be dyed red, and in its place had said, "A man shall have but one
wife, and the wife but one husband," how much better it would have been. Again, it is urged that "the acceptance of Christianity by a large
portion of the generation contemporary with its Founder and His
Apostles, was under the circumstances, an adjudication as solemn and
authoritative as mortal intelligence could pronounce." If this is true,
then "the acceptance of Buddhism by a large portion of the generation
contemporary with its Founder was an adjudication as solemn and
authoritative as mortal intelligence could pronounce." The same could
be said of Mohammedanism, and, in fact, of every religion that has
ever benefited or cursed this world. This argument, when reduced to its
simplest form, is this: All that succeeds is inspired. The Morality in Christianity

The morality in Christianity has never opposed the freedom of thought. It has never put, nor tended to put, a chain on a human mind, nor a
manacle on a human limb; but the doctrines distinctively Christian--the
necessity of believing a certain thing; the idea that eternal punishment
awaited him who failed to believe; the idea that the innocent can suffer
for the guilty--these things have |opposed, and for a thousand years
substantially destroyed the freedom of the human mind. All religions
have, with ceremony, magic, and mystery, deformed, darkened, and
corrupted, the soul. Around the sturdy oaks of morality have grown and
clung the parasitic, poisonous vines of the miraculous and monstrous. Irenaeus assures us that all Christians possessed the power of
working miracles; that they prophesied, cast out devils, healed the
sick, and even raised the dead. Epiphanius asserts that some rivers
and fountains were annually transmuted into wine, in attestation of the
miracle of Cana, adding that he himself had drunk of these fountains. Augustine declares that one was told in a dream where the bones of
St. Stephen were buried and the bones were thus discovered and brought
to Hippo, and that they raised five dead persons to life, and that in
two years seventy miracles were performed with these relics. Justin
Martyr states that God once sent some angels to guard the human race,
that these angels fell in love with the daughters of men, and became the
fathers of innumerable devils. For hundreds of years miracles were
about the only things that happened. They were wrought by thousands of
Christians, and testified to by millions. The saints and martyrs, the
best and greatest, were the witnesses and workers of wonders. Even
heretics, with the assistance of the devil, could suspend the "laws
of nature." Must we believe these wonderful accounts because they were
written by "good men," by Christians," who made their statements in the
presence and expectation of death"? The truth is that these "good men"
were mistaken. They fed their minds on prodigies, and their imaginations
feasted on effects without causes. Doubts were regarded as "rude disturbers of the congregation." Credulity
and sanctity walked hand in hand. As the philosophy of the ancients was rendered almost worthless by the
credulity of the common people, so the proverbs of Christ, his religion
of forgiveness, his creed of kindness, were lost in the mist of miracle
and the darkness of superstition. The Honor Due to Christ

For the man Christ--for the reformer who loved his fellow-men--for the
man who believed in an Infinite Father, who would shield the innocent
and protect the just--for the martyr who expected to be rescued from the
cruel cross, and who at last, finding that his rope was dust, cried out
in the gathering gloom of death; "My God! --for that great and suffering man, mistaken though he was, I have
the highest admiration and respect. That man did not, as I believe,
claim a miraculous origin; he did not pretend to heal the sick nor raise
the dead. He claimed simply to be a man, and taught his fellow-men
that love is stronger far than hate. His life was written by reverent
ignorance. Loving credulity belittled his career with feats of jugglery
and magic art, and priests wishing to persecute and slay, put in his
mouth the words of hatred and revenge. The theological Christ is the
impossible union of the human and divine--man with the attributes of
God, and God with the limitations and weakness of man. Christianity has no Monopoly in Morals

The morality of the world is not distinctively Christian. Zoroaster,
Gautama, Mohammed, Confucius, Christ, and, in fact, all founders of
religions, have said to their disciples: You must not steal; You must
not murder; You must not bear false witness; You must discharge your
obligations. Christianity is the ordinary moral code, _plus_ the
miraculous origin of Jesus Christ, his crucifixion, his resurrection,
his ascension, the inspiration of the Bible, the doctrine of the
atonement, and the necessity of belief. Buddhism is the ordinary moral
code, _plus_ the miraculous illumination of Buddha, the performance of
certain ceremonies, a belief in the transmigration of the soul, and
in the final absorption of the human by the infinite. The religion of
Mohammed is the ordinary moral code, _plus_ the belief that Mohammed
was the prophet of God, total abstinence from the use of intoxicating
drinks, a harem for the faithful here and hereafter, ablutions, prayers,
alms, pilgrimages, and fasts. Old Age in Superstition's Lap

And here I take occasion to thank Mr. Black for having admitted that
Jehovah gave no commandment against the practice of polygamy, that he
established slavery, waged wars of extermination, and persecuted for
opinions' sake even unto death, Most theologians endeavor to putty,
patch, and paint the wretched record of inspired crime, but Mr. Black
has been bold enough and honest enough to admit the truth. In this age
of fact and demonstration it is refreshing to find a man who believes
so thoroughly in the monstrous and miraculous, the impossible and
immoral--who still clings lovingly to the legends of the bib and
rattle--who through the bitter experiences of a wicked world has kept
the credulity of the cradle, and finds comfort and joy in thinking about
the Garden of Eden, the subtile serpent, the flood, and Babel's tower,
stopped by the jargon of a thousand tongues--who reads with happy eyes
the story of the burning brimstone storm that fell upon the cities
of the plain, and smilingly explains the transformation of the
retrospective Mrs. Lot--who laughs at Egypt's plagues and Pharaoh's
whelmed and drowning hosts--eats manna with the wandering Jews, warms
himself at the burning bush, sees Korah's company by the hungry earth
devoured, claps his wrinkled hands with glee above the heathens'
butchered babes, and longingly looks back to the patriarchal days of
concubines and slaves. How touching when the learned and wise crawl back
in cribs and ask to hear the rhymes and fables once again! How charming
in these hard and scientific times to see old age in Superstition's lap,
with eager lips upon her withered breast! Ararat in Chicago

A little while ago, in the city of Chicago, a gentleman addressed a
number of Sunday-school children. In his address he stated that some
people were wicked enough to deny the story of the deluge; that he was
a traveler; that he had been to the top of Mount Ararat, and had brought
with him a stone from that sacred locality. The children were then
invited to form in procession and walk by the pulpit, for the purpose of
seeing this wonderful stone. After they had looked at it, the lecturer
said: "Now, children, if you ever hear anybody deny the story of the
deluge, or say that the ark did not rest on Mount Ararat, you can tell
them that you know better, because you have seen with your own eyes a
stone from that very mountain." How Gods and Devils are Made

It was supposed that God demanded worship; that he loved to be
flattered; that he delighted in sacrifice; that nothing made him happier
than to see ignorant faith upon its knees; that above all things he
hated and despised doubters and heretics, and regarded investigation as
rebellion. Each community felt it a duty to see that the enemies of God
were converted or killed. To allow a heretic to live in peace was
to invite the wrath of God. Every public evil--every misfortune--was
accounted for by something the community had permitted or done. When
epidemics appeared, brought by ignorance and welcomed by filth, the
heretic was brought out and sacrificed to appease the anger of God. By putting intention behind what man called good, God was produced. By
putting intention behind what man called bad, the Devil was created. Leave this "intention" out, and gods and devils fade away. If not a
human being existed, the sun would continue to shine, and tempest now
and then would devastate the earth; the rain would fall in pleasant
showers; violets would spread their velvet bosoms to the sun, the
earthquake would devour, birds would sing, and daisies bloom, and
roses blush, and volcanoes fill the heavens with their lurid glare; the
procession of the seasons would not be broken, and the stars would shine
as serenely as though the world were filled with loving hearts and happy
homes. The Romance of Figures

How long, according to the universal benevolence of the New Testament,
can a man be reasonably punished in the next world for failing to
believe something unreasonable in this? Can it be possible that any
punishment can endure forever? Suppose that every flake of snow that
ever fell was a figure nine, and that the first flake was multiplied by
the second, and that product by the third, and so on to the last flake. And then suppose that this total should be multiplied by every drop of
rain that ever fell, calling each drop a figure nine; and that total by
each blade of grass that ever helped to weave a carpet for the earth,
calling each blade a figure nine; and that again by every grain of sand
on every shore, so that the grand total would make a line of nines so
long that it would require millions upon millions of years for light,
traveling at the rate of one hundred and eighty-five thousand miles per
second, to reach the end. And suppose, further, that each unit in this
almost infinite total, stood for billions of ages--still that vast and
almost endless time, measured by all the years beyond, is as one flake,
one drop, one leaf, one blade, one grain, compared with all the flakes,
and drops, and leaves, and blades and grains. Upon love's breast the
Church has placed the eternal asp. And yet, in the same book in which is
taught this most infamous of doctrines, we are assured that "The Lord is
good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his works." God and Zeno

If the Bible is inspired, Jehovah, God of all worlds, actually said:
"And if a man smite his servant or his maid with a rod, and he die under
his hand, he shall be surely punished; notwithstanding, if he continue
a day or two, he shall not be punished, for he is his money." And yet
Zeno, founder of the Stoics, centuries before Christ was born, insisted
that no man could be the owner of another, and that the title was bad,
whether the slave had become so by conquest, or by purchase. Jehovah,
ordered a Jewish general to make war, and gave, among others, this
command: "When the Lord thy God shall drive them before thee, thou shalt
smite them and utterly destroy them." And yet Epictetus, whom we have
already quoted, gave this marvelous rule for the guidance of human
conduct: "Live with thy inferiors as thou wouldst have thy superiors
live with thee." If Christ was in fact God, he knew all the future. Before him, like a
panorama, moved the history yet to be. He knew exactly how his words
would be interpreted. He knew what crimes, what horrors, what infamies,
would be committed in his name. He knew that the fires of persecution
would climb around the limbs of countless martyrs. He knew that brave
men would languish in dungeons, in darkness, filled with pain; that the
church would use instruments of torture, that his followers would appeal
to whip and chain. He must have seen the horizon of the future red with
the flames of the _auto da fe_. He knew all the creeds that would spring
like poison fungi from every text. He saw the sects waging war against
each other. He saw thousands of men, under the orders of priests,
building dungeons for their fellow-men. He heard the groans, saw the faces white with agony, the tears,
the blood--heard the shrieks and sobs of all the moaning, martyred
multitudes. He knew that commentaries would be written on his words with
swords, to be read by the light of fagots. He knew that the Inquisition
would be born of teachings attributed to him. He saw all the
interpolations and falsehoods that hypocrisy would write and tell. He
knew that above these fields of death, these dungeons, these burnings,
for a thousand years would float the dripping banner of the cross. He
knew that in his name his followers would trade in human flesh, that
cradles would be robbed and women's breasts unbabed for gold;--and yet
he died with voiceless lips. Why did he not
tell his disciples, and through them the world, that man should not
persecute, for opinion's sake, his fellow-man? Why did he not cry, You
shall not persecute in my name; you shall not burn and torment those who
differ from you in creed? Why did he not plainly say, I am the Son of
God? Why did he not explain the doctrine of the trinity? Why did he not
tell the manner of baptism that was pleasing to him? Why did he not say
something positive, definite, and satisfactory about another world? Why
did he not turn the tear-stained hope of heaven to the glad knowledge
of another life? Why did he go dumbly to his death, leaving the world to
misery and to doubt? The Philosophy of Action

Consequences determine the quality of an action. If consequences are
good, so is the action. If actions had no consequences, they would be
neither good nor bad. Man did not get his knowledge of the consequences
of actions from God, but from experience and reason. If man can, by
actual experiment, discover the right and wrong of actions, is it not
utterly illogical to declare that they who do not believe in God can
have no standard of right and wrong? Consequences are the standard by
which actions are judged. They are the children that testify as to the
real character of their parents. God or no God, larceny is the enemy of
industry--industry is the mother of prosperity--prosperity is a good,
and therefore larceny is an evil. God or no God, murder is a crime. There has always been a law against larceny, because the laborer wishes
to enjoy the fruit of his toil. As long as men object to being killed,
murder will be illegal. I have insisted, and I still insist, that it is still impossible for
a finite man to commit a crime deserving infinite punishment; and upon
this subject Mr. Black admits that "no revelation has lifted the veil
between time and eternity;" and, consequently, neither the priest nor
the "policeman" knows anything with certainty regarding another world. He simply insists that "in shadowy figures we are warned that a very
marked distinction will be made between the good and bad in the next
world." There is "a very marked distinction" in this; but there is this
rainbow in the darkest human cloud: The worst have hope of reform. All I
insist is, if there is another life, the basest soul that finds its way
to that dark or radiant shore will have the everlasting chance of
doing right. Nothing but the most cruel ignorance, the most heartless
superstition, the most ignorant theology, ever imagined that the
few days of human life spent here, surrounded by mists and clouds of
darkness, blown over life's sea by storms and tempests of passion, fixed
for all eternity the condition of the human race. If this doctrine be
true, this life is but a net, in which Jehovah catches souls for hell. We are told that "there is no good reason to doubt that the statements
of the Evangelists, as we have them now, are genuine." The fact is, no
one knows who made the "statements of the Evangelists." There are three
important manuscripts upon which the Christian world relies. "The first
appeared in the catalogue of the Vatican, in 1475. Of the New, it contains the four gospels,--the Acts, the
seven Catholic Epistles, nine of the Pauline Epistles, and the
Epistle to the Hebrews, so far as the fourteenth verse of the ninth
chapter,"--and nothing more. "The
second, the Alexandrine, was presented to King Charles the First, in
1628. It contains the Old and New Testaments, with some exceptions;
passages are wanting in Matthew, in John, and in II. It
also contains the Epistle of Clemens Romanus, a letter of Athanasius,
and the treatise of Eusebius on the Psalms." The last is the Sinaitic
Codex, discovered about 1850, at the Convent of St. "It contains the Old and New Testaments, and in addition
the entire Epistle of Barnabas, and a portion of the Shepherd of
Hennas--two books which, up to the beginning of the fourth century, were
looked upon by many as Scripture." In this manuscript, or codex, the
gospel of St. Mark concludes with the eighth verse of the sixteenth
chapter, leaving out the frightful passage: "Go ye into all the world,
and preach the gospel to every creature. He that believeth and is
baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned." In
matters of the utmost importance these manuscripts disagree, but even if
they all agreed it would not furnish the slightest evidence of their
truth. It will not do to call the statements made in the gospels
"depositions," until it is absolutely established who made them, and the
circumstances under which they were made. Neither can we say that "they
were made in the immediate prospect of death," until we know who made
them. It is absurd to say that "the witnesses could not have been
mistaken, because the nature of the facts precluded the possibility of
any delusion about them." Can it be pretended that the witnesses could
not have been mistaken about the relation the Holy Ghost is alleged to
have sustained to Jesus Christ? Is there no possibility of delusion
about a circumstance of that kind? Did the writers of the four gospels
have "the sensible and true avouch of their own eyes and ears" in that
behalf? How was it possible for any one of the four Evangelists to know
that Christ was the Son of God, or that he was God? Matthew says that an angel of the Lord told
Joseph in a dream, but Joseph never wrote an account of this wonderful
vision. Luke tells us that the angel had a conversation with Mary, and
that Mary told Elizabeth, but Elizabeth never wrote a word. There is no
account of Mary, or Joseph, or Elizabeth, or the angel, having had any
conversation with Matthew, Mark, Luke, or John, in which one word was
said about the miraculous origin of Jesus Christ. The persons who knew
did not write, so that the account is nothing but hearsay. Black pretend that such statements would be admitted as evidence in any
court? But how do we know that the disciples of Christ wrote a word of
the gospels? How do we know
that the writers of the gospels "were men of unimpeachable character?" Black's Admission

For the purpose of defending the character of his infallible God, Mr. Black is forced to defend religious intolerance, wars of extermination,
human slavery, and almost polygamy. He admits that God established
slavery; that he commanded his chosen people to buy the children of the
heathen; that heathen fathers and mothers did right to sell their girls
and boys; that God ordered the Jews to wage wars of extermination and
conquest; that it was right to kill the old and young; that God forged
manacles for the human brain; that he commanded husbands to murder their
wives for suggesting the worship of the sun or moon; and that every
cruel, savage passage in the Old Testament was inspired by him. Such is
a "policeman's" view of God. The Stars Upon the Door of France

Mr. Black justifies all the crimes and horrors, excuses all the tortures
of all the Christian years, by denouncing the cruelties of the French
Revolution. Thinking people will not hasten to admit that an infinitely
good being authorized slavery in Judea, because of the atrocities of the
French Revolution. They will remember the sufferings of the Huguenots. They will not forget
the countless cruelties of priest and king. They will not forget the
dungeons of the Bastile. They will know that the Revolution was an
effect, and that liberty was not the cause--that atheism was not the
cause. Behind the Revolution they will see altar and throne--sword and
fagot--palace and cathedral--king and priest--master and slave--tyrant
and hypocrite. They will see that the excesses, the cruelties, and
crimes were but the natural fruit of seeds the church had sown. Upon that cloud of war, black with
the myriad miseries of a thousand years, dabbled with blood of king and
queen, of patriot and priest, there was this bow: "Beneath the flag of
France all men are free." In spite of all the blood and crime, in spite
of deeds that seem insanely base, the People placed upon a Nation's brow
these stars:--Liberty, Fraternity, Equality--grander words than ever
issued from Jehovah's lips. A KIND WORD FOR JOHN CHINAMAN

On the 27th day of March, 1880, Messrs. Wright, Dickey, O'Conner, and
Murch, of the Select Committee appointed by Congress to "Consider
the causes of the present depression of labor," presented the majority
special report on Chinese Immigration. The following quotations are
excerpts from Col. R. G. Ingersoll's caustic review of that report. The Select Committee Afraid

These gentlemen are in great fear for the future of our most holy and
perfectly authenticated religion, and have, like faithful watchmen,
from the walls and towers of Zion, hastened to give the alarm. They have
informed Congress that "Joss has his temple of worship in the Chinese
quarters, in San Francisco. Within the walls of a dilapidated structure
is exposed to the view of the faithful the God of the Chinaman, and here
are his altars of worship, Here he tears up his pieces of paper; here he
offers up his prayers; here he receives his religious consolations,
and here is his road to the celestial land." That "Joss is located in a
long, narrow room, in a building in a back alley, upon a kind of altar;"
that "he is a wooden image, looking as much like an alligator as like a
human being;" that the Chinese "think there is such a place as heaven;"
that "all classes of Chinamen worship idols;" that "the temple is open
every day at all hours;" that "the Chinese have no Sunday;" that this
heathen god has "huge jaws, a big red tongue, large white teeth, a half
dozen arms, and big, fiery, eyeballs. About him are placed offerings of
meat, and other eatables--a sacrificial offering." The Gods of the Joss-House and Patmos

No wonder that these members of the committee were shocked at such a
god, knowing as they did, that the only true God was correctly described
by the inspired lunatic of Patmos in the following words: "And there sat
in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks one like unto the Son of
Man, clothed with a garment down to the foot, and girt about the paps
with a golden girdle. His head and his hairs were white like wool, as
white as snow; and his eyes were as a flame of fire; and his feet like
unto fine brass as if they burned in a furnace; and his voice as the
sound of many waters. And he had in his right hand seven stars; and out
of his mouth went a sharp, two-edged sword; and his countenance was as
the sun shining in his strength." Certainly, a large mouth, filled
with white teeth, is preferable to one used as the scabbard of a sharp,
two-edged sword. Why should these gentlemen object to a god with big
fiery eyeballs, when their own Deity has eyes like a flame of fire? A Little Too Late

Is it not a little late in the day to object to people because they
sacrifice meat and other eatables to their god? We all know, that for
thousands of years the "real" God was exceedingly fond of roasted meat;
that He loved the savor of burning flesh, and delighted in the perfume
of fresh warm blood. Christianity has a Fair Show in San Francisco

The world is also informed by these gentlemen that "the idolatry of
the Chinese produces a demoralizing effect upon our American youth by
bringing sacred things into disrespect and making religion a theme of
disgust and contempt." In San Francisco there are some three hundred
thousand people. Is it possible that a few Chinese can bring "our holy
religion" into disgust and contempt? In that city there are fifty times
as many churches as joss-houses. Scores of sermons are uttered every
week; religious books and papers are plentiful as leaves in autumn, and
somewhat dryer; thousands of bibles are within the reach of all. An Arrow from the Quiver of Satire

And there, too, is the example of a Christian city. Why should we send
missionaries to China, if we cannot convert the heathen when they come
here? When missionaries go to a foreign land the poor benighted people
have to take their word for the blessings showered upon a Christian
people; but when the heathen come here, they can see for themselves. What was simply a story becomes a demonstrated fact. They come in
contact with people who love their enemies. They see that in a Christian
land men tell the truth; that they will not take advantage of strangers;
that they are just and patient; kind and tender; and have no prejudice
on account of color, race or religion; that they look upon mankind as
brethren; that they speak of God as a Universal Father, and are
willing to work and even to suffer, for the good, not only of their own
countrymen, but of the heathen as well. All this the Chinese see and
know, and why they still cling to the religion of their country is, to
me, a matter of amazement. We Have no Religious System

I take this, the earliest opportunity, to inform these gentlemen
composing a majority of the committee, that we have in the United States
no "religious system;" that this is a secular government. That it has
no religious creed; that it does not believe nor disbelieve in a future
state of reward or punishment; that it neither affirms nor denies the
existence of a "living" God. Congress Nothing to Do with Religion

Congress has nothing to do with the religion of the people. Its members
are not responsible to God for the opinions of their constituents, and
it may tend to the happiness of the constituents for me to state that
they are in no way responsible for the religion of the members. Religion
is an individual, not a national matter. And where the nation interferes
with the right of conscience, the liberties of the people are devoured
by the monster Superstition. But I am astonished that four Christian statesmen, four members of
Congress in the last quarter of the nineteenth century, who seriously
object to people on account of their religious convictions, should
still assert that the very religion in which they believe--and the only
religion established by the living god-head of the American system--is
not adapted to the spiritual needs of one-third of the human race. It is
amazing that these four gentlemen have, in the defense of the Christian
religion, announced the discovery that it is wholly inadequate for
the civilization of mankind; that the light of the cross can never
penetrate the darkness of China; "that all the labors of the missionary,
the example of the good, the exalted character of our civilization, make
no impression upon the pagan life of the Chinese;" and that even
the report of this committee will not tend to elevate, refine and
Christianize the yellow heathen of the Pacific coast. In the name
of religion these gentlemen have denied its power and mocked at the
enthusiasm of its founder. Worse than this, they have predicted for the
Chinese a future of ignorance and idolatry in this world, and, if the
"American system" of religion is true, hell-fire in the next. Do not Trample on John Chinaman

Do not trample upon these people because they have a different
conception of things about which even this committee knows nothing. Give them the same privilege you enjoy of making a God after their own
fashion. Would you be willing
to have them remain, if one of their race, thousands of years ago, had
pretended to have seen God, and had written of him as follows: "There
went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth; coals
were kindled by it, * * * and he rode upon a cherub and did fly." Why
should you object to these people on account of their religion? Your
objection has in it the spirit of hate and intolerance. That spirit lighted the fagot, made the
thumb-screw, put chains upon the limbs, and lashes upon the backs of
men. The same spirit bought and sold, captured and kidnapped human
beings; sold babes, and justified all the horrors of slavery. Be Honest with the Chinese

If you wish to drive out the Chinese, do not make a pretext of religion. Do not pretend that you are trying to do God a favor. Injustice in his
name is doubly detestable. The assassin cannot sanctify his dagger by
falling on his knees, and it does not help a falsehood if it be uttered
as a prayer. Religion, used, to intensify the hatred of men toward men,
under the pretense of pleasing God, has cursed this world. An Honest Merchant the Best Missionary

I am almost sure that I have read somewhere that "Christ died for _all_
men," and that "God is no respecter of persons." It was once taught
that it was the duty of Christians to tell to all people the "tidings of
great joy." I have never believed these things myself, but have always
contended that an honest merchant was the best missionary. Commerce
makes friends, religion makes enemies; the one enriches, and the other
impoverishes; the one thrives best where the truth is told, the other
where falsehoods are believed. For myself, I have but little confidence
in any business, or enterprise, or investment, that promises dividends
only after the death of the stockholders. Good Words from Confucius

For the benefit of these four philosophers and prophets, I will give a
few extracts from the writings of Confucius that will, in my judgment,
compare favorably with the best passages of their report:

"My doctrine is that man must be true to the principles of his nature,
and the benevolent exercises of them toward others." "With coarse rice to eat, with water to drink, and with my bended arm
for a pillow, I still have joy." "Riches and honor acquired by injustice are to me but floating clouds." "The man who, in view of gain, thinks of righteousness; who, in view of
danger, forgets life; and who remembers an old agreement, however far
back it extends, such a man may be reckoned a complete man." "Recompense injury with justice, and kindness with kindness." There is one word which may serve as a rule of practice for all one's
life: Reciprocity is that word. The Ancient Chinese

When the ancestors of the four Christian Congressmen were barbarians,
when they lived in caves, gnawed bones, and worshiped dry snakes; the
infamous Chinese were reading these sublime sentences of Confucius. When
the forefathers of these Christian statesmen were hunting toads to
get the jewels out of their heads to be used as charms, the wretched
Chinamen were calculating eclipses, and measuring the circumference
of the earth. When the progenitors of these representatives of the
"American system of religion" were burning women charged with nursing
devils, these people "incapable of being influenced by the exalted
character of our civilization," were building asylums for the insane. The Chinese and Civil Service Reform

Neither should it be forgotten that, for thousands of years, the Chinese
have honestly practised the great principle known as civil service
reform--a something that even the administration of Mr. Hayes has
reached only through the proxy of promise. Invading China in the Name of Opium and Christ

The English battered down the door of China in the names of Opium and
Christ. This infamy was regarded as another triumph of the gospel. At last in self-defense the Chinese allowed Christians to touch their
shores. Their wise men, their philosophers, protested, and prophesied
that time would show that Christians could not be trusted. This re port
proves that the wise men were not only philosophers but prophets. Don't be Dishonest in the Name of God

Treat China as you would England. Change it if you will, according to the laws of nations, but on no
account excuse a breach of national faith by pretending that we are
dishonest for God's sake. CONCERNING CREEDS AND THE TYRANNY OF SECTS




482. Diversity of Opinion Abolished by Henry VIII

In the reign of Henry VIII--that pious and moral founder of the
apostolic Episcopal Church,--there was passed by the parliament
of England an act entitled, "An act for abolishing of diversity of
opinion." And in this act was set forth what a good Christian was
obliged to believe:

First, That in the sacrament was the real body and blood of Jesus
Christ. Second, That the body and blood of Jesus Christ was in the bread, and
the blood and body of Jesus Christ was in the wine. Fourth, That vows of chastity were of perpetual obligation. Fifth, That private masses ought to be continued; and,

Sixth, That auricular confession to a priest must be maintained. This creed was made by law, in order that all men might know just what
to believe by simply reading the statute. The Church hated to see the
people wearing out their brains in thinking upon these subjects. Spencer and Darwin Damned

According to the philosophy of theology, man has continued to degenerate
for six thousand years. To teach that there is that in nature which
impels to higher forms and grander ends, is heresy, of course. The
Deity will damn Spencer and his "Evolution," Darwin and his "Origin
of Species," Bastian and his "Spontaneous Generation," Huxley and his
"Protoplasm," Tyndall and his "Prayer Gauge," and will save those, and
those only, who declare that the universe has been cursed, from the
smallest atom to the grandest star; that everything tends to evil and to
that only, and that the only perfect thing in nature is the Presbyterian
Confession of Faith. The Dead do Not Persecute

Imagine a vine that grows at one end and decays at the other. The
end that grows is heresy, the end that rots is orthodox. The dead are
orthodox, and your cemetery is the most perfect type of a well regulated
church. No thought, no progress, no heresy there. Slowly and silently,
side by side, the satisfied members peacefully decay. There is only this
difference--the dead do not persecute. The Atheist a Legal Outcast in Illinois

The supreme court of Illinois decided, in the year of grace 1856, that
an unbeliever in the existence of an intelligent First Cause could not
be allowed to testify in any court. His wife and children might have
been murdered before his very face, and yet in the absence of other
witnesses, the murderer could not have even been indicted. To him, Justice was not only blind, but deaf. He
was liable, like other men, to support the government, and was forced to
contribute his share towards paying the salaries of the very judges
who decided that under no circumstances could his voice be heard in any
court. This was the law of Illinois, and so remained until the adoption
of the new Constitution By such infamous means has the Church endeavored
to chain the human mind, and protect the majesty of her God. How the Owls Hoot

Now and then somebody examines, and in spite of all keeps his manhood,
and has the courage to follow where his reason leads. Then the pious
get together and repeat wise saws, and exchange knowing nods and most
prophetic winks. The stupidly wise sit owl-like on the dead limbs of the
tree of knowledge, and solemnly hoot. The Fate of Theological Students

Thousands of young men are being educated at this moment by the various
Churches. In order that they may be prepared to investigate
the phenomena by which we are surrounded? The object, and the only
object, is that they may be prepared to defend a creed; that they may
learn the arguments of their respective churches, and repeat them in
the dull ears of a thoughtless congregation. If one, after being thus
trained at the expense of the Methodists, turns Presbyterian or Baptist,
he is denounced as an ungrateful wretch. Honest investigation is utterly
impossible within the pale of any Church, for the reason, that if you
think the Church is right you will not investigate, and if you think it
wrong, the Church will investigate you. The consequence of this is,
that most of the theological literature is the result of suppression, of
fear, tyranny and hypocrisy. Trials for Heresy

A trial for heresy means that the spirit of persecution still lingers in
the Church; that it still denies the right of private judgment; that it
still thinks more of creed than truth, and that it is still determined
to prevent the intellectual growth of man. It means the churches are
shambles in which are bought and sold the souls of men. It means that
the Church is still guilty of the barbarity of opposing thought with
force. It means that if it had the power, the mental horizon would be
bound by a creed; that it would bring again the whips and chains and
dungeon keys, the rack and fagot of the past. Presbyterianism Softening

Fortunately for us, civilization has had a softening effect even upon
the Presbyterian Church. To the ennobling influence of the arts and
sciences the savage spirit of Calvinism has, in some slight degree,
succumbed. True, the old creed remains substantially as it was written,
but by a kind of tacit understanding it has come to be regarded as a
relic of the past. The cry of "heresy" has been growing fainter and
fainter, and, as a consequence, the ministers of that denomination
have ventured, now and then, to express doubts as to the damnation of
infants, and the doctrine of total depravity. The Methodist "Hoist with his own Petard." A few years ago a Methodist clergyman took it upon himself to give me a
piece of friendly advice. "Although you may disbelieve the bible," said
he, "you ought not to say so. "Do
you believe the bible," said I. He replied, "Most assuredly." To which
I retorted, "Your answer conveys no information to me. You may be
following your own advice. Of
course a man who will advise others to dissimulate will not always be
particular about telling the truth himself." The Precious Doctrine of Total Depravity

What a precious doctrine is that of the total depravity of the human
heart! How sweet it is to believe that the lives of all the good and
great were continual sins and perpetual crimes; that the love a mother
bears her child is, in the sight of God, a sin; that the gratitude of
the natural heart is simple meanness; that the tears of pity are impure;
that for the unconverted to live and labor for others is an offense to
heaven; that the noblest aspirations of the soul are low and groveling
in the sight of God. Guilty of Heresy

Whoever has an opinion of his own, and honestly expresses it, will be
guilty of heresy. Heresy is what the minority believe; it is the name
given by the powerful to the doctrine of the weak. This word was born of
the hatred, arrogance and cruelty of those who love their enemies, and
who, when smitten on one cheek, turn the other. This word was born of
intellectual slavery in the feudal ages of thought. It was an epithet
used in the place of argument. From the commencement of the Christian
era, every art has been exhausted and every conceivable punishment
inflicted to force all people to hold the same religious opinions. This
effort was born of the idea that a certain belief was necessary to the
salvation of the soul. One great trouble is that most teachers are dishonest. They teach as
certainties those things concerning which they entertain doubts. They
do not say, "we _think_ this is so," but "we _know_ this is so." They do
not appeal to the reason of the pupil, but they command his faith. They
keep all doubts to themselves; they do not explain, they assert. In all ages reason has been regarded as the enemy of religion. Nothing
has been considered so pleasing to the Deity as a total denial of the
authority of your own mind. Self-reliance has been thought a deadly
sin; and the idea of living and dying without the aid and consolation
of superstition has always horrified the Church. By some unaccountable
infatuation, belief has been and still is considered of immense
importance. All religions have been based upon the idea that God will
forever reward the true believer, and eternally damn the man who doubts
or denies. To practice
justice, to love mercy, is not enough. You must believe in some
incomprehensible creed. You must say, "Once one is three, and three
times one is one." The man who practiced every virtue, but failed to
believe, was execrated. Nothing so outrages the feelings of the Church
as a moral unbeliever--nothing so horrible as a charitable Atheist. A Hundred and Fifty Years Ago

One hundred and fifty years ago the foremost preachers would have
perished at the stake. A Universalist would have been torn in pieces in
England, Scotland, and America. Unitarians would have found themselves
in the stocks, pelted by the rabble with dead cats, after which their
ears would have been cut off, their tongues bored, and their foreheads
branded. The Despotism of Faith

The despotism of faith is justified upon the ground that Christian
countries are the grandest and most prosperous of the world. At one time
the same thing could have been truly said in India, in Egypt, in Greece,
in Rome, and in every other country that has, in the history of the
world, swept to empire. This argument proves too much not only, but the
assumption upon which it is based is utterly false. Believe, or Beware

And what does a trial for heresy mean? It means that the Church says
a heretic, "Believe as I do, or I will withdraw my support. I will pursue you until your garments are rags; until your
children cry for bread; until your cheeks are furrowed with tears. I
will hunt you to the very portals of the grave." Calvin's Petrified Heart

Luther denounced mental liberty with all the coarse and brutal vigor
of his nature; Calvin despised, from the very bottom of his petrified
heart, anything that even looked like religious toleration, and solemnly
declared that to advocate it was to crucify Christ afresh. All the
founders of all the orthodox churches have advocated the same infamous
tenet. The truth is, that what is called religion is necessarily
inconsistent with free thought. Must one be versed in Latin before he is entitled to express his opinion
as to the genuineness of a pretended revelation from God? Common sense
belongs exclusively to no tongue. Logic is not confined to, nor has it
been buried with, the dead languages. Paine attacked the bible as it is
translated. If the translation is wrong, let its defenders correct it. A gentleman, walking among the ruins of Athens came upon a fallen statue
of Jupiter; making an exceedingly low bow he said: "O Jupiter! He then added: "Should you ever sit upon the throne of heaven
again, do not, I pray you, forget that I treated you politely when you
were prostrate." The Tail of a Lion

There is no saying more degrading than this: "It is better to be the
tail of a lion than the head of a dog." It is a responsibility to think
and act for yourself. Most people hate responsibility; therefore they
join something and become the tail of some lion. They say, "My party
can act for me--my church can do my thinking. It is enough for me to
pay taxes and obey the lion to which I belong, without troubling myself
about the right, the wrong, or the why or the wherefore." While the Preachers Talked the People Slept

The fact is, the old ideas became a little monotonous to the people. The
fall of man, the scheme of redemption and irresistible grace, began
to have a familiar sound. The preachers told the old stories while the
congregations slept. Some of the ministers became tired of these stories
themselves. The five points grew dull, and they felt that nothing short
of irresistible grace could bear this endless repetition. The outside
world was full of progress, and in every direction men advanced, while
the church, anchored to a creed, idly rotted at the shore. Christianity no Friend to Progress

Christianity has always opposed every forward movement of the human
race. Across the highway of progress it has always been building
breastworks of bibles, tracts, commentaries, prayer-books, creeds,
dogmas and platforms, and at every advance the Christians have gathered
together behind these heaps of rubbish and shot the poisoned arrows of
malice at the soldiers of freedom. You may be laughed at in this world for insisting that God put Adam into
a deep sleep and made a woman out of one of his ribs, but you will be
crowned and glorified in the next. You will also have the pleasure of
hearing the gentlemen howl there, who laughed at you here. While you
will not be permitted to take any revenge, you will be allowed to
smilingly express your entire acquiescence in the will of God. The one was lost, and the other has not
been found. The Real Eden is Beyond

Nations and individuals fail and die, and make room for higher forms. The intellectual horizon of the world widens as the centuries pass. Ideals grow grander and purer; the difference between justice and mercy
becomes less and less; liberty enlarges, and love intensifies as the
years sweep on. The ages of force and fear, of cruelty and wrong, are
behind us and the real Eden is beyond. It is said that a desire for
knowledge lost us the Eden of the past; but whether that is true or not,
it will certainly give us the Eden of the future. Party Names Belittle Men

Let us forget that we are Baptists, Methodists, Catholics,
Presbyterians, or Free-thinkers, and remember only that we are men and
women. After all, man and woman are the highest possible titles. All
other names belittle us, and show that we have, to a certain extent,
given up our individuality. A FEW PLAIN QUESTIONS




507. On which of the six days was he
created? Is it possible that God would make a successful
rival? He must have known that Adam and Eve would fall. He knew what
a snake with a "spotted, dappled skin" could do with an inexperienced
woman. He knew that if the serpent
got into the garden, Adam and Eve would sin, that he would have to drive
them out, that afterwards the world would be destroyed, and that he
himself would die upon the cross. Must We Believe Fables to be Good and True? Must we, in order to be
good, gentle and loving in our lives, believe that the creation of woman
was a second thought? That Jehovah really endeavored to induce Adam to
take one of the lower animals as an helpmeet for him? After all, is it
not possible to live honest and courageous lives without believing these
fables? Why was not the serpent kept out of the garden? Why did not the Lord God
take him by the tail and snap his head off? Why did he not put Adam
and Eve on their guard about this serpent? They, of course, were not
acquainted in the neighborhood, and knew nothing about the serpent's
reputation. Questions About the Ark

How was the ark kept clean? We know how it was ventilated; but what
was done with the filth? How were some
portions of the ark heated for animals from the tropics, and others
kept cool for the polar bears? How did the animals get back to their
respective countries? Some had to creep back about six thousand miles,
and they could only go a few feet a day. Some of the creeping things
must have started for the ark just as soon as they were made, and kept
up a steady jog for sixteen hundred years. Think of a couple of the
slowest snails leaving a point opposite the ark and starting for the
plains of Shinar, a distance of twelve thousand miles. Going at the rate
rate of a mile a month, it would take them a thousand years. Polar bears must have gone several thousand miles, and
so sudden a change in climate must have been exceedingly trying upon
their health. Of course, all the polar
bears did not go. It could be confounded only by the
destruction of memory. Did God destroy the memory of mankind at
that time, and if so, how? Did he paralyze that portion of the brain
presiding over the organs of articulation, so that they could not speak
the words, although they remembered them clearly, or did he so touch
the brain that they could not hear? Will some theologian, versed in
the machinery of the miraculous, tell us in what way God confounded the
language of mankind? Would God Kill a Man for Making Ointment? Can we believe that the real God, if there is one, ever ordered a man
to be killed simply for making hair oil, or ointment? We are told in
the thirtieth chapter of Exodus, that the Lord commanded Moses to take
myrrh, cinnamon, sweet calamus, cassia, and olive oil, and make a
holy ointment for the purpose of anointing the tabernacle, tables,
candlesticks and other utensils, as well as Aaron and his sons; saying,
at the same time, that whosoever compounded any like it, or whoever put
any of it on a stranger, should be put to death. In the same chapter,
the Lord furnishes Moses with a recipe for making a perfume, saying,
that whoever should make any which smelled like it, should be cut off
from his people. This, to me, sounds so unreasonable that I cannot
believe it. Some Christians say that the fountains of the great deep were broken up. Will they be kind enough to tell us what the fountains of the great deep
are? Others say that God had vast stores of water in the center of the
earth that he used on the occasion of the flood. How did these waters
happen to run up hill? Would a Real God Uphold Slavery? Must we believe that God called some of his children the money of
others? Can we believe that God made lashes upon the naked back, a
legal tender for labor performed? Must we regard the auction block as an
altar? Were the
stealers and whippers of babes and women the justified children of God? Will some minister, who now believes in religious liberty, and
eloquently denounces the intolerance of Catholicism, explain these
things; will he tell us why he worships an intolerant God? Is a god who
will burn a soul forever in another world, better than a christian who
burns the body for a few hours in this? Do the angels all discuss questions on the same side? Are all the
investigators in perdition? Will the penitent thief, winged and crowned,
laugh at the honest folks in hell? Will the agony of the damned increase
or decrease the happiness of God? Will there be, in the universe, an
eternal _auto da fe_? John moved to the bedroom. Why should a believer in God hate an atheist? Surely the atheist has
not injured God, and surely he is human, capable of joy and pain, and
entitled to all the rights of man. Would it not be far better to treat
this atheist, at least, as well as he treats us? ORIENT PEARLS AS RANDOM STRUNG

I do not believe that Christians are as bad as their creeds. The highest crime against a creed is to change it. A believer is a bird in a cage, a free-thinker is an eagle parting the
clouds with tireless wing. All that is good in our civilization is the result of commerce, climate,
soil, geographical position. The heretics have not thought and suffered and died in vain. Every
heretic has been, and is, a ray of light. No man ever seriously attempted to reform a Church without being cast
out and hunted down by the hounds of hypocrisy. After all, the poorest bargain that a human being can make, is to give
his individuality for what is called respectability. On every hand are the enemies of individuality and mental freedom. Custom meets us at the cradle and leaves us only at the tomb. There can be nothing more utterly subversive of all that is really
valuable than the suppression of honest thought. No man, worthy of the form he bears, will at the command of Church or
State solemnly repeat a creed his reason scorns. Although we live in what is called a free government,--and politically
we are free,--there is but little religious liberty in America. According to orthodox logic, God having furnished us with imperfect
minds, has a right to demand a perfect result. Nearly all people stand in great horror of annihilation, and yet to give
up your individuality is to annihilate yourself. When women reason, and babes sit in the lap of philosophy, the victory
of reason over the shadowy host of darkness will be complete. Of all the religions that have been produced by the egotism, the malice,
the ignorance and ambition of man, Presbyterianism is the most hideous. And what man who really thinks can help repeating the words of Ennius:
"If there are gods they certainly pay no attention to the affairs of
man." Events, like the pendulum of a clock have swung forward and backward,
but after all, man, like the hands, has gone steadily on. In spite of Church and dogma, there have been millions and millions of
men and women true to the loftiest and most generous promptings of the
human heart. I was taught to hate Catholicism with every drop of my blood, it is only
justice to say, that in all essential particulars it is precisely the
same as every other religion. Wherever brave blood has been shed, the sword of the Church has been
wet. On every chain has been the sign of the cross. The altar and throne
have leaned against and supported each other. We have all been taught by the Church that nothing is so well calculated
to excite the ire of the Deity as to express a doubt as to his
existence, and that to deny it is an unpardonable sin. Universal obedience is universal stagnation; disobedience is one of the
conditions of progress. Select any age of the world and tell me what
would have been the effect of implicit obedience. We have no national religion, and no national God; but every citizen
is allowed to have a religion and a God of his own, or to reject all
religions and deny the existence of all gods. Whatever may be the truth upon any subject has nothing to do with our
right to investigate that subject, and express any opinion we may form. All that I ask, is the same right I freely accord to all others. Mental slavery is mental death, and every man who has given up his
intellectual freedom is the living coffin of his dead soul. In this
sense, every church is a cemetery and every creed an epitaph. Think of reading the 109th Psalm to a heathen who has a Bible of his own
in which is found this passage: "Blessed is the man and beloved of all
the gods, who is afraid of no man, and of whom no man is afraid." The trouble with most people is, they bow to what is called authority;
they have a certain reverence for the old because it is old. They think
a man is better for being dead, especially if he has been dead a long
time. We should all remember that to be like other people is to be unlike
ourselves, and that nothing can be more detestable in character than
servile imitation. The great trouble with imitation is, that we are apt
to ape those who are in reality far below us. Suppose the Church had had absolute control of the human mind at any
time, would not the words liberty and progress have been blotted from
human speech? In defiance of advice, the world has advanced. Over every fortress of tyranny has waved, and still waves, the banner of
the Church. The Church has won no victories for the rights of man. We have advanced in spite of religious zeal, ignorance, and opposition. Luther labored to reform the Church--Voltaire, to reform men. There have been, and still are, too many men who own themselves--too
much thought, too much knowledge for the Church to grasp again the
sword of power. For the Eg-lon of superstition
Science has a message from Truth. It is a blessed thing that in every age some one has had individuality
enough and courage enough to stand by his own convictions,--some one
who had the grandeur to say his say. "The Church says the earth is flat; but I have seen its shadow on the
moon, and I have more confidence even in a shadow than in the Church." "On the prow of his ship were disobedience, defiance, scorn, and
success. INGERSOLL'S ORATION AT HIS BROTHER'S GRAVE

     A Tribute to Ebon C. Ingersoll, by his Brother
     Robert--The Record of a Generous Life Runs
     Like a  Vine Around the Memory of our
     Dead,   and   Every   Sweet,   Unselfish
     Act is Now a Perfumed Flower. Dear Friends: I am going to do that which the dead oft promised he would
do for me. The loved and loving brother, husband, father, friend, died where
manhood's morning almost touches noon, and while the shadows still were
falling toward the west. He had not passed on life's highway the stone that marks the highest
point; but, being weary for a moment, he lay down by the wayside, and,
using his burden for a pillow, fell into that dreamless sleep that
kisses down his eyelids still. While yet in love with life and raptured
with the world, he passed to silence and pathetic dust. Yet, after all, it may be best, just in the happiest, sunniest hour
of all the voyage, while eager winds are kissing every sail, to dash
against the unseen rock, and in an instant hear the billows roar above a
sunken ship For whether in mid sea or '<DW41> the breakers of the farther
shore, a wreck at last must mark the end of each and all. And every
life, no matter if its every hour is rich with love and every moment
jeweled with a joy, will, at its close, become a tragedy as sad and deep
and dark as can be woven of the warp and woof of mystery and death. This brave and tender man in every storm of life was oak and rock; but
in the sunshine he was vine and flower. He was the friend of all heroic
souls. He climbed the heights, and left all superstitions far below,
while on his forehead fell the golden dawning of the grander day. He loved the beautiful, and was with color, form, and music touched to
tears. He sided with the weak, the poor, and wronged, and lovingly
gave alms. With loyal heart and with the purest hands he faithfully
discharged all public trusts. He was a worshiper of liberty, a friend of the oppressed. A thousand
times I have heard him quote these words: "For Justice all place a
temple, and all season, summer." He believed that happiness was the only
good, reason the only torch, justice the only worship, humanity the only
religion, and love the only priest. He added to the sum of human joy;
and were every one to whom he did some loving service to bring a blossom
to his grave, he would sleep to-night beneath a wilderness of sweet
flowers. Life is a narrow vale between the cold and barren peaks of two
eternities. We strive in vain to look beyond the heights. We cry aloud,
and the only answer is the echo of our wailing cry. From the voiceless
lips of the unreplying dead there comes no word; but in the night of
death hope sees a star and listening love can hear the rustle of a wing. He who sleeps here, when dying, mistaking the approach of death for the
return of health, whispered with his latest breath, "I am better now." Let us believe, in spite of doubts and dogmas, of fears and tears, that
these dear words are true of all the countless dead. And now, to you, who have been chosen, from among the many men he loved,
to do the last sad office for the dead, we give his sacred dust. There was, there is, no gentler,
stronger, manlier man. INGERSOLL'S DREAM OF THE WAR

     The Following Words of Matchless Eloquence were
     Addressed by Col. Ingersoll to the Veteran
     Soldiers of Indianapolis. The past, as it were, rises before me like a dream. Again we are in the
great struggle for national life. We hear the sound of preparation--the
music of the boisterous drums--the silver voices of heroic bugles. We
see thousands of assemblages, and hear the appeals of orators; we see
the pale cheeks of women, and the flushed faces of men; and in those
assemblages we see all the dead whose dust we have covered with flowers. We are with them when they enlist in the
great army of freedom. Some are
walking for the last time in quiet, woody places with the maidens they
adore. We hear the whisperings and the sweet vows of eternal love as
they lingeringly part forever. Others are bending over cradles kissing
babes that are asleep. Some are parting with
mothers who hold them and press them to their hearts again and again,
and say nothing; and some are talking with wives, and endeavoring with
brave words spoken in the old tones to drive away the awful fear. We see the wife standing in the door with the babe in her
arms--standing in the sunlight sobbing--at the turn of the road a hand
waves--she answers by holding high in her loving hands the child. We see them all as they march proudly away under the flaunting flags,
keeping time to the wild music of war--marching down the streets of the
great cities--through the towns and across the prairies--down to the
fields of glory, and do and to die for the eternal right. We are by their side on all the gory
fields, in all the hospitals of pain--on all the weary marches. We stand
guard with them in the wild storm and under the quiet stars. We are with
them in ravines running with blood--in the furrows of old fields. We are
with them between contending hosts, unable to move, wild with thirst,
the life ebbing slowly away among the withered leaves. We see them
pierced by balls and torn with shells in the trenches of forts, and in
the whirlwind of the charge, where men become iron with nerves of steel. We are with them in the prisons of hatred and famine, but human speech
can never tell what they endured. We are at home when the news comes that they are dead. We see the maiden
in the shadow of her sorrow. We see the silvered head of the old man
bowed with the last grief. The past rises before us, and we see four millions of human beings
governed by the lash--we see them bound hand and foot--we hear the
strokes of cruel whips--we see the hounds tracking women through
tangled swamps. We see babes sold from the breasts of mothers. Four million bodies in chains--four million souls in fetters. All the
sacred relations of wife, mother, father and child trampled beneath the
brutal feet of might. All this was done under our own beautiful banner
of the free. We hear the roar and shriek of the bursting
shell. Instead of
slaves we see men and women and children. The wand of progress touches
the auction-block, the slave-pen, and the whipping-post, and we see
homes and firesides, and school-houses and books, and where all was want
and crime, and cruelty and fear, we see the faces of the free. They died for liberty--they died for us. They
are at rest, They sleep in the land they made free, under the flag
they rendered stainless, under the solemn pines, the sad hemlocks, the
tearful willows, the embracing vines. They sleep beneath the shadows of
the clouds, careless alike of sunshine or storm, each in the window-less
palace of rest. Earth may run red with other wars--they are at peace. In
the midst of battle, in the roar of conflict, they found the serenity of
death. I have one sentiment for the soldiers living and dead--cheers for
the living and tears for the dead. It is not necessary to be a pig in order to raise one. A blow from a parent leaves a scar on the soul of the child. A mortgage casts a shadow on the sunniest field. It is better to be a whole farmer than part of a mechanic. One good school-master is worth a thousand priests. Out in the intellectual sea there is room for every sail. An honest God is the noblest work of man. A King is a non-producing thief, sitting on a throne, surrounded by
vermin. Whiskey is the son of villainies, the father of all crimes, the mother
of all abominations, the devil's best friend, and God's worst enemy. An Orthodox Man is a gentleman petrified in his mind. Chicago is a marvel of energy, a miracle of nerva

The Pulpit is a pillory. Civilization is the Child of Forethought

Prejudice is the Child of Ignorance. I believe in the democracy of the fireside, in the republicanism of the
home. I believe in truth, in
investigation, in forethought. I believe in the gospel of education, of cheerfulness, of justice and
intelligence. Often she found herself most interested
in the ministry of the Rev. Hunter, who subsequently left Glasgow
for London. There are many shrewd comments on other ministers, on the
Declaratory Acts, then agitating the Free Church. She thought the
Westminster Confession should either be accepted or rejected, and that
the position was made no simpler by declarations. In London she
attended the English Church almost exclusively, listening to the many
remarkable teachers who in the Nineties occupied the pulpits of the
Anglican Church. It was not till after her fathers death that she came
to rest entirely in the ministry of the Church of Scotland, and found
in the teaching and friendship of Dr. Wallace Williamson that which
gave her the vital faith which inspired her life and work, and carried
her at last triumphantly through the swellings of Jordan. Giles lay in the centre of her healing mission, and her
alert active figure was a familiar sight, as the little congregation
gathered for the daily service. When the kirk skailed in the fading
light of the short days, the westering sun on the windows would often
fall on the fair hair and bright face of her whose day had been spent
in ministering work. On these occasions she never talked of her work. If she was joined by a friend, Dr. Elsie waited to see what was the
pressing thought in the mind of her companion, and into that she at
once poured her whole sympathy. Few ever walked west with her to
her home without feeling in an atmosphere of high and chivalrous
enterprise. Thus in an ordered round passed the days and years, drawing
ever nearer to the unknown destiny, when that which was to try the
reins and the hearts of many nations was to come upon the world. When
that storm burst, Elsie Inglis was among those whose lamp was burning,
and whose heart was steadfast and prepared for the things which were
coming on the earth. ELSIE INGLIS, 1916]




CHAPTER VIII

WAR AND THE SCOTTISH WOMEN

    God the all-terrible King, Who ordainest
      Great winds Thy clarion, the lightnings Thy sword,
    Show forth Thy pity on high where Thou reignest,
      Give to us peace in our time, O Lord. God the All-wise, by the fire of Thy chastening
      Earth shall to freedom and truth be restored,
    Through the thick darkness Thy kingdom is hastening,
      Thou wilt give peace in Thy time, O Lord.


The year of the war coincided with that period in the life of Dr. Inglis when she was fully qualified for the great part she was to play
among the armies of the Allied nations. It is now admitted that this country was unprepared for war, and
incredulous as to the German menace. The services of women have now
attained so high a value in the State that it is difficult to recast
their condition in 1914. In politics there had been a succession of efforts to obtain
their enfranchisement. Each effort had been marked by a stronger
manifestation in their favour in the country, and the growing force
of the movement, coupled with the unrest in Ireland, had kept all
political organisations in a high state of tension. It has been shown how fully organised were all the Women Suffrage
societies. Committees, organisers, adherents, and speakers were at
work, and in the highest state of efficiency. Women linked by a common
cause had learnt how to work together. The best brains in their midst
were put at the service of the Suffrage, and they had watched in the
political arena where to expect support, and who could be trusted among
the leaders of all parties. No shrewder or more experienced body of
politicians were to be found in the country than those women drawn from
all classes, in all social, professional, and industrial spheres, who
acknowledged Mrs. Fawcett as their leader, and trusted no one party,
sect, or politician in the year 1914. When the war caused a truce to be pronounced in all questions of acute
political difference, the unenfranchised people realised that this
might mean the failure of their hopes for an indefinite time. They
never foresaw that, for the second time within a century, emancipation
was to be bought by the life blood of a generation. The truce made no difference to any section of the Suffrage party. War found both men and women
unprepared, but the path of glory was clear for the men. A great army
must be formed in defence of national liberty. It would have been well had the strength of the women been mobilised in
the same hour. Their long claim for the rights of citizenship made them
keenly alive and responsive to the call of national service. War and its consequences had for many years been uppermost in their
thoughts. In the struggle for emancipation, the great argument they
had had to face among the rapidly decreasing anti-party, was the one
that women could take no part in war, and, as all Government rested
ultimately on brute force, women could not fight, and therefore must
not vote. In countering this outlook, women had watched what war meant all over
the world, wherever it took place. With the use of scientific weapons
of destruction, with the development of scientific methods of healing,
with all that went to the maintenance of armies in the field, and the
support of populations at home, women had some vision in what manner
they would be needed if war ever came to this country. The misfortune of such a controversy as that of the Rights of Women
is that it necessarily means the opposition has to prove a negative
proposition--a most sterilising process. Political parties were so
anxious to prove that women were incapable of citizenship, that the
whole community got into a pernicious habit of mind. Women were
underrated in every sphere of industry or scientific knowledge. Their
sense of incapacity and irresponsibility was encouraged, and when they
turned militant under such treatment, they were only voted a nuisance
which it was impossible to totally exterminate. Those who watched the gathering war clouds, and the decline of their
Parliamentary hopes, did not realise that, in the overruling providence
of God, the devastating war among nations was to open a new era for
women. They were no longer to be held cheap, as irresponsibles--mere
clogs on the machinery of the State. They were to be called on to
take the place of men who were dying by the thousand for their homes,
fighting against the doctrine that military force is the only true
Government in a Christian world. After mobilisation, military authorities had to make provision for the
wounded. We can remember the early sensation of seeing buildings raised
for other purposes taken over for hospitals. Since the Crimea, women as
nurses at the base were institutions understood of all men. In the vast
camps which sprang up at the commencement of the war, women modestly
thought they might be usefully employed as cooks. The idea shocked the
War Office till it rocked to its foundations. A few adventurous women
started laundries for officers, and others for the men. They did it on
their own, and in peril of their beneficent soap suds, being ordered to
a region where they would be out of sight, and out of any seasonable
service, to the vermin-ridden camps. The Suffrage organisations, staffed and equipped with able practical
women Jacks of all trades, in their midst, put themselves at the call
of national service, but were headed back from all enterprises. It
had been ordained that women could not fight, and therefore they were
of no use in war time. A few persisted in trying to find openings for
service. It is one thing to offer to be
useful without any particular qualification; it is another to have
professional knowledge to give, and the medical women were strong in
the conviction that they had their hard-won science and skill to offer. Those who have read the preceding pages will realise that Dr. Inglis
carried into this offer a perfect knowledge how women doctors were
regarded by the community, and she knew political departments too well
to believe that the War Office would have a more enlightened outlook. In the past she had said in choosing her profession that she liked
pioneer work, and she was to be the pioneer woman doctor who, with
the aid of Suffrage societies, founded and led the Scottish Womens
Hospitals to the healing of many races. Inglis to this point, it is easy
to imagine the working of her fertile brain, and her sense of vital
energy, in the opening weeks of the war. What material for instant
action she had at hand, she used. She had helped to form a detachment
of the V.A.D. when the idea of this once despised and now greatly
desired body began to take shape. Before the war men spoke slightingly
of its object, and it was much depreciated. Inglis saw all the
possibilities which lay in the voluntary aid offer. Inglis was in
Edinburgh at the commencement of the war, and the 6th Edinburgh V.A.D.,
of which she was commandant, was at once mobilised. For several weeks
she worked hard at their training. She gave up the principal rooms in
her house for a depot for the outfit of Cargilfield as an auxiliary
hospital. Inglis
put in charge of it, the wider work of her life might never have had
its fulfilment. Inglis from the first advocated that the V.A.D. should be used as probationers in military hospitals, and the orderlies
who served in her units were chiefly drawn from this body. In September she went to London to put her views before the National
Union and the War Office, and to offer the services of herself
and women colleagues. Miss Mair expresses the thoughts which were
dominating her mind. To her it seemed wicked that women with power
to wield the surgeons knife in the mitigation of suffering and with
knowledge to diagnose and cure, should be withheld from serving the
sick and wounded.

Her love for the wounded and suffering gave her a clear vision as
to what lay before the armies of the Allies. At the root of all her
strenuous work of the last three years, says her sister, was the
impelling force of her sympathy with the wounded men. This feeling
amounted at times to almost agony. Only once did she allow herself to
show this innermost feeling. This was at the root of her passionate
yearning to get with her unit to Mesopotamia during the early months
of 1916. I cannot bear to think of them, _our Boys_. To the womans
heart within her the wounded men of all nations made the same
irresistible appeal.

In that spirit she approached a departmental chief. Official reserve at
last gave way, and the historic sentence was uttered--My good lady, go
home and sit still. In that utterance lay the germ of that inspiration
which was to carry the Red Cross and the Scottish women among many
nations, kindreds, and tongues. The overworked red-tape-bound
official: the little figure of the woman with the smile, and the ready
answer, before him. There is a story that, while a town in Serbia was
under bombardment, Dr. Inglis was also in it with some of her hospital
work. She sought an official in his quarters, as she desired certain
things for her hospital. The noise of the firing was loud, and shells
were flying around. Inglis seemed oblivious of any sound save her
own voice, and she requested of an under officer an interview with his
chief. The official had at last to confess that his superior was hiding
in the cellar till the calamity of shell-fire was overpast. In much
the same condition was the local War Office official when confronted
with Dr. No doubt she saw it was
useless to continue her offers of service. Fawcett says:

 Nearly all the memorial notices of her have recorded the fact that at
 the beginning of her work in 1914 the War Office refused her official
 recognition. The recognition so stupidly refused by her own country
 was joyfully and gratefully given by the French and later the Serbian
 A.M.S. and Red Cross.

She went home to her family, who so often had inspired her to good
work, and as she sat and talked over the war and her plans with one of
her nieces, she suddenly said, I know what we will do! We will have a
unit of our own.

The We referred to that close-knit body of women with whom she had
worked for a common cause, and she knew at once that We would work
with her and in her for the accomplishment of this ideal which so
rapidly took shape in her teeming brain. She was never left alone in any part of her lifes work. Her
personality knit not only her family to her in the closest bonds of
love, but she had devoted friends among those who did not see eye
to eye with her in the common cause. She never loved them the less
for disagreeing with her, and though their indifference to her views
might at times obscure her belief in their mental calibre, it never
interfered with the mutual affections of all. She did not leave these
friends out of her scheme when it began to take shape. The Edinburgh Suffrage offices, no longer needed for propaganda and
organisation work, became the headquarters of the Scottish Womens
Hospitals, and the enlarged committee, chiefly of Dr. Inglis personal
friends, began its work under the steam-hammer of her energy. Well do I recall the first suggestion that passed between us on the
 subject of directing the energies of our Suffrage Societies to the
 starting of a hospital. Let us gather a few hundred pounds, and then
 appeal to the public, was the decision of our ever courageous Dr. Elsie, and from that moment she never swerved in her purpose. Some of
 us gasped when she announced that the sum of 50,000 must speedily
 be advertised for. Some timid souls advised the naming of a smaller
 amount as our goal. With unerring perception, our leader refused to
 lower the standard, and abundantly has she been proved right! Not
 50,000, but over 200,000 have rewarded her faith and her hope. This quick perception was one of the greatest of her gifts, and it
 was with perfect simplicity she stated to me once that when on rare
 occasions she had yielded her own conviction to pressure from others,
 the result had been unfortunate. There was not an ounce of vanity in
 her composition. She saw the object aimed at, and she marched
 straight on. If, on the road, some obstacles had to be not exactly
 ruthlessly, but very firmly brushed aside, her strength of purpose
 was in the end a blessing to all concerned. Strength combined with
 sweetness--with a wholesome dash of humour thrown in--in my mind sums
 up her character. What that strength did for agonised Serbia only the
 grateful Serbs can fully tell.

A letter written in October of this year to Mrs. Fawcett tells of the
rapid formation of the hospital idea. 8 WALKER STREET,
      _Oct. FAWCETT,--I wrote to you from the office this morning,
 but I want to point out a little more fully what the Committee felt
 about the name of the hospitals. We felt that our original scheme
 was growing very quickly into something very big--much bigger than
 anything we had thought of at the beginning--and we felt that if the
 hospitals were called by a non-committal name it would be much easier
 to get all men and women to help. The scheme is _of course_ a National
 Union scheme, and that fact the Scottish Federation will never lose
 sight of, or attempt to disguise. The National Union will be at the
 head of all our appeals, and press notices, and paper. But--if you could reverse the position, and imagine for a moment
 that the Anti-Suffrage Society had thought of organising all these
 skilled women for service, you can quite see that many more neutrals,
 and a great many suffragists would have been ready to help if they
 sent their subscriptions to the Scottish Womens Hospital for Foreign
 Service, than if they had to send to the Anti-Suffrage League
 Hospital. We were convinced that the more women we could get to help, the
 greater would be the gain to the womans movement. For we have hit upon a really splendid scheme. Laurie and
 I went to see Sir George Beatson--the head of the Scottish Red Cross,
 in Glasgow--he said at once: Our War Office will have nothing to say
 to you, and then he added, yet there is no knowing what they may do
 before the end of the war.

 You see, we get these expert women doctors, nurses, and ambulance
 workers organised. Once
 these units are out, the work is bound to grow. The need is there,
 and too terrible to allow any haggling about who does the work. If
 we have a thoroughly good organisation here, we can send out more
 and more units, or strengthen those already out. We can add motor
 ambulances, organise rest stations on the lines of communication, and
 so on. It will all depend on how well we are supplied with funds and
 brains at our base. Each unit ought to be carefully chosen, and the
 very best women doctors must go out with them. I wrote this morning to
 the Registered Medical Womens Association in London, and asked them
 to help us, and offered to address a meeting when I come up for your
 meeting. Next week a special meeting of the Scottish Medical Womens
 Association is being called to discuss the question. From the very beginning we must make it clear that our hospitals are
 as well-equipped and well-manned as any in the field, more economical
 (easy! I cannot think of anything more calculated to bring home to men the
 fact that women _can help_ intelligently in any kind of work. So much
 of our work is done where they cannot see it. Theyll see every bit of
 this. The fates seem to be fighting for us! Sometimes schemes do float off
 with the most extraordinary ease. The Belgian Consul here is Professor
 Sarolea--the editor of _Everyman_. He grasped at the help we offered,
 and has written off to several influential people. And then yesterday
 morning he wrote saying that his brother Dr. Leon Sarolea, would come
 and work under us. He is an M.P., a man of considerable influence. So you can see the Belgian Hospital will have everything in its favour. Seton Watson, who has devoted his life to the Balkan States,
 has taken up the Servian Unit. He puts himself entirely at our
 service. He knows all the powers that be in Servia. Two people in the Press have offered to help. It must not be wasted, but we must have
 lots. And as the work grows do lets keep it _together_, so that, however
 many hospitals we send out, they all shall be run on the same lines,
 and wherever people see the Union Jack with the red, white and green
 flag below it, theyll know it means efficiency and kindness and
 intelligence. I wanted the Executive, for this reason, to call the hospitals
 British Womens Hospitals for Foreign Service, but of course it was
 their own idea, and one understood the desire to call it Scottish;
 but if there is a splendid response from England and from other
 federations, that will have to be reconsidered, _I_ think. The great
 thing is to do the thing well, and do it as _one_ scheme. I do hope youll approve of all this. I am marking this letter
 Private, because it isnt an official letter, but just what I
 think--to you, my Chief. But you can show it to anybody you like--as
 that. I can think of nothing except these Units just now! And when one
 hears of the awful need, one can hardly sit still till they are ready. Professor Sarolea simply made ones heart bleed. He said, You talk of distress from the war here. You simply
 know nothing about it.--Ever yours sincerely,

      ELSIE MAUD INGLIS.

In October 1914 the scheme was finally adopted by the Scottish
Federation, and the name of Scottish Womens Hospitals was chosen. At the same meeting the committee decided to send Dr. Inglis to London
to explain the plan to the National Union, and to speak at a meeting
in the Kingsway Hall, on What women could do to help in the war. At
that meeting she was authorised to speak on the plans of the S.W.H. The N.U.W.S.S. adopted the plan of campaign on 15th October, and the
London society was soon taking up the work of procuring money to start
new units, and to send Dr. Inglis out on her last enterprise, with a
unit fully equipped to work with the Serbian army, then fighting on the
Bulgarian front. The use she made of individuals is well illustrated by Miss Burke. She
was found by Dr. Inglis in the office of the London Society, and sent
forth to speak and fill the Treasury chest of the S.W.H. It is written
in the records of that work how wonderfully Miss Burke influenced her
countrymen in America, and how nobly, through her efforts, they have
aided the great adventure.

      U.S.M.S. Paul_,
      _Saturday, February 9th_. DEAR LADY FRANCES,--Certainly I am one of Dr. It
 was largely due to her intuition and clear judgment of character that
 my feet were placed in the path which led to my reaching my maximum
 efficiency as a hospital worker and a member of the Scottish Womens
 Hospitals. Elsie after I had been the Secretary of the
 London Committee for about a month. There was no question of meeting a
 stranger; her kindly eyes smiled straight into mine. Well, the best way to encourage me was to
 give me responsibility. Do you speak French?

 Yes.

 Very well, go and write me a letter to General de Torcy, telling him
 we accept the building he has offered at Troyes.

 Some one hazarded the suggestion that the letter should be passed on. Nonsense, replied Dr. Elsie, I know the type. If she says she speaks French, she does.

 She practically signed the letter I wrote her without reading it. Doubtless all the time I was with her I was under her keen scrutiny,
 and when finally, after arranging a meeting for her at Oxford, which
 she found impossible to take, owing to her sudden decision to leave
 for Serbia, she had already judged me, and without hesitation she told
 me to go to Oxford and speak myself. I have wondered often whether any
 one else would have sent a young and unknown speaker--it needed Dr. Elsies knowledge of human character and rapid energetic method of
 making decisions. It would be difficult for we young ones of the Scottish Womens
 Hospitals to analyse our feelings towards Dr. A wave of her
 hand in passing meant much to us.

Space utterly forbids our following the fortunes of the Scottish
Womens Hospitals as they went forth one by one to France, to Belgium,
to Serbia, to Corsica, and Russia. That history will have some day to
be written. It is only possible in this memoir to speak of their work
in relation to their founder and leader. Not I, but my unit, was
her dying watchword, and when the work of her unit is reviewed, it is
obvious how they carried with them, as an oriflamme, the inspiration of
unselfish devotion set them by Dr. Besides going into all the detailed work of the hospital equipment, Dr. Inglis found time to continue her work of speaking for the cause of the
hospitals. We find her addressing her old friends:

 I have the happiest recollection of Dr. I. addressing a small meeting
 of the W. L. Association here. It was one of her first meetings to
 raise money. She told us how she wanted to go to Serbia. She was so
 convincing, but with all my faith in her, I never thought she _would_
 get there! That, and much more she did--a lesson in faith. She looked round the little gathering in the Good Templar Hall and
 said, I suppose nobody here could lend me a yacht? She did get her
 ship there.

To one of her workers in this time, she said, My dear, we shall live
all our lives in the shadow of war. The one to whom she spoke says, A
cold chill struck my heart. Did she feel it, and know that never again
would things be as they were?

At the close of 1914 Dr. Inglis went to France to see the Scottish
Womens Hospital established and working under the French Red Cross at
Royaumont. It was probably on her way back that she went to Paris on
business connected with Royaumont. She went into Notre Dame, and chose
a seat in a part of the cathedral where she could feel alone. She there
had an experience which she afterwards told to Mrs. As she
sat there she had a strong feeling that some one was behind her. She
resisted the impulse to turn round, thinking it was some one who like
herself wanted to be quiet! The feeling grew so strong at last, that
she involuntarily turned round. There was no one near her, but for the
first time she realised she was sitting in front of a statue of Joan of
Arc. To her it appeared as if the statue was instinct with life. She
added: Wasnt it curious? Then later she said, I would like to know
what Joan was wanting to say to me! I often think of the natural way
which she told me of the experience, and the _practical_ conclusion
of wishing to know what Joan wanted. Once again she referred to the
incident, before going to Russia. I see her expression now, just for a
moment forgetting everything else, keen, concentrated, and her humorous
smile, as she said, You know I would like awfully to know what Joan
was trying to say to me.

Elsie Inglis was not the first, nor will she be the last woman who has
found help in the story of the Maid of Orleans, when the causes dear to
the hearts of nations are at stake. It is easy to hear the words that
would pass between these two leaders in the time of their countrys
warfare. The graven figure of Joan was instinct with life, from the
undying love of race and country, which flowed back to her from the
woman who was as ready to dedicate to her country her self-forgetting
devotion, as Jeanne dArc had been in her day. Both, in their day and
generation, had heard--

    The quick alarming drum--
    Saying, Come,
    Freemen, come,
    Ere your heritage be wasted, said the quick alarming drum.

      ABBAYE DE ROYAUMONT,
      _Dec. DEAREST AMY,--Many, many happy Christmases to you, dear, and to
 all the others. Everything is splendid here now, and if the General
 from headquarters would only come and inspect us, we could begin. I only wish you could see them with their
 red bedcovers, and little tables. There are four wards, and we have
 called them Blanche of Castille (the woman who really started the
 building of this place, the mother of Louis IX., the Founder, as he
 is called), Queen Margaret of Scotland, Joan of Arc, and Millicent
 Fawcett. Now, dont you think that is rather nice! The Abbaye itself
 is a wonderful place. It has beautiful architecture, and is placed in
 delightful woods. One wants to spend hours exploring it, instead of
 which we have all been working like galley slaves getting the hospital
 in order. There are
 no thermometers and no sandbags. Yesterday,
 I was told there were no tooth-brushes and no nail-brushes, but they
 appeared. After all the fuss, you can imagine our feelings when the
 Director, an official of the French Red Cross, who has to live here
 with us, told us French soldiers dont want tooth-brushes! Our first visitors were three French officers, whom we took for the
 inspecting general, and treated with grovelling deference, till we
 found they knew nothing about it, and were much more interested in the
 tapestry in the proprietors house than in our instruments. However,
 they were very nice, and said we were _bien meubl_. Once we had all been on tenterhooks all day about the inspection. Suddenly, a man poked his head round the door of the doctors
 sitting-room and said, The General. In one flash every doctor was
 out of the room and into her bedroom for her uniform coat, and I was
 left sitting. I got up, and wandered downstairs, when an excited
 orderly dashed past, singing, Nothing but two British officers!
 Another time we were routed out from breakfast by the cry of The
 General, but this time it turned out to be a French regiment, whose
 officers had been moved by curiosity to come round by here. We have had to get a new boiler in the kitchen, new taps and
 lavatories, and electric light, an absolute necessity in this huge
 place, and all the theatre sinks. We certainly are no longer a
 _mobile_ hospital, but as we are twelve miles from the point from
 which the wounded are distributed (I am getting very discreet about
 names since a telegram of mine was censored), we shall probably be as
 useful here as anywhere. They even think we may get English Tommies. You have no idea of the conditions to which the units came out, and
 they have behaved like perfect bricks. The place was like an ice hole:
 there were no fires, no hot water, no furniture, not even blankets,
 and the equipment did not arrive for five days. They have scrubbed the
 whole place out themselves, as if they were born housemaids; put up
 the beds, stuffed the mattresses, and done everything. They stick at absolutely nothing, and when Madame came,
 she said, What it is to belong to a practical nation!

 We had a service in the ward on Sunday. We are going to see if they
 will let us use the little St. There are two other
 chapels, one in use, that we hope the soldiers will go to, and a
 beautiful chapel the same style of architecture as the chapel at Mont
 St. It is a perfect joy to walk through it to meals. The
 village cur has been to tea with us. Will you believe it, that General hasnt arrived _yet_!--Your loving

      ELSIE.

Mr. Seton Watson has permitted his article in the December number of
the _New Europe_ (1917) to be reprinted here. His complete knowledge
of Serbia enables him to describe both the work and Dr. Inglis who
undertook the great task set before her. Elsie Inglis was one of the heroic figures of the war, one whose
 memory her many friends will cherish with pride and confidence--pride
 at having been privileged to work with her, confidence in the race
 which breeds such women. This is not the place to tell the full story
 of her devotion to many a good cause at home, but the _New Europe_
 owes her a debt of special interest and affection. For in her own
 person she stood for that spirit of sympathy and comprehension upon
 which intercourse between the nations must be founded, if the ideal of
 a New Europe is ever to become a reality. Though her lifework had hitherto lain in utterly different fields,
 she saw in a flash the needs of a tragic situation; and when war came
 offered all her indomitable spirit and tireless energy to a cause
 till recently unknown and even frowned upon in our country. Like
 the Douglas of old, she flung herself where the battle raged most
 fiercely--always claiming and at last obtaining permission to set up
 her hospitals where the obstacles were greatest and the dangers most
 acute. But absorbed as she was in her noble task of healing, she saw
 beyond it the high national ideal that inspired the Serbs to endure
 sufferings unexampled even in this war, and became an enthusiastic
 convert to the cause of Southern Slav unity. To her, as to all true
 Europeans, the principle of nationality is not, indeed, the end of
 all human wisdom, but the sure foundation upon which a new and saner
 internationalism is to be built, and an inalienable right to which
 great and small alike are entitled. Perhaps the fact that she herself
 came of a small nation which, like Serbia, has known how to celebrate
 its defeats, was not without its share in determining her sympathies. The full political meaning of her work has not yet been brought home
 to her countrymen, and yet what she has done will live after her. Her
 achievement in Serbia itself in 1915 was sufficiently remarkable, but
 even that was a mere prelude to her achievement on the Eastern front. The Serbian Division in Southern Russia, which the Scottish Womens
 Hospitals went out to help, was not Serbian at all in the _ordinary_
 sense of the word. Its proper name is the Jugoslav Division, for
 it was composed entirely of volunteers drawn from among the Serbs,
 Croats, and Slovenes of Austria-Hungary who had been taken prisoners
 by the Russian army. Thousands of these men enrolled themselves on the
 side of the Entente and in the service of Serbia, in order to fight
 for the realisation of Southern Slav independence and unity under the
 national dynasty of Kara George. Beyond the ordinary risks of war
 they acted in full knowledge that capture by the enemy would mean the
 same fate as Austria meted out to the heroic Italian deputy, Cesare
 Battisti; and some of them, left wounded on the battle-field after
 a retreat, shot each other to avoid being taken alive. Throughout
 the Dobrudja campaign they fought with the most desperate gallantry
 against impossible odds, and, owing to inadequate support during the
 retreat, their main body was reduced from 15,000 to 4000. Latterly the
 other divisions had been withdrawn to recruit at Odessa, after sharing
 the defence of the Rumanian southern front. To these men in the summer of 1916 Serbia had sent a certain number
 of higher officers, but, for equipment and medical help, they were
 dependent upon what the Russians could spare from their own almost
 unlimited needs. Inglis and her unit came to the
 help of the Jugoslavs, shared their privations and misfortunes, and
 spared no effort in their cause. History will record the name of Elsie Inglis, like that of Lady
 Paget, as pre-eminent among that band of women who have redeemed for
 all time the honour of Britain in the Balkans. Among the Serbs it is
 already assuming an almost legendary quality. To us it will serve to
 remind us that Florence Nightingale will never be without successors
 among us. And in particular, every true Scotsman will cherish her
 memory, every believer in the cause for which she gave her life will
 gain fresh courage from her example. R. W. SETON-WATSON. CHAPTER IX

SERBIA

    Send thine hand from above; rid me, and deliver me out of great
    waters, from the hand of strange children.

    And pray ye that your flight be not in the winter. For in those
    days shall be affliction, such as was not from the beginning of the
    creation which God created unto this time, neither shall be.

    On either side of the river, was there the tree of life: And the
    leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations.


Dr. Inglis remained at home directing the many operations necessary
to ensure the proper equipment of the units, and the difficult task of
getting them conveyed overseas. From the beginning, till her return
with her unit serving with the Serbian army in Russia, she had the
sustaining co-operation both of the Admiralty and the Foreign Office. In the many complications surrounding the history of the hospitals
with the Allied armies, the Scottish women owed very much to both
Secretaries of State for Foreign Affairs, and very particularly to Lord
Robert Cecil in his department of the Foreign Office. It was not easy to get the scheme of hospitals staffed entirely by
women, serving abroad with armies fighting the common and unscrupulous
foe, accepted by those in authority. The Foreign Office was responsible
for the safety of these British outpost hospitals, and they knew well
the dangers and privations to which the devoted pioneer band of women
would be exposed. Inglis, which
she accepted, and abided by as long as her work was not hindered. No
care or diplomatic work was spared, and if at the end of their service
in Russia the safety of the unit was a matter of grave anxiety to
the Foreign Office, it had never cause to be ashamed of the way this
countrys honour and good faith was upheld by the hospitals under the
British flag, amid the chaotic sufferings of the Russian people. Eleanor Soltau, who was in charge of the
First Serbian Unit, became ill with diphtheria in the midst of the
typhus epidemic which was devastating the Serbian people. The Serbian
Minister writes of that time:--

 They were the first to go to the help of Serbia when the Austrians,
 after they were defeated, besides 60,000 prisoners, also left behind
 them epidemics in all the districts which they had invaded. The
 Scottish women turned up their sleeves, so to speak, at the railways
 station itself, and went straight to typhus and typhoid-stricken
 patients, who were pitifully dying in the crowded hospitals.

Colonel Hunter, A.M.S., wrote after her death: It was my privilege
and happiness to see much of her work in Serbia when I was officer in
charge of the corps of R.A.M.C. to deal
with the raging epidemic of typhus and famine fevers then devastating
the land. I have never met with any one who gave me so deep an
impression of singlemindedness, gentleheartedness, clear and purposeful
vision, wise judgment, and absolutely fearless disposition.... No more
lovable personality than hers, or more devoted and courageous body of
women, ever set out to help effectively a people in dire distress than
the S.W.H., which she organised and sent out, and afterwards took
personal charge of in Serbia in 1915. Amidst the most trying conditions
she, or they, never faltered in courage or endurance. Under her wise
and gentle leadership difficulties seemed only to stir to further
endeavour, more extended work, and greater endurance of hardship. Captain Ralph Glyn writes from France:--

 I see you went to the funeral of that wonderful person, Dr. I shall never forget arriving where that S.W. unit was in the
 midst of the typhus in Serbia, and finding her and all her people so
 clean and obviously ready for anything.

The Serbian nation lost no time in commemorating her services to them. At Mladenovatz they built a beautiful fountain close to the camp
hospital. On 7th October 1915 it was formally opened with a religious
service according to the rites of the Greek Church. Inglis turned
on the water, which was to flow through the coming years in grateful
memory of the good work done by the Scottish Womens Hospitals. ELSIE INGLIS

 (Obiit Nov. At Mladenovatz still the fountain sings
      Raised by the Serbs to you their angel friend,
      Who fought the hunger-typhus to its end;
    A nobler fountain from your memory springs,
    A fountain-head where Faith renews its wings
      --Faith in the powers of womanhood to bend
      Wars curse to blessing, and to make amend
    By Love, for Hates unutterable things. Wherefore, when cannon-voices cease to roar,
      A louder voice shall echo in our ears
        --Voice of three peoples joined in one accord,
    Telling that, gentle to your brave hearts core,
      You faced unwavering all that woman fears,
        And clear of vision followed Christ the Lord. [NOTE.--Two years ago the Serbians dedicated a simple fountain in
 Mladenovatz to the grateful memory of one they spoke of as the
 angel of their people. The Rumanian and Russian refugees in the
 Dobrudja will never forget her.] _The Englishwoman_, April and June 1916, has two articles written by
Dr. Inglis, under the title The Tragedy of Serbia. The literary power
of her narrative makes one regret that she did not live to give a
consecutive account of all she passed through in the countries in which
she suffered with the peoples:--

 When we reached Serbia in May 1915, she was lying in sunshine. Two
 storms had raged over her during the preceding months--the Austrian
 invasion and the terrific typhus epidemic. In our safe little island
 we can hardly realise what either meant. At the end of 1914, the
 Austrian Empire hurled its punitive expedition across the Danube--a
 punitive expedition that ended in the condign punishment of the
 invader. They left behind them a worse foe than themselves, and the
 typhus, which began in the hospitals they left so scandalously filthy
 and overcrowded, swept over the land.

Dr. Inglis describes the long peaceful summer, with its hopes of
an advance to their aid on the part of the Allies. The Serbs were
conscious the Great Powers owed them much, for how often we heard the
words, We are the only one, as yet, who has beaten our enemy.

Not till September did any real sense of danger trouble them. Then the
clouds rolled up black and threatening on the horizon--Bulgaria arming,
and a hundred thousand Germans massing on the northern frontier. They
began to draw off the main part of their army from the Danube towards
the east, to meet their old enemies. The Powers refused to let them
attack, and they waited till the Bulgarian mobilisation was complete. The Allies discounted the attack from the north; aeroplanes had been
out, and there are no Germans there. There are no signs whatever of
any military movements, so said the wiseacres. The only troops there
are untrained Austrian levies, which the Serbs ought to be able to deal
with themselves, if they are up to their form last year. The 100,000 Germans appeared on the northern
frontier. The Bulgars invaded from the east, the Greeks did not come
in, and the Austrians poured in from the west. The Serbian army
shortened the enormous line they had to defend, but they could not
stand against the long-distance German guns, and so began the retreat. What is coming to Serbia? said a Serb to me, we cannot think.
And then, hopefully, But God is great and powerful, and our Allies
are great and powerful too. Strong men could hardly speak of the
disaster without breaking down. When
are your men coming up? They must come soon. We must give our people
two months, the experts among us answered, to bring up the heavy
artillery. We thought the Serbs would be able to hold the West Morava
Valley. It is too hilly for the German artillery to be of any use,
they said.

Dr. Inglis goes on to relate how all the calculations were wrong, how
the Austrian force came down that very valley. The Serbs were caught
in a trap, and that 160,000 of their gallant little army escaped was
a wonderful feat. That they are already keen to take the field again
is but one more proof of the extraordinary recuperative power of the
nation.

Dr. Elsie gives an account of the typhus epidemic. Soltau, in 1914, was able at Kragujevatz to do excellent
work for the Serbian army after its victories, and it was only
evacuated owing to the retreat in October 1915. The unit had only
been a fortnight out when the committee got from it a telegram, dire
necessity for more doctors and nurses. The word _dire_ was used,
hoping it would pass unnoticed by the censor, for the authorities did
not wish the state of Serbia from typhus to be generally known. We
shall never know what the death-rate was during the epidemic; but of
the 425 Serbian doctors, 125 died of the disease, and two-thirds of the
remainder had it. The Scottish Committee hastened out supplies and staff. For three months the epidemic raged, and all women may ever be proud
 of the way those women worked. It was like a long-drawn-out battle,
 and not one of them played the coward. Not one of them asked to come
 away. There were three deaths and nine cases of illness among the
 unit; and may we not truly claim that those three women who died gave
 their lives for the great cause for which our country stands to-day as
 much as any man in the trenches.

Dr. Inglis speaks of the full share of work taken by other British
units--Lady Pagets Hospital at Skopio, magnificently organised; The
Red Cross under Dr. Banks took more than its share of the burden; and
how Dr. Ryan of the American hospital asserted that Serbia would have
been wiped out but for the work of the Foreign Missions. Miss Holme tells of some of her experiences with her leader:--

      KRAGUJEVATZ. Elsie Inglis took me out shopping with her, and we
 wanted a great many things for our hospital in the way of drugs, etc.,
 and we also wanted more than anything else some medical scales for
 weighing drugs. Inglis saw hanging up
 in it three pairs of these scales. So she asked the man, in her most
 persuasive manner, if he would sell her a pair of these scales for our
 hospital use. He explained at length that he used all the scales, and
 was sorry that he could not possibly sell them. Inglis bought
 some more things--in fact, we stayed in the shop for about an hour
 buying things to the amount of 10, and between each of the different
 articles purchased, she would again revert to the scales and say,
 You know it is for _your_ men that we want them, until at last the
 man--exhausted by his refusals--took down the scales and presented
 them to her. When she asked How much are they? he made a bow, and
 said it would be a pleasure to give them to her. When we were taken prisoners, and had been so for some time, and
 before we were liberated, the German Command came bringing a paper
 which they commanded Dr. The purport of the paper was
 a statement which declared that the British prisoners had been well
 treated in the hands of the Germans, and was already signed by two men
 who were heads of other British units. Inglis said, Why should
 I sign this paper? I do not know if all the prisoners are being well
 treated by you, therefore I decline to sign it. To which the German
 authorities replied, You must sign it. Dr. Inglis then said, Well,
 make me, and that was the end of that incident--she never did sign it. So convinced were some of the people belonging to the Scottish
 Womens unit that the British forces were coming to the aid of their
 Serbian ally, that long after they were taken prisoners they thought,
 each time they heard a gun from a different quarter, that their
 liberators were close at hand. So much so indeed, that three of the
 members of the unit begged that in the event of the unit being sent
 home they might be allowed to stay behind in Serbia with the Serbs,
 to help the Serbian Red Cross. Inglis _unofficially_ consented to
 this, and with the help of the Serbian Red Cross these three people in
 question adjourned to a village hard by which was about a mile from
 the hospital, three days before the unit had orders to move. Inglis and three other people of the unit knew where these
 three members were living. However, the date of the departure was
 changed, and the unit was told they were to wait another twenty days. This made it impossible for these three people to appear again with
 the unit. They continued to live at the little house which sheltered
 them. Suddenly one afternoon one of the members of the unit went to
 ask at the German Command if there were any letters for the unit. At
 this interview, which took place about three oclock in the afternoon,
 the person was informed that the whole unit was to leave that night
 at 7.30. Inglis sent the person who received this command to tell
 the three people in the cottage to get ready, and that they must go,
 she thought. But the messenger only said, We have had orders that the
 unit is to go at 7.30 to-night, but did not say that Dr. Inglis had
 sent an order for the three people to get ready, so they did nothing
 but simply went to bed at ten oclock, thinking the unit had already
 started. It was a wintry night, snowing heavily, and not a night that
 one would have sent out a dog! At about half-past ten a knock came to the window, and Dr. Inglis
 voice was heard saying, You have to come at once to the train. I
 am here with an armed guard! (All the rest of the unit had been at
 the station for some hours, but the train was not allowed to start
 until every one was there.) It was
 difficult to get her to enter the house, and naturally she seemed
 rather ruffled, having had to come more than a mile in the deep snow,
 as she was the only person who knew anything about us. One of the
 party said, Are you really cross, or are you pretending because the
 armed guard understands English? She gave her queer little smile, and
 said, No, I am not pretending. The whole party tramped through the
 snow to the station, and on the way she told them she was afraid that
 she had smashed somebodys window, having knocked at another cottage
 before she found ours in the dark, thinking it was the one we lived
 in, for which she was very much chaffed by her companions, who knew
 well her views on the question of militant tactics! The first stages of this journey were made in horse-boxes with no
 accommodation whatsoever. Occasionally the train drew up in the middle
 of the country, and anybody who wished to get out had simply to ask
 the sentry who guarded the door, to allow them to get out for a moment. The next night was spent lying on the floor of the station at
 Belgrade, the eight sentries and all their charges all lying on the
 floor together; the only person who seemed to be awake was the officer
 who guarded the door himself all night. In the morning one was not
 allowed to go even to wash ones hands without a sentry to come and
 stand at the door. The next two days were spent in an ordinary train
 rather too well heated with four a side in second-class compartments. At Vienna all the British units who were being sent away were formed
 into a group on the station at 6 A.M., where they awaited the arrival
 of the American Consul, guarded all the time by their sentries, who
 gave his parole that if the people were allowed to go out of the
 station they would return at eight oclock, the time they had to leave
 that town. Inglis with a party adjourned to a
 hotel where baths, etc., were provided. Other members were allowed to
 do what they liked. The unit was detained for eight days at Bludenz, close to the
 frontier, for Switzerland. On their arrival at Zrich they were met
 by the British Consul-General, Vice-Consul, and many members of the
 British Colony, who gave Dr. Inglis and her unit a very warm-hearted
 welcome, bringing quantities of flowers, and doing all they could to
 show them kindness and pleasure at their safe arrival. It is difficult for people who have never been prisoners to know what
 the first days freedom means. Everybody had a different expression,
 and seemed to have a different outlook on life. But already we could
 see our leader was engrossed with plans and busy with schemes for the
 future work of the unit. The next day the Consul-General made a speech in which he told the
 unit all that had passed during the last four months, of which they
 knew nothing.

_To her Sister._

      BRINDISI, _en route_ for SERBIA,
      _April 28, 1915_. The boat ought to have left last night, but it did not even come in
 till this morning. However, we have only lost twenty-four hours. It has been a most luxurious journey, except the bit from Naples
 here, and that was rather awful, with spitting men and shut windows,
 in first-class carriages, remember. When we got here we immediately
 ordered baths, but the boiler was broken. So, I said, Well, then,
 we must go somewhere else--with the result that we were promised
 baths in our rooms at once. That was a nice bath, and then I curled
 up on the sofa and went to sleep. Our windows look right on to the
 docks, and the blue Mediterranean beyond. It is so queer to see the
 red, white, and green flags, and to think they mean Italy, and not the
 N.U.W.S.S.! I went out before dinner last night, and strolled through the quaint
 streets. The whole population was out, and most whole-hearted and
 openly interested in my uniform. This is a most delightful window, with all the ships and the colours. There are three men-of-war in, and half a dozen of the quaintest
 little boats, which a soldier told me were scouts. I wished I had
 asked a sailor, for I had never heard of scouts. The soldier I asked
 is one of the bersaglieri with cocks feathers, a huge mass of them,
 in his hat. They all say Italy is certainly coming into the war. One
 man on the train to Rome was coming from Cardiff to sell coal to the
 Italian Government. He told us weird stories about German tricks to
 get our coal through Spain and other countries. It was a pleasure seeing Royaumont. It is a _huge_ success, and I do
 think Dr. The wards and the theatre,
 and the X-Ray department, and the rooms for mending and cleaning the
 mens clothes were all perfect.

_To Mrs. Simson._

      S.W.H., KRAGUJEVATZ,
      _May 30/15_. Well, this is a perfectly lovely place, and the Serbians are
 delightful. I am staying with a charming woman, Madame Milanovitz. She
 is a Vice-President of the Serbian Womens League, formed to help the
 country in time of war. I think she wanted to help us because of all
 the hospital has done here. Any how, _I_ score--I have a beautiful
 room and everything. She gives me an early cup of coffee, and for the
 rest I live with the unit. Neither she nor I can speak six words of
 one anothers languages, but her husband can talk a little French. Now, she has asked the little Serbian lady who teaches the unit
 Serbian, to live with her to interpret. We have had a busy time since we arrived. The unit is nursing 550
 beds, in three hospitals, having been sent out to nurse 300 beds. There is first the surgical hospital, called Reserve No. It was a
 school, and is in two blocks with a long courtyard between. I think
 we have got it really quite well equipped, with a fine X-Ray room. The theatre, and the room opposite where the dressings are done, both
 very well arranged, and a great credit to Sister Bozket. The one thing
 that troubled me was the floor--old wood and holes in it, impossible
 to sterilise--but yesterday, Major Protitch, our Director, said he was
 going to get cement laid down in it and the theatre. Chesney, This is the best surgical hospital
 in Serbia. You must not believe that _quite_, for they are very good
 at saying pleasant things here! There are two other hospitals, the typhus one, No. 6 Reserve, and
 one for relapsing fever and general diseases, No. We have put most of our strength in No. 6, and it is in
 good working order, but No. 7 has had only one doctor, and two day
 Sisters and one night, for over 200 beds. Still it is wonderful what
 those three women have done. We have Austrian prisoners as orderlies
 everywhere, in the hospitals and in the houses. The conglomeration of
 languages is too funny for words--Serbian, German, French, English. Sometimes, you have to get an orderly to translate Serbian into
 German, and another to translate the German into French before you can
 get at what is wanted. Two words we have all learnt, _dotra_, which
 means good, and which these grateful people use at once if they
 feel a little better, or are pleased about anything, and the other is
 _boli_, pain--poor men! So much for what we _have_ been doing; but the day before
 yesterday we got our orders for a new bit of work. They are forming a
 disinfecting centre at Mladanovatz, and Colonel Grustitch, who is the
 head of the Medical Service here, wants us to go up there at once,
 with our whole fever staff, under canvas. They are giving us the tents
 till ours come out. Typhus is decreasing so much, that No. 6 is to be
 turned into a surgical hospital, and there will be only one infectious
 diseases hospital here. I am so pleased at being asked to do this,
 for it is part of a big and well thought out scheme. Alice Hutchison goes to Posheravatz also
 for infectious diseases. I hope she is at Salonika to-day. We really began to think the Governor was going to
 keep her altogether! Her equipment has all come, and yesterday I sent
 Mrs. Smith up to Posheravatz to choose the site and
 pitch the tent. They gave me an awfully exciting bit of news in Colonel G.s office
 yesterday, and that was that five motor cars were in Serbia, north of
 Mladanovatz, for _me_. Of course, I had wired for six, but you have
 been prompt about them. How they got into the north of Serbia I cannot
 imagine, unless they were dropped out of aeroplanes. Really, it is wonderful the work this unit has done in the most awful
 stress all through March and April. We ought to be awfully proud of
 them. Soltau a decoration, and Patsy
 Hunter had two medals. _To her Niece, Amy MLaren._

      VALJEVO, _August 16, 1915_. DARLING AMY,--I wonder if you could find this place on the map. I have spelt it properly, but if you want to say it you must say
 _Valuvo_. One of the hospitals mother has been collecting so much
 money for is here. It is in tents,
 on a bit of sloping ground looking south. There are big tents for
 the patients, and little tents for the staff. I pull my bed out
 of the tent every night, and sleep outside under the stars. Such
 lovely starlight nights we have here. Alice Hutchison is head of
 this unit, and I am here on a visit to her. My own hospital is in
 a town--Kragujevatz. Now, I wonder if you can find that place? The
 hospital there is in a girls school. Now--I wonder what will happen
 to the lessons of all those little girls as long as the war lasts? Serbia has been at war for three years, four wars in three years, and
 the women of the country have kept the agriculture of the country
 going all that time. A Serbian officer told me the other day that
 the country is so grateful to them, that they are going to strike a
 special medal for the women to show their thanks, when this war is
 over. This is such a beautiful country, and such nice people. Some day
 when the war is over, well come here, and have a holiday. How are you
 getting on, my precious? God bless you,
 dear little girlie.--Ever your loving Aunt

      ELSIE.

As the fever died out, a worse enemy came in. Serbia was overrun by
the Austro-German forces, and she, with others of her units, was taken
prisoner, as they had decided it was their duty to remain at their work
among the sick and wounded. Again the Serbian Minister is quoted:--

 When the typhus calamity was overcome, the Scottish women reorganised
 themselves as tent hospitals and offered to go as near as possible
 to the army at the front. Their camp in the town of Valjevo--which
 suffered most of all from the Austrian invasion--might have stood
 in the middle of England. In Lazarevatz, shortly before the new
 Austro-German offensive, they formed a surgical hospital almost out
 of nothing, in the devastated shops and the village inns, and they
 accomplished the nursing of hundreds of wounded who poured in from
 the battle-field. When it became obvious that the Serbian army could
 not resist the combined Austrians, Germans, Magyars, and Bulgarians,
 who were about four times their numbers, the main care of the Serbian
 military authorities was what to do with the hospitals full of
 wounded, and whom to leave with the wounded soldiers, who refused to
 be left to fall into the hands of the cruel enemy. Then the Scottish
 women declared that they were not going to leave their patients, and
 that they would stay with them, whatever the conditions, and whatever
 might be expected from the enemy. They remained with the Serbian
 wounded as long as they could be of use to them. Simson._

      KRUSHIEEVATZ, _Nov. We are in the very centre of the storm, and it just feels exactly
 like having the rain pouring down, and the wind beating in gusts, and
 not being able to see for the water in ones eyes, and just holding on
 and saying, It cannot last, it is so bad. These poor little people,
 you cannot imagine anything more miserable than they are. Remember,
 they have been fighting for years for their independence, and now it
 all seems to end. Germans, Austrians,
 Bulgars, and all that is left is this western Morava Valley, and
 the country a little south of it. And their big Allies--from here
 it looks as if they are never going to move. I went into Craijuvo
 yesterday, in the car, to see about Dr. The road
 was crowded with refugees pouring away, all their goods piled on
 their rickety ox-wagons, little children on the top, and then bands
 of soldiers, stragglers from the army. These men were forming up
 again, as we passed back later on. We decided we must stand by our hospitals; it was too awful
 leaving badly wounded men with no proper care. Sir Ralph eventually
 agreed, and we gave everybody in the units the choice of going or
 staying. We have about 115 people in the Scottish unit, and twenty
 have gone. Smith brings up the rear-guard to-day, with one or two
 laggards and a wounded English soldier we have had charge of. MacGregor has trekked for Novi Bazaar. It is
 the starting-place for Montenegro. We all managed wonderfully in our
 first evacuations, and saved practically everything, but now it is
 hopeless. The bridges are down, and the trucks standing anyhow on
 sidings, and, worst of all, the people have begun looting. Therell be famine, as well as cold, in this corner of the
 world soon, and then the distant prospect of 150,000 British troops at
 Salonika wont help much. The beloved British troops,--the thought of them always cheers. But
 not the thought of the idiots at the top who had not enough gumption
 to _know_ this must happen. Anybody, even us women, could have told
 them that the Germans must try and break through to the help of the
 Turks. We have got a nice building here for a hospital, and Dr. Holloway
 is helping in the military hospital. I believe there are about 1000
 wounded in the place. I cant write a very interesting letter, Amy
 dear, because at the bottom of my heart I dont believe it will ever
 reach you. I dont see them managing the Montenegrin passes at this
 time of year! There is a persistent rumour that the French have
 retaken Skopiro, and if that is true perhaps the Salonika route will
 be open soon. Some day, Ill tell you all the exciting things that have been
 happening, and all the funny things too! For there have been funny
 things, in the middle of all the sadness. The guns are booming away,
 and the country looking so lovely in the sunlight. I wonder if Serbia
 is a particularly beautiful country, or whether it looks so lovely
 because of the tragedy of this war, just as bed seems particularly
 delightful when the night bell goes!

      SERBIAN MILITARY HOSPITAL,
      KRUSHIEEVATZ, _Nov. We have been here about a month. It was dreadfully sad work leaving
 our beautiful little hospital at Krushieevatz. Here, we are working in
 the Serbian military hospital, and living in it also. You can imagine
 that we have plenty to do, when you hear we have 900 wounded. The
 prisoners are brought in every day, sometimes thousands, and go on to
 the north, leaving the sick. The Director has put the sanitation and
 the laundry into our hands also. We have had a hard frost for four days now, and snowstorms. My
 warm things did not arrive--I suppose they are safe at Salonika. Fortunately last years uniform was still in existence, and I wear
 three pairs of stockings, with my high boots. We have all cut our
 skirts short, for Serbian mud is awful. It is a lovely land, and the
 views round here are very cheering. One sunset I shall never forget--a
 glorious sky, and the hills deep blue against it. In the foreground
 the camp fires, and the prisoners round them in the fading light.

With the invasion came the question of evacuation. At one time it was
possible the whole of the British unit might escape _via_ Montenegro. Sir Ralph Paget, realising that the equipment could not be saved,
allowed any of the hospital unit who wished to remain with their
wounded. Two parties went with the retreating Serbs, and their story
and the extraordinary hardships they endured has been told elsewhere. Those left at Krushieevatz were in Dr. Inglis opinion the fortunate
units. For three months they tended the Serbian wounded under foreign
occupation. Inglis kept to their work, and when
necessary confronted the Austro-German officers with all the audacity
of their leader and the Scottish thistle combined. When we went up
there were 900 patients. During the greatest part of the pressure the
number rose to 1200. Patients were placed in the corridors--at first
one man to one bed, but later two beds together, and three men in them. Then there were no more bedsteads, and mattresses were placed on the
floor. The magazine in full blast was a
sight, once seen, never to be forgotten. There were three tiers,
the slightly wounded men in the highest tier. Inglis says the time to see the place at its
best or its worst was in the gloaming, when two or three feeble oil
lamps illuminated the gloom, and the tin bowls clattered and rattled as
the evening ration of beans was given out, and the men swarmed up and
down the poles of their shelves chattering as Serbs will chatter. The
Sisters called the place the Zoo.

The dread of the renewal of the typhus scourge, amid such conditions
of overcrowding, underfeeding, fatigue and depression, was great. Inglis details the appalling tasks the unit undertook in sanitation. There was no expert amongst them:--

 When we arrived, the hospital compound was a truly terrible
 place--the sights and smells beyond description. We dug the rubbish
 into the ground, emptied the overflowing cesspool, built incinerators,
 and cleaned, and cleaned, and cleaned. That is an Englishmans job all
 over the world. Our three untrained English girl orderlies took to it
 like ducks to water. It was not the pleasantest or easiest work in the
 world; but they did it, and did it magnificently. Laundry and bathing arrangements were installed and kept going. We
 had not a single case of typhus; we had a greater achievement than
 its prevention. Late of an evening, when men among the prisoners were
 put into the wards, straight from the march, unwashed and crawling
 with lice, there was great indignation among the patients already in. Doktoritza, they said, if you put these dirty men in among us we
 shall all get typhus. Our hearts rejoiced. If we have done nothing
 else, we thought, we have driven that fact home to the Serbian mind
 that dirt and typhus go together.

Dr. Inglis describes the misery of the Serbian prisoners:--

 They had seen men go out to battle, conscious of the good work they
 had done for the Allies in driving back the Austrians in their first
 punitive expedition. We are the only ones who, so far, have beaten
 our enemy. They came back to us broken and dispirited. They were
 turned into the hospital grounds, with a scanty ration of beans, with
 a little meat and half a loaf of bread for twenty-four hours. Their
 camp fires flickered fitfully through the long bitter cold nights. Every scrap of wood was torn up, the foot bridges over the drains, and
 the trees hacked down for firewood. We added to the rations of our
 sanitary workers, we gave away all the bread we could, but we could
 not feed that enclosure of hungry men. We used to hear them coughing
 and moaning all night.

Dr. Inglis details the starving condition of the whole country, the
weakness of the famine-stricken men who worked for them, the starved
yoke oxen, and all the manifold miseries of a country overrun by the
enemy. There was, she says, a curious exhilaration in working for those
 grateful patient men, and in helping the director, Major Nicolitch, so
 loyal to his country and so conscientious in his work, to bring order
 out of chaos, and yet the unhappiness in the Serbian houses, and the
 physical wretchedness of those cold hungry prisoners lay always like
 a dead weight on our spirit. Never shall we forget the beauty of the
 sunrises, or the glory of the sunsets, with clear, cold sunlit days
 between, and the wonderful starlit nights. But we shall never forget
 the Zoo either, or the groans outside the windows when we hid our
 heads under the blankets to shut out the sound. The unit got no news,
 and they made it a point of honour to believe nothing said in the
 German telegrams. We could not believe Serbia had been sacrificed for
 nothing. We were convinced it was some deep laid scheme for weakening
 other fronts, and so it was natural to believe rumours, such as that
 the English had taken Belgium, and the French were in Metz. The end of the five months of service in captivity, and to captive
 Serbs ended. On the 11th February 1916, they were sent north under an
 Austrian guard with fixed bayonets, thus to Vienna, and so by slow
 stages they came to Zrich. It was a great thing to be once more home and to realise how strong
 and straight and fearless a people inhabit these islands: to realise
 not so much that they mean to win the war, but rather that they
 consider any other issue impossible.

So Dr. Inglis came back to plan new campaigns for the help of the
Serbian people, who lay night and day upon her heart. She knew she had
the backing of the Suffrage societies, and she intended to get the
ear of the English public for the cause of the Allies in the Balkans. We, who had sent her out, found her changed in many ways. Physically
she had altered much, and if we could ever have thought of the body
in the presence of that dauntless spirit, we might have seen that the
Angel of Shadows was not far away. The privations and sufferings she
described so well when she had to speak of her beloved Serbs had been
fully shared by the unit. Their comfort was always her thought; she
never would have anything that could not be shared and shared alike,
but there was little but hardship to share, and one and all scorned to
speak of privations which were a light affliction compared to those
of a whole nation groaning and waiting to be redeemed from its great
tribulation. There was a look in her face of one whose spirit had been pierced by
the sword. The brightness of her eyes was dimmed, for she had seen the
days when His judgments were abroad upon the earth:--

    Mine eyes have seen the glory of the coming of the Lord;
    He is trampling out the vintage where the grapes of wrath are
        stored;
    He has loosed the fatal lightning of His terrible swift sword:
    I have seen Him in the watch-fires of a hundred circling camps;
    They have builded Him an altar in the evening dews and damps;
    I have read His righteous sentence by the dim and flaring lamps.

She could never forget the tragedy of Serbia, and she came home, not
to rest, but vowed to yet greater endeavours for their welfare. The
attitude of the Allies she did not pretend to understand. She had
something of the spirit of Oliver Cromwell, when he threatened to
send his fleet across the Alps to help the Waldensians. In her public
speeches, when she set forth what in her outlook could have been done,
no censor cut out the sentences which were touched by the live coals
from off her altar of service. Elsie never recognised the word
impossible for herself, and for her work that was well. As to her
political and military outlook, the story of the nations will find it a
place in the history of the war. For a few months she worked from the bases of her two loyal
Committees in London and Edinburgh. She spoke at many a public meeting,
and filled many a drawing-room. The Church of Scotland knew her
presence in London. One of our most treasured memories will be that
keen, clever face of hers in St. Columbas of a Sunday--with the far,
wistful melancholy in it, added to its firm determination. So writes
the minister. We knew what lay behind the wistful brave eyes, a yet
more complete dedication to the service of her Serbian brethren. CHAPTER X

RUSSIA

1917

    Even so in our mortal journey,
      The bitter north winds blow,
    And thus upon lifes red river,
      Our hearts as oarsmen row. And when the Angel of Shadow
      Rests his feet on wave and shore,
    And our eyes grow dim with watching,
      And our hearts faint at the oar,

    Happy is he who heareth
      The signal of his release
    In the bells of the holy city
      The chimes of eternal peace.


Dr. Inglis return to England was the signal for renewed efforts
on the part of the Committees managing the S.W.H. This memoir has
necessarily to follow the personality of the leader, but it must never
be forgotten that her strength and all her sinews of war lay in the
work of those who carried on at home, week by week. Strong committees
of women, ably organised and thoroughly staffed, took over the burden
of finance--a matter Dr. Inglis once amusingly said, did not interest
her. They found and selected the _personnel_ on which success so much
depended, they contracted for and supervised the sending out of immense
consignments of equipment and motor transport. They dealt with the
Government department, and in loyal devotion smoothed every possible
obstacle out of the path of those flying squadrons, the units of the
S.W.H. It was inevitable the quick brain and tenacious energy of Dr. Inglis,
far away from the base of her operations, should at times have found
it hard to understand why the wheels occasionally seemed to drag, and
the new effort she desired to make did not move at the pace which to
her eager spirit seemed possible. Two enterprises filled her mind on
her return in 1916. One, by the help of the London Committee, she put
through. This was the celebration of Kossovo Day in Great Britain. The flag-day of the Serbian Patriot King was under her chairmanship
prepared for in six weeks. Hundreds of lectures on the history of
Serbia were arranged for and delivered throughout the country, and no
one failed to do her work, however remote they might think the prospect
of making the British people interested in a country and patriot so far
from the ken of their island isolation. Kossovo Day was a success, and through the rush of the work Dr. Inglis
was planning the last and most arduous of all the undertakings of the
S.W.H., that of the unit which was to serve with the Serbian Volunteers
on the Rumanian Russian front. Inglis knew from private sources the
lack of hospital arrangements in Mesopotamia, and she, with the backing
of the Committees, had approached the authorities for leave to take a
fully equipped unit to Basra. When the story of the Scottish Womens
Hospital is written, the correspondence between the War Office, the
Foreign Office, and S.W.H. will throw a tragic light on this lamentable
episode, and, read with the report of the Committees, it will prove how
quick and foreseeing of trouble was her outlook. Inglis
brought her units back from Serbia, she again urged the War Office to
send her out. Of her treatment by the War Office, Mrs. Fawcett writes:
She was not only refused, but refused with contumely and insult.

True to her instinct never to pause over a set-back, she lost no time
in pressing on her last enterprise for the Serbians. M. Curcin, in _The
Englishwoman_, says:--

 She was already acquainted with one side of the Serbian
 problem--Serbia; she was told that in Russia there was the best
 opportunity to learn about the second half--the Serbs of Austria, the
 Jugoslavs. Inglis succeeded in raising a hospital
 unit and transport section staffed by eighty women heroes of the
 Scottish Womens Hospitals to start with her on a most adventurous
 undertaking, _via_ Archangel, through Russia to Odessa and the
 Dobrudja. Inglis succeeded also--most difficult of all--in
 getting permission from the British authorities for the journey. Eye-witnesses--officers and soldiers--tell everybody to-day how those
 women descended, practically straight from the railway carriages,
 after forty days travelling, beside the stretchers with wounded,
 and helped to dress the wounds of those who had had to defend the
 centre and also a wing of the retreating army. For fifteen months she
 remained with those men, whose _rle_ is not yet fully realised, but
 is certain to become one of the most wonderful and characteristic
 facts of the conflagration of nations.

The Edinburgh Committee had already so many undertakings on behalf of
the S.W.H. that they gladly allowed the Committee formed by the London
Branch of the N.U.W.S.S. to undertake the whole work of organising this
last adventure for the Serbian Army. Inglis and her unit sailed the wintry main, and to them she sent
the voluminous and brilliant reports of her work. When the Russian
revolution imperilled the safety of the Serbian Army on the Rumanian
front, she sent home members of her unit, charged with important
verbal messages to her Government. Through the last anxious month,
when communications were cut off, short messages, unmistakably her
own, came back to the London Committee, that they might order her to
return. She would come with the Serbian Army and not without them. We
at home had to rest on the assurances of the Foreign Office, always
alive to the care and encouragement of the S.W.H., that Dr. Inglis and
her unit were safe, and that their return would be expedited at the
safest hour. In those assurances we learnt to rest, and the British
Government did not fail that allied force--the Serbian Army and the
Scottish women serving them. The following letters were those written
to her family with notes from her graphic report to her Committees. The
clear style and beautiful handwriting never changed even in those last
days, when those who were with her knew that nothing but the spirit
kept the wasted body at its work. The Serbian Division is superb; we
are proud to be attached to it. These were the last words in her last
letter from Odessa in June 1917. That pride of service runs through
all the correspondence. The spirit she inspired is noteworthy in a
book which covers the greater part of these fifteen months, _With the
Scottish Nurses in Rumania_, by Yvonne Fitzroy. In a daily diary a
searchlight is allowed to fall on some of the experiences borne with
such high-hearted nonchalance by the leader and her gallant disciples. Haverfield, who saw her work, writes:

 It was perfectly incredible that one human being could do the work
 she accomplished. Her record piece of work perhaps was at Galatz,
 Rumania, at the end of the retreat. There were masses and masses of
 wounded, and she and her doctors and nurses performed operations and
 dressings for fifty-eight hours out of sixty-three. Scott, of the
 armoured cars, noted the time, and when he told her how long she had
 been working, she simply said, Well, it was all due to Mrs. Milne,
 the cook, who kept us supplied with hot soup. She had been very
 tired for a long time; undoubtedly the lack of food, the necessity of
 sleeping on the floor, and nursing her patients all the time told on
 her health. In Russia she was getting gradually more tired until she
 became ill. When she was the least bit better she was up again, and
 all the time she attended to the business of the unit. Just before getting home she had a relapse, and the last two or
 three days on board ship, we know now, she was dying. She made all the
 arrangements for the unit which she brought with her, however, and
 interviewed every member of it. To Miss Onslow, her transport officer,
 she said, when she arrived at Newcastle, I shall be up in London in a
 few days time, and we will talk the matter of a new unit over. Miss
 Onslow turned away with tears in her eyes.

      H.M. TRANSPORT ----,
      _Sep. DEAREST AMY,--Here we are more than half way through our voyage. We
 got off eventually on Wednesday night, and lay all Thursday in the
 river. You never in your life saw such a filthy boat as this was when
 we came on board. The captain had been taken off an American liner the
 day before. The only officer who had been on this boat before was the
 engineer officer. The crew were drunk to a man,
 and, as the Transport officer said, The only way to get this ship
 right, is to get her _out_. So we got out. I must say we got into
 shape very quickly. We cleaned up, and now we are painting. They wont
 know her when she gets back. She is an Austrian Lloyd captured at the
 beginning of the war, and she has been trooping in the Mediterranean
 since. She was up at Glasgow for this new start, but she struck the
 Glasgow Fair, and could therefore get nothing done, so she was brought
 down to the port we started from--as she was. The captain seems to be an awfully good man. He is Scotch,
 and was on the Anchor Line to Bombay. She has all our equipment, fourteen of our cars. For passengers,
 there are ourselves, seventy-five people, and three Serbian officers,
 and the mother and sister of one of them, and thirty-two Serbian
 non-commissioned officers. On the saloon deck there are
 twenty-two very small, single cabins. And on this deck larger cabins
 with either three or four berths. I am on this deck in the most
 luxurious quarters. It is called _The Commanding Officers Cabin_
 (ahem). There is a huge cabin with one berth; off it on one side
 another cabin with a writing-table and sofa, and off it on the other
 side a bathroom and dressing-room! Of course, if we had had rough
 weather, and the ports had had to be closed, it would not have been so
 nice, especially as the glass in all the portholes is blackened, but
 we have had perfectly glorious weather. At night every porthole and
 window is closed to shut in the light, but the whole ship is very well
 ventilated. A good many of them sleep up in the boats, or in one of
 the lorries. We sighted one submarine, but it took no notice of us, so we took
 no notice of it. We had all our boats allotted to us the very first
 day. We divided the unit among them, putting one responsible person
 in charge of each, and had boat drill several times. Then one day the
 captain sounded the alarm for practice, and everybody was at their
 station in three minutes in greatcoat and life-belt. The amusing
 thing was that some of them thought it was a real alarm, and were
 most annoyed and disappointed to find there was not a submarine
 really there! The unit as a whole seems very nice and capable, though
 there are one or two queer characters! But most of them are healthy,
 wholesome bricks of girls. Of course
 a field hospital is quite a new bit of work. We reach our port of disembarkation this afternoon. The voyage
 has been a most pleasant one in every way. As soon as sea-sickness
 was over the unit developed a tremendous amount of energy, and we
 have had games on deck, and concerts, and sports, and a fancy dress
 competition! All this in addition to drill every morning, which was
 compulsory. We began the day at 8.30--breakfast, the cabins were tidied. 9.30--roll call and cabin inspection immediately after; then
 drill--ordinary drill, stretcher drill, and Swedish drill in sections. Lunch was at 12.30, and then there were lessons in Russian, Serbian,
 and French, to which they could go if they liked, and most of them
 took one, or even two, and lectures on motor construction, etc. Tea at
 4, and dinner 6.30. You would have thought there was not much time for
 anything else, but the superfluous energy of a British unit manages
 to put a good deal more in. (The head of a British unit in Serbia
 once said to me that the chief duty of the head of a British unit was
 to use up the superfluous energy of the unit in harmless ways. He
 said that the only time there was no superfluous energy was when the
 unit was overworking. That was the time I found that particular unit
 playing rounders!) I was standing next
 to a Serb officer during the obstacle race, and he suddenly turned to
 me and said, Cest tout--fait nouveau pour nous, Madame. I thought
 it must be, for at that moment they were getting under a sail which
 had been tied down to the deck--two of them hurled themselves on the
 sail and dived under it, you saw four legs kicking wildly, and then
 the sail heaved and fell, and two dishevelled creatures emerged at the
 other side, and tore at two life-belts which they went through, and so
 on. I should think it was indeed _tout--fait nouveau_. Some of the
 dresses at the fancy dress competition were most clever. There was
 Napoleon--the last phase, in the captains long coat and somebodys
 epaulettes, and one of our grey hats, side to the front, excellent;
 and Tweedledum and Tweedledee, in saucepans and life-belts. One of
 them got herself up as a greaser, and went down to the engine-room
 to get properly dirty, with such successful result that, when she was
 coming up to the saloon, with her little oiling can in her hand, one
 of the officers stopped her with, Now, where are you going to, my
 lad?

 We ended up with all the allied National Anthems, the Serbs leading
 their own. I do love to see them enjoying themselves, and to hear them
 chattering and laughing along the passages, for theyll have plenty
 of hard work later. We had service on Sunday, which I took, as
 the captain could not come down. Could you get us some copies of
 the Archbishop of Canterburys war prayers? The captain declares he was snap-shotted six times
 one morning. I dont know if the Russian Government will let us take
 all these cameras with us. We are flying the Union Jack for the first
 time to-day since we came out. It is good to know you are all thinking
 of us.--Ever your loving sister,

      ELSIE MAUD INGLIS.

      ON THE TRAIN TO MOSCOW,
      _Sep. DEAREST AMY,--Here we are well on our way to Moscow, having got
 through Archangel in 2 days--a feat, for we were told at home that it
 might be six weeks. They did not know that there is a party of our
 naval men there helping the Russians, and Archangel is magnificently
 organised now. When one realises that the population was 5000 before the war,
 and is now 20,000, it is quite clear there was bound to be some
 disorganisation at first. I never met a kinder set of people than are collected at Archangel
 just now. They simply did everything for us, and sent us off in a
 train with a berth for each person, and gave us a wonderful send off. The Russian Admiral gave us a letter which acts as a kind of magic
 ring whenever it is produced. The first time it was really quite
 startling. We were longing for Nyamdonia where we were to get dinner. We were told we should be there at four oclock, then at five, and
 at six oclock we pulled up at a place unknown, and rumours began
 to spread that our engine was off, and sure enough it was, and was
 shunting trucks. Miss Little, one of our Russian-speaking people,
 and I got out. We tried our united eloquence, she in fluent Russian,
 and I saying, _Shechaz_, which means immediately at intervals, and
 still they looked helpless and said, Two hours and a half. Then I
 produced my letter, and you never saw such a change. They said, Five
 minutes, and we were off in three. We tried it all along the line
 after that; my own belief is that we should still be at the unknown
 place, without that letter, shunting trucks. At one station, Miss
 Little heard the station-master saying, There is a great row going
 on here, and there will be trouble to-morrow if this train isnt got
 through. Eventually, we reached Nyamdonia at 11.30, and found a
 delightful Russian officer, and an excellent dinner paid for by the
 Russian Government, waiting for us. We all thought the food very good,
 and I thought the sauce of hunger helped. The next day, profiting
 over our Nyamdonia experience, I said meals were to be had at regular
 times from our stores in the train, and we should take the restaurants
 as we found them, with the result that we arrived at Vorega, where
 _djeuner_ had been ordered just as we finished a solid lunch of ham
 and eggs. I said they had better go out and have two more courses,
 which they did with great content, and found it quite as nice as the
 night before. This is a special train for us and the Serbian officers and
 non-coms. We broke a coupling after we left Nyamdonia, and they sent
 out another carriage from there, but it had not top berths, so they
 had another sleeper ready when we reached Vologda. They gave us
 another and stronger engine at Nyamdonia, because we asked for it, and
 have repaired cisterns, and given us chickens and eggs; and when we
 thank them, they say, It is for our friends. The crowd stand round
 three deep while we eat, and watch us all the time, quite silently in
 the stations. In Archangel one old man asked, Who, on Gods earth,
 are you?

 They gave us such a send-off from Archangel! Russian soldiers were
 drawn up between the ship and the train, and cheered us the whole way,
 with a regular British cheer; our own crew turned out with a drum
 and a fife and various other instruments, and marched about singing. Then they made speeches, and cheered everybody, and then suddenly the
 Russian soldiers seized the Serbian officers and tossed them up and
 down, up and down, till they were stopped by a whistle. But they had
 got into the mood by then, and they rushed at me. You can imagine, I
 fled, and seized hold of the British Consul. I did think the British
 Empire would stand by me, but he would do nothing but laugh. And I
 found myself up in the air above the crowd, up and down, quite safe,
 hands under one and round one. They were so happy that I waved my hand
 to them, and they shouted and cheered. The unit is only annoyed that
 they had not their cameras, and that anyhow it was dark. Then they
 tossed Captain Bevan, who is in command there, because he was English,
 and the Consul for the same reason, and the captain of the transport
 because he had brought us out. We sang all the national anthems, and
 then they danced for us. It was a weird sight in the moonlight. Some
 of the dances were like Indian ones, and some reminded me of our
 Highland flings. We went on till one in the morning--all the British
 colony, there. I confess, I was tired--though I did enjoy it. Captain
 Bevans good-bye was the nicest and so unexpected--simply God bless
 you. Mrs. Young, the Consuls wife, Mrs. Kerr, both Russians, simply
 gave up their whole time to us, took the girls about, and Mrs. Kerr
 had _the whole unit_ to tea. I had lunch one day at the British Mess,
 and another day at the Russian Admirals. They all came out to dinner
 with us. Of course a new face means a lot in an out-of-the-way place, and
 seventy-five new faces was a God-send. Well, as I said before, they
 are the kindest set of people I ever came across. They brought us our
 bread, and changed our money, and arranged with the bank, and got us
 this train with berths, and thought of every single thing for us. NEARING ODESSA,
      _Sep. DARLING EVE,--We are nearing the second stage of our journey, and
 _they say_ we shall be in Odessa to-night. We have all come to the
 conclusion that a Russian minute is about ten times as long as ours. If we get in to-night we shall have taken nine days from Archangel;
 with all the lines blocked with military trains, that is not bad. All the same we have had some struggles, but it has been a very
 comfortable journey and very pleasant. The Russian officials all along
 the line have been most helpful and kind. A Serbian officer on board,
 or rather a Montenegrin, looked after us like a father. What we should have done without M. and Mme. Malinina at Moscow, I
 dont know. They gave the whole afternoon up to us: took us to the
 Kremlin--he, the whole unit on special tramcars, and she, three of
 us in her motor. She has a beautiful
 hospital, a clearing one at the station, and he is a member of the
 Duma, and Commandant of all the Red Cross work in Moscow. We only had
 a glimpse of the Kremlin, yet enough to make one want to see more. I
 carried away one beautiful picture to remember--the view of Moscow in
 the sunset light, simply gorgeous. The unit are very very well, and exceedingly cheerful. I am not
 sorry to have had these three weeks since we left to get the unit in
 hand. When M. Malinina said it was
 time to leave the Kremlin, and the order was given to Fall in, I was
 quite proud of them, they did it so quickly. It is wonderful even now
 what they manage to do. Miss H. says they are like eels in a basket. They were told not to eat fruit without peeling it, so one of them
 peeled an apple with her teeth. They were told not to drink unboiled
 water, so they handed their water-bottles out at dead of night to
 Russian soldiers, to whom they could not explain, to fill for them,
 as of course they understood they were not to fill them from water on
 the train. I must say they are an awfully nice lot on the whole. We
 certainly shall not fail for want of energy. The Russian crowds are
 tremendously interested in them.--Ever your loving aunt,

      ELSIE.

      RENI, _Sep. DEAREST AMY,--We have left Odessa and are really off to our
 Division. We were told this is the important point in the war
 just now--A Second Verdun. The great General Mackensen is in command
 against us. He was in command at Krushinjevatz when we were taken
 prisoners. Every one says how anxiously they are looking out for us,
 and, indeed, we shall have our work cut out for us. We are two little
 field hospitals for a whole Division. Think if that was the provision
 for our own men. We saw the
 2nd Division preparing in Odessa. Only from the point of view of the
 war, they ought to be looked after, but when one remembers that they
 are men, every one of them with somebody who cares for them, it is
 dreadful. I wish we were each six women instead of one. I have wired
 home for another Base Hospital to take the place of the British Red
 Cross units when they move on with the 2nd Division. The Russians are
 splendid in taking the Serbs into their Base Hospitals, but you can
 imagine what the pressure is from their own huge armies. We had such
 a reception at Odessa. All the Russian officials, at the station, and
 our Consul, and a line drawn up of twenty Serbian officers. They had
 a motor car and forty droskies and a squad of Serbian soldiers to
 carry up our personal luggage, and most delightful quarters for us on
 the outskirts of the town in a sanatorium. We were the guests of the
 city while we were there. We were told that the form of greeting
 while we were there was, Have you seen _them_? The two best things
 were the evening at the Serbian Mess, and the gala performance at the
 opera. The cheering of the Serbian mess when we went in was something
 to remember, but I can tell you I felt quite choking when the whole
 house last night turned round and cheered us after we tried to sing
 our National Anthem to them with the orchestra. DEAREST AMY,--Just a line to say I am all right. Four weeks to-morrow
 since we reached Medgidia, and began our hospital. We evacuated it in
 three weeks, and here we are all back on the frontier. Such a time it
 has been, Amy dear. You cannot imagine what war is just behind the
 lines, and in a retreat!--our second retreat, and almost to the same
 day. We evacuated Kragujevatz on the 25th of October last year. We
 evacuated Medgidia on the 22nd this year. On the 25th this year, we
 were working in a Russian dressing-station at Harshova, and were moved
 on in the evening. We arrived at Braila to find 11,000 wounded, and
 seven doctors--only one of them a surgeon. Am going back to Braila to do surgery. Have
 sent every trained person there.--Your loving sister,

      ELSIE. _P.S._--We have had lots of exciting things too, and amusing things,
 and _good_ things.

      ON THE DANUBE AT TULCEA,
      _Nov. DEAREST AMY,--I am writing this on the boat between Tulcea and
 Ismail, where I am going to see our second hospital and the transport. Admiral Vesolskin has given me a special boat, and we motored over
 from Braila. The tappen command had been expecting us all afternoon,
 and the boat was ready. They were very amused to find that the
 doctor they had been expecting was a _woman_! Our main hospital was at Medgidia, and our field hospital at
 Bulbulmic, only about seven miles from the front. They gave us a
 very nice building, a barrack, at Medgidia for the hospital, and the
 _personnel_ were in tents on the opposite hill. We arrived on the
 day of the offensive, and were ready for patients within forty-eight
 hours. We were there less than three weeks, and during that time we
 unpacked the equipment and repacked it. We made really a rather nice
 hospital at Medgidia, and the field hospital. We pitched and struck
 the camp--we were nursing and operating the whole time, and evacuating
 rapidly too, and our cars were on the road practically always. The first notice we got of the retreat was our field hospital being
 brought back five versts. Then we were told to
 send the equipment to Galatz, but to keep essential things and the
 _personnel_. The whole country was covered with
 groups of soldiers who had lost their regiments. Russians, Serbs, and
 Rumanians. The Rumanian guns were simply being rushed back, through
 the crowds of refugees. The whole country was moving: in some places
 the panic was awful. One part of our scattered unit came in for it. You would have thought the Bulgars were at the heels of the people. One man threw away a baby right in front of the cars. They were
 throwing everything off the carts to lighten them, and our people,
 being of a calmer disposition, picked up what they wanted in the way
 of vegetables, etc. Men, with their rifles and bayonets, climbed on
 to the Red Cross cars to save a few minutes. We simply went head
 over heels out of the country. I want to collect all the different
 stories of our groups. My special lot slept the first night on straw
 in Caromacat; the next night on the roadside round a lovely fire; the
 next (much reduced in numbers, for I had cleared the majority off in
 barges for Galatz), we slept in an empty room at Hershova, and spent
 the next day dressing at the wharf. And by the next night we were in
 Braila, involved in the avalanche of wounded that descended on that
 place, and there we have been ever since. We found some of our transport, and, while we were having tea, an
 officer came in and asked us to go round and help in a hospital. There, we were told, there were 11,000 wounded (I believe the official
 figures are 7000). They had been working thirty-six hours without
 stopping when we arrived. The wounded had overflowed into empty houses, and were lying about in
 their uniforms, and their wounds not dressed for four or five days. So we just turned up our sleeves and went in. I got back all the
 trained Sisters from Galatz, and now the pressure is over. One thing
 I am going up to Ismail for, is to get into touch with the Serbian H. 2, and find out what they want us to do next. The Serb wounded were
 evacuated straight to Odessa. The unit as a whole has behaved splendidly, plucky and cheery through
 everything, and game for any amount of work. And we are prouder of our Serbs than ever. I do hope the papers at
 home have realised what the 1st Division did, and how they suffered in
 the fight in the middle of September. General Genlikoffsky said to me,
 _Ctait magnifique, magnifique! Ils sont les hros_;--and another
 Russian: We did not quite believe in these Austrian Serbs, but no one
 will ever doubt them again.

 Personally, I have been awfully well, and prouder than ever of
 British women. I wish you could have seen trained Sisters scrubbing
 floors at Medgidia, and those strapping transport girls lifting the
 stretchers out of the ambulances so steadily and gently. I have told
 in the Report how Miss Borrowman and Miss Brown brought the equipments
 through to Galatz. We lost only one Ludgate boiler and one box of
 radiators. We lost two cars, but that was really the fault of a rather
 stupid Serbian officer. It is a comfort to feel you are all thinking
 of us.--Your loving sister,

      E. I.

      IN AN AMBULANCE TRAIN BETWEEN
      RENI AND ODESSA, _Jan. DARLING EVE,--Now we have got a hospital at Reni again, for badly
 wounded, working in connection with the evacuation station. We have
 got the dearest little house to live in ourselves, but, as we are
 getting far more people out from Odessa, we shall have to overflow
 into the Expedition houses. I
 remember thinking Reni a most uninteresting place--crowds of shipping
 and the wharf all crammed with sacks. It was just a big junction like
 Crewe! The hospital at Reni is a real building, but it is not finished. One
 unfinished bit is the windows, which have one layer of glass each,
 though they have double sashes. When this was pointed out, I thought
 it was a mere continental foible. When the cold came I realised
 that there is some sense in this foible after all! We _cannot_ get
 the wards warm, notwithstanding extra stoves and roaring fires. The
 poor Russians do mind cold so much. But they dont want to leave the
 hospital. One man whom I told he must have an operation later on in
 another hospital, said he would rather wait for it in ours. The first
 time we had to evacuate, we simply could not get the men to go. We have got a Russian Secretary now, because we are using Russian
 Red Cross money, and he told us he had been told in Petrograd that
 the S.W.H. were beautifully organised, and the only drawback was
 the language. We have got a
 certain number of Austrian prisoners as orderlies, and most of them
 curiously can speak Russian, so we get on better. This is a most comfortable
 way of travelling, and the quickest. We have 500 wounded on board,
 twenty-three of them ours. I am going to Odessa to find out why we
 cannot get Serb patients. There are still thousands of them in Odessa,
 and yet Dr. The Serbs we meet seem
 to think it is somehow our fault! I tell them I have written and
 telegraphed, and planned and made two journeys to Ismail, to try and
 get a real Serbian Hospital going, and yet it doesnt go. What did happen over the change of Government? I do hope we have got
 the right lot now, to put things straight at home, and carry through
 things abroad. Remember it all depends on you people at home. _The
 whole thing depends on us._ I know we lose the perspective in this
 gloomy corner, but there is one thing quite clear, and that is that
 they are all trusting to our _sticking_ powers. They know well hold
 on--of course--I only wish we would realise that it would be as well
 to use our intellects too, and have them clear of alcohol.

      IN AN AMBULANCE TRAIN,
      NEAR ODESSA, _Jan. You dont know what a comfort it is on this tumultuous front, to
 know that all you people at home have just settled down to it, and
 that youll put things right in the long run. It is curious to feel
 how everybody is trusting to that. The day we left Braila, a Rumanian
 said to me in the hall, It is England we are trusting to. She has
 got hold now like a strong dog! But it is a bigger job than any of
 you imagine, _I_ think. But there is not the slightest doubt we shall
 pull it off. I am glad to think the country has discovered that it is
 possible to have an alternative Government. If it does not do, we must
 find yet another. _To her little Niece, Amy MLaren_

      ON AN AMBULANCE TRAIN,
      NEAR ODESSA, _Jan. DARLING AMY,--How are you all? We have been very busy since we came
 out here: first a hospital for the Serbs at Medgidia, then in a
 Rumanian hospital at Braila, and then for the Russians at Galatz and
 Reni. In the very middle, by some funny mistake, we were sent flying
 right on to the front line. However we nipped out again just in time,
 and the station was burnt to the ground just half an hour after we
 left. Ill tell you the name of the place when the war is over, and
 show it to you on the map. We saw the petrol tanks on fire as we came
 away, and the ricks of grain too. Our hospital at Galatz was in a school. I dont think the children
 in these parts are doing many lessons during the war, and that will
 be a great handicap for their countries afterwards. Perhaps, however,
 they are learning other lessons. When we left the Dobrudja we saw the
 crowds of refugees on their carts, with the things they had been able
 to save, and all the little children packed in among the furniture and
 pots and pans and pigs. In one cart I saw two fascinating babies about three years old,
 sitting in a kind of little nest made of pillows and rugs. They were
 little girls, one fair and one dark, and they sat there, as good as
 gold, watching everything with such interest. There were streams of
 carts along the roads, and all the villages deserted. That is what
 the war means out here. It is not quite so bad in our safe Scotland,
 is it?--thanks to the fleet. And that is why it seems to me we have
 got to help these people, because they are having the worst of it. I wonder if you can knit socks yet, for I can use any number, and
 bandages. Blessings on you, precious
 little girl.--Your loving aunt,

      ELSIE.

 I have had my meals with the Staff. Unfortunately, most of them
 speak only Russian, but one man speaks French, and another German. The man who speaks German is
 having English lessons from her. He picked up _Punch_ and showed _me_ YOU. So, I said you.
 He repeated it quite nicely, and then found another OU. Though,
 and when I said though, he flung up his hands, and said, Why a
 practical nation like the English should do things like this!

      S.W.H.,
      RENI, _March 5, 1917_. DARLING MARY,--We have been having such icy weather here, such
 snowstorms sweeping across the plain. One day I really thought the house would be cut off from the hospital. The unit going over to Roll was quite a sight, with the indiarubber
 boots, and peaked Russian caps, with the ends twisted round their
 throats. We should have thoroughly enjoyed it if it had not been for
 the shortage of fuel. However, we were never absolutely without wood,
 and now have plenty, as a Cossack regiment sent a squad of men across
 the Danube to cut for us, and we brought it back in our carts. The
 Danube is frozen right across--such a curious sight. The first time in
 seven years, they say--so nice of it to do it just when we are here! I
 would not have missed it for anything. The hospital has only had about
 forty patients for some time, as there has been no fighting, and it
 was just as well when we were so short of wood. We collected them all
 into one ward, and let the other fires out. The chief of the medical department held an inspection. Took off the
 mens shirts and looked for lice, turned up the sheets, and beat the
 mattresses to look for dust, tasted the mens food, and in the end
 stated we were _ochin chest_ (very clean), and that the patients
 were well cared for medically and well nursed. All of which was
 very satisfactory, but he added that the condition of the orderlies
 was disgraceful, and so it was. I hadnt realised they were my job. However, I told him next time he came he should not find one single
 louse. Laird and I have a nice snug little room together. That is one
 blessing here, we have plenty of sun. Very soon it will begin to get
 quite hot. I woke up on the 1st of March and thought of getting home
 last year that day, and two days after waking up in Eves dear little
 room, with the roses on the roof. Bless all you dear people.--Ever
 your loving aunt,

      ELSIE.

      _March 23, 1917._

 We have been awfully excited and interested in the news from
 Petrograd. We heard of it, probably long after you people at home
 knew all about it! It is most interesting to see how everybody is on
 the side of the change, from Russian officers, who come to tea and
 beam at us, and say, Heresho (good) to the men in the wards. In any
 case they say we shall find the difference all over the war area. One
 Russian officer, who was here before the news came, was talking about
 the Revolution in England two hundred years ago, and said it was the
 most interesting period of European history. They say all these ideas
 began with the French Revolution, but they didnt--they began long
 before in England, he thought. He spoke English beautifully, and had
 had an English nurse. He had read Miltons political pamphlets, and
 we wondered all the time whether he was thinking of changes in Russia
 after the war, but now I wonder if he knew the changes were coming
 sooner. Do you know we have all been given the St. Prince
 Dolgourokoff, who is in command on this front, arrived quite
 unexpectedly, just after roll call. The telegram saying he was coming
 arrived a quarter of an hour after he left! General Kropensky, the
 head of the Red Cross, rushed up, and the Prince arrived about two
 minutes after him. He went all over the hospital, and a member of
 his gilded staff told matron he was very pleased with everything. He decorated two men in the wards with St. Georges Medal, and then
 said he wanted to see us together, and shook hands with everybody and
 said, Thank you, and gave each of us a medal too; Dr. Lairds was
 for service, as she had not been under fire. Georges Medal is a
 silver one with For Bravery on its back. Our patients were awfully
 pleased, and inpressed on us that it carried with it a pension of a
 rouble a month for life. We gave them all cigarettes to commemorate
 the occasion. It was rather satisfactory to see how the hospital looked in its
 ordinary, and even I was _fairly_ satisfied. I tell the unit that
 they must remember that they have an old maid as commandant, and must
 live up to it! I cannot stand dirt, and crooked charts and crumpled
 sheets. One Sister, I hear, put it delightfully in a letter home: Our
 C.M.O. is an idealist! I thought that was rather sweet; I believe she
 added, but she does appreciate good work. Certainly, I appreciate
 hers. She is in charge of the room for dressings, and it is one of the
 thoroughly satisfactory points in the hospital. The Greek priest came yesterday to bless the hospital. We put up
 Icons in each of the four wards. The Russians are a very religious
 people, and it seems to appeal to some mystic sense in them. The
 priest just put on a stole, green and gold, and came in his long grey
 cloak. The two wards open out of one another, so he held the service
 in one, the men all saying the responses and crossing themselves. The
 four icons lay on the table before him, with three lighted candles at
 the inner comers, and he blessed water and sprinkled them, and then he
 sprinkled everybody in the room. The icons were fixed up in the corner
 of the wards, and I bought little lamps to burn in front of them, as
 they always have them. We are going to have the evening hymn sung
 every evening at six oclock. I heard that first in Serbia from those
 poor Russian prisoners, who sang it regularly every evening. The night nurses come up from the
 village literally wet through, having dragged one another out of mud
 holes all the way. Now, a cart goes down to fetch them each evening. We have twenty horses and nine carts belonging to us. I have made Vera
 Holme master of the horse. I have heard two delightful stories from the Sisters who have
 returned from Odessa. There is a great rivalry between the Armoured
 Car men and the British Red Cross men, about the capabilities of
 their Sisters. (We, it appears, are the Armoured Car Sisters!) man said their Sisters were so smart they got a man on to the
 operating-table five minutes after the other one went off. Said an
 Armoured Car man: But thats nothing. The Scottish Sisters get the
 second one on before the first one is off. The other story runs that
 there was some idea of the men waiting all night on a quay, and the
 men said, But you dont think we are Scottish Sisters, sir, do you?
 I have no doubt that refers to Galatz, where we made them work all
 night.

      RENI, _Easter Day, 1917_. We, all the patients, sick and wounded, belonging to the Army and
 Navy, and coming from different parts of the great, free Russia, who
 are at present in your hospital, are filled with feelings of the
 truest respect for you. We think it our duty as citizens on this
 beautiful day of Holy Easter to express to you, highly respected and
 much beloved Doctor, as well as to your whole Unit, our best thanks
 for all the care and attention you have bestowed upon us. We bow low
 and very respectfully before the constant and useful work which we
 have seen daily, and which we know to be for the well-being of our
 allied countries. We are quite sure that, thanks to the complete unity of action of
 all the allied countries, the hour of gladness and the triumph of the
 Allied arms in the cause of humanity and the honour of nations is near. _Vive lAngleterre!_

      Russian Soldiers, Citizens, and the Russian Sister,
      VERA V. DE KOLESNIKOFF.

      RENI, _March 2, 1917_. DARLING EVE,--Very many thanks for the war prayers. The Archbishops prayers that I wanted are the
 original ones at the beginning of the war. Just at present we are
 very lucky as regards the singing, as there are three or four capital
 voices in the unit. We have the service at 1.30 on Sunday. That lets
 all the morning work be finished. I do wonder what has become of Miss
 Henderson and the new orderlies! We want them all
 so badly, not to speak of my cool uniform. That will be needed very
 soon I think. We are having
 glorious weather, so sunny and warm. All the snow has gone, and the
 mud is appalling. I thought I knew the worst mud could do in Serbia,
 but it was nothing to this. We have made little tiled paths all about
 our domain, and keep comparatively clean there. I wish we could take
 over the lot of buildings. The other day I thought I had made a great
 score, and bought two thousand poud of wood at a very small price. It
 was thirty-five versts out. We got the Cossacks to lend us transport. But the transport stuck in the mud, and came back the next day, having
 had to haul the empty carts out of mud holes by harnessing four horses
 first to one cart and then to another. It was no wonder I got the wood
 so cheap. _April 18, 1918._

 I am writing this sitting out in my little tent, with a glorious
 view over the Danube. We have pitched some of the tents to relieve
 the crowding in the house. They are no longer beautiful and white, as
 they were at Medgidia. We have had to stain them a dirty grey colour,
 so as to hide them from aeroplanes. Yesterday, we had an awful gale,
 and a downpour of rain, and the tents stood splendidly, and not a
 drop of water came through. Miss Pleister and the Austrian orderly
 who helped her to pitch them are triumphant. Do get our spy-incident,
 from the office. We had an awful
 two days, but it is quite a joke to look back on. The unit were most
 thoroughly and Britishly angry. But I very soon saw
 the other side, and managed to get them in hand once more. General
 Kropensky, our chief, was a perfect brick. The armoured car section
 sent a special despatch rider over to Galatz to fetch him, and he came
 off at once. He talks perfect English, and he has since written me a
 charming letter saying our _sang-froid_ and our _savoir-faire_ saved
 the situation. I am afraid there was not much _sang-froid_ among us,
 but some of us managed to keep hold of our common sense. As I told
 the girls, in common fairness they must look at the other side--spy
 fever raging, a foreign hospital right on the front, and a Revolution
 in progress. I told them, even if they did not care about Russia, I
 supposed they cared about the war and England, and I wondered what
 effect it would have on all these Russian soldiers if we went away
 with the thing not cleared up, and still under suspicion. After all,
 the ordinary Russian soldier knows nothing about England, except in
 the very concrete form of _us_. We should have played right into the
 devils hands if we had gone away. Of course, they saw it at once,
 and we stuck to our guns for Englands sake. The 6th Army, I think,
 understands that England, as represented by this small unit, is keen
 on the war, and does not spy! We have had a telegram from the General
 in command, apologising, and our patients have been perfectly angelic. And the men from all regiments round come up to the out-patients
 department, and are most grateful and punctiliously polite. You know the Russian greeting
 on Easter morning, Christ is risen, and the answer, He is risen
 indeed. We learnt them both, and made our greetings in Russian
 fashion. On Easter Eve we went to the church in the village. The church was crowded with soldiers--very
 few women there. They were most reverent and absorbed outside in the
 courtyards. It was a very curious scene; little groups of people with
 lighted candles waiting to get in. Here, we had a very nice Easter
 service. My choir had three lovely Easter hymns, and we even sang
 the Magnificat. One of the armoured car men, on his way from Galatz
 to Belgrade, stayed for the service, and it was nice to have a mans
 voice in the singing. Except that we are very idle, we are very happy here. Our patients are
 delightful, the hospital in good order. The Steppe is a fascinating
 place to wander over, the little valleys, and the villages hidden
 away in them, and the flowers! We have been riding our transport
 horses--rather rough, but quite nice and gentle. We all ride astride
 of course. _On Active Service._

      To Mrs. FLINDERS PETRIE,
      Hon. Sec., Scottish Womens Hospitals. RENI, _May 8, 1917_. PETRIE,--How perfectly splendid about the Egyptologists. Miss Henderson brought me your message, saying how splendidly they are
 subscribing. That is of course all due to you, you wonderful woman. It was such a tantalising thing to hear that you had actually thought
 of coming out as an Administrator, and that you found you could not. I cannot tell you how splendid it would have been if you could have
 come.... I want a woman of the world... and I want an adaptable
 person, who will talk to the innumerable officers who swarm about this
 place, and ride with the girls, and manage the officials! I do wish you could see our hospital now. Such a nice story:--Matron was in Reni the other day, seeing the
 Commandant of the town about some things for the hospital, and when
 she came out she found a crowd of Russian soldiers standing round her
 house. They asked her if she had got what she wanted, and she said the
 Commandant was going to see about it. Whereupon the men said, The
 Commandant must be told that the Scottish Hospital (_Schottlandsche
 bolnitza_) is the best hospital on this front, and must have whatever
 it wants. That is the opinion of the Russian Soldier. Do you
 recognise the echo of the big reverberation that has shaken Russia. We get on awfully well with the Russian soldier. Two of our patients
 were overheard talking the other day, and they said, The Russian
 Sisters are pretty but not good, and the English Sisters are good
 and not pretty. The story was brought up to the mess-room by quite
 a nice-looking girl who had overheard it. But we thought wed let
 the judgment stand and be like Kingsleys maid--though we _dont_
 undertake to endorse the Russian part of it! We have got some of the _personnel_ tents pitched now, and it is
 delightful. It was rather close quarters in the little house. I am
 writing in my tent now, looking out over the Danube. Such a lovely
 place, Reni is--and the Steppe is fascinating with its wide plains and
 little unexpected valleys full of flowers. The other night our camp was the centre of a fight. They are drilling recruits here, and suddenly the other
 night we found ourselves being defended by one party while another
 attacked from the Steppe. The battle raged all night, and the camp was
 finally carried at four oclock in the morning amid shouts and cheers
 and barking of dogs. It was even too much for me, and I have slept
 through bombardments. It has been so nice hearing about you all from Miss Henderson. How
 splendidly the money is coming in. Petrie,
 _do_ make them send the reliefs more quickly. I know all about boats,
 but, as you knew the orderlies had to leave on the 15th of January,
 the reliefs ought to have been off by the 1st. I wish you could hear the men singing their evening hymn in hospital. I am so glad we thought of putting up the
 icons for them. Good-bye for the present, dear Mrs. My kindest regards to
 Professor Flinders Petrie.--Ever yours affectionately,

      ELSIE MAUD INGLIS.

      _May 11, 1917._

 It was delightful seeing Miss Henderson, and getting news of all you
 dear people. But she did arrive
 with all her equipment. The equipment I wired for in October, and
 which was sent out by itself, arrived in Petrograd, got through to
 Jassy, and has there stuck. We have not got a single thing, and the
 Consuls have done their best. French, one of the chaplains in Petrograd, came here. He said
 he would have some services here. We pitched a tent, and we had the
 Communion. I have sent down a notice to the armoured car
 yacht, and I hope some of the men will come up. We and they are the
 only English people here. The Serbs have sent me a message saying we may have to rejoin our
 Division soon. I dont put too much weight on this, because I know
 my dearly beloved Serbs, and their habit of saying the thing they
 think you would like, but still we are preparing. I shall be very
 sorry to leave our dear little hospital here, and the Russians. They
 are a fascinating people, especially the common soldier. I hope that
 as we have done this work for the Russians and therefore have some
 little claim on them, it will help us to get things more easily for
 the Serbs. We have one little laddie in, about ten years old, the
 most amusing brat. He was wounded by an aeroplane bomb in a village
 seven versts out, and was sent into Reni to a hospital. But, when he
 got there he found the hospital was for sick only (a very inferior
 place! He wanders about with a Russian
 soldiers cap on his head and wrapped round with a blanket, and we
 hear his pretty little voice singing to himself all over the place. Nicolai, the man who came in when the hospital was first opened,
 and has been so very ill, is really getting better. He had his
 dressing left for two days for the first time the other day, and his
 excitement and joy were quite pathetic. _Ochin heroshe doktorutza,
 ochin herosho_ (Very good, dear doctor, very good), he kept saying,
 and then he added, Now, I know I am not going to die! Poor boy,
 he has nearly died several times, and would have died if he had not
 had English Sisters to nurse him. He has been awfully naughty--the
 wretch. He bit one of the Sisters one day when she tried to give him
 his medicine. Now, he kisses my hand to make up. The other day I
 ordered massage for his leg, and he made the most awful row, howled
 and whined, and declared it would hurt (really, he has had enough pain
 to destroy anybodys nerve), and then suddenly pointed to a Sister who
 had come in, and said what she had done for him was the right thing. I asked what she had done for him; Massaged his leg, she said. I
 got that promptly translated into Russian, and the whole room roared
 with laughter. Poor Nicolai--after a minute, he joined in. His home
 is in Serbia, a very nice home with a beautiful garden. His mother
 is evidently the important person there. His father is a smith, and
 he had meant to be a smith too, but now he has got the St. Georges
 Cross, which carries with it a pension of six roubles a month, and he
 does not think he will do any work at all. He is the eldest of the
 family, twenty-four years old, and has three sisters, and a little
 brother of five. Cant you imagine how he was spoilt! and how proud
 they are of him now, only twenty-four, and a _sous-officier_, and
 been awarded the St. Georges Cross which is better than the medal;
 and been wounded, four months in hospital, and had three operations! He has been so ill I am afraid the spoiling continued in the Scottish
 Womens Hospital. Laird says she would not be his future wife for
 anything. We admitted such a nice-looking boy to-day, with thick, curly, yellow
 hair, which I had ruthlessly cropped, against his strong opposition. I
 doubt if I should have had the heart, if I had known how ill he was. I found him this evening with
 tears running silently over his cheeks, a Cossack, a great big man. He may have to go on to Odessa, as a severe
 operation and bombs and a nervous breakdown dont go together. We have made friends with lots of the officers; there is one, also
 a Cossack, who spends a great part of his time here. His regiment is
 at the front, and he has been left for some special work, and he seems
 rather lonely. He is a nice boy, and brings nice horses for us to
 ride. We have been having quite a lot of riding, on our own transport
 horses too. It is heavenly riding here across the great plain. We all
 ride astride, and at first we found the Cossacks saddles most awfully
 uncomfortable, but now we are quite used to them. Our days fly past
 here, and in a sense are monotonous, but I dont think we are any of
 us the worse for a little monotony as an interlude! quite fairly
 often there is a party at one of the regiments here! The girls enjoy
 them, and matron and I chaperone them alternately and reluctantly. It
 was quite a rest during Lent when there were no parties. The spy incident has quite ended, and we have won. Matron was in Reni
 the other day asking the Commandant about something, and when she came
 out she found a little crowd of Russian soldiers round her house. They
 asked her if she had got what she wanted, and she said the Commandant
 had said he would see about it. They answered, The Commandant must
 be told that the S.W.H. is the best hospital on this front, and that
 it must have everything it wants. That is the opinion of the Russian
 soldier! If you were here you would recognise the new tone of the
 Russian soldier in these days,--but I am glad he approves of our
 hospital.

      ODESSA, _June 24, 1917_. I wish you could realise how the little nations, Serbs and Rumanians
 and Poles, count on us. What a comfort it is to them to think we are
 the most tenacious nation in Europe. In their eyes it all hangs on
 us. I dont believe we can disentangle
 it all in our minds just now. The only thing is just to go on doing
 ones bit. Because, one thing is quite clear, Europe wont be a
 habitable place if Germany wins--for anybody. I think there are going to be a lot of changes here.

      _July 15, 1917._

 I have had German measles! The Consul asked me what I meant by that
 at my time of life! The majority of people say how unpatriotic and
 Hunnish of you! Well, a few days off did not do me any harm. I had
 a very luxurious time lying in my tent. The last lot of orderlies
 brought it out.

      ODESSA, _Aug. The work at Reni is coming to an end, and we are to go to the front
 with the Serbian Division. I cannot write about it owing to censors
 and people. But I am going to risk this: the Serbs ought to be most
 awfully proud. The Russian General on the front is going to insist on
 having them to stiffen up his Russian troops. I think you people at
 home ought to know what magnificent fighting men these Serbs are, and
 so splendidly disciplined, simply worth their weight in gold. There
 are only two divisions of them after all. We have about thirty-five of
 them in hospital just now as sanitaries, and they are such a comfort;
 their quickness and their devotion is wonderful. The hospital was full
 and overflowing when I left--still Russians. Most of the cases were
 slight; a great many left hands, if you know what that _means_. I
 dont think the British Army does know! We had a Red Cross inspecting officer down from Petrograd. He was
 very pleased with everything, and kissed my hand on departing, and
 said we were doing great things for the Alliance. I wanted to say many
 things, but thought I had better leave it alone. We are operating at 5 A.M. now, because the afternoons are so hot. The other day we began at 5, and had to go till 4 P.M. Matron and I had a delightful ride the other evening. Just as we
 had turned for home, an aeroplane appeared, and the first shot from
 the anti-aircraft guns close beside us was too much for our horses,
 who promptly bolted. However, there was nothing but the clear Steppe
 before us, so we just sat tight and went. After a little they
 recovered themselves, and really behaved very well.

      _Aug. 28._

 You dear, dear people, how sweet of you to send me a telegram for
 my birthday. You dont know how nice it was to get it and to feel you
 were thinking of me. Miss G. brought it
 me with a very puzzled face, and said, I cannot quite make out this
 telegram. It was written in Russian characters. She evidently was not
 used to people doing such mad things as telegraphing the Many happy
 returns of the day half across the world. I understood it at once,
 and it nearly made me cry. It was good to get it, though I think the
 Food Controller or somebody ought to come down on you for wasting
 money in the middle of a war. I am finishing this letter in Reni. We closed the hospital yesterday,
 and joined our Division somewhere on Friday. The rush that had begun
 before I got to Odessa got much worse. They had an awfully busy time,
 a faint reminiscence of Galatz, though, as they were operating twelve
 hours on end, I dont know it was so very faint. We had no more left
 hands, but all the bad cases. Everybody worked magnificently, but they
 always do in a push. The time a British unit goes to pieces is when
 there is nothing to do! So this bit of work ends, eight months. I am quite sorry to leave it,
 but quite quite glad to get back to our Division. Well, Amy dearest, good-bye for the present. Love to all you dear people.

      S.W.H.,
      HADJI ABDUL, _Oct. I wonder if this is my last letter from Russia! We hope to be off
 in a very few days now. We have had a very pleasant time in this
 place with its Turkish name. We are with the Division, and were given this perfectly beautiful
 camping-ground, with trees, and a <DW72> towards the east. The question
 was whether we were going to Rumania or elsewhere. It is nice being
 back with these nice people. They have been most kind and friendly,
 and we have picnics and rides and _dances_, and dinners, and till this
 turmoil of the move began we had an afternoon reception every day
 under the walnut trees! Now, we are packed up and ready to go, and I
 mean to walk in on you one morning. We shall have about two months to refit, but one of those is my due
 as a holiday, _which I am going to take_. Ill see you all soon.--Your
 loving aunt,

      ELSIE.

_To Mrs. Simson_

      ARCHANGEL, _Nov. Have not been very well; nothing to worry about. Shall report in London, then come straight to you. INGLIS.




CHAPTER XI

THE MOORINGS CUT

    Not I, but my Unit.

    My dear Unit, good-bye.--Nov. Into the wide deep seas which we call God
    You plunged. This is not death,
    You seemed to say, but fuller life.

The reports of Dr. Inglis as chief medical officer to the London
Committee were as detailed and foreseeing in the very last one that
she wrote as in the first from on board the transport that took her
and her unit out. She writes:--In view of the fact that we are in the
middle of big happenings I should like Dr. Laird to bring  ton cotton
wool, six bales moss dressings, 100 lb. ether, 20
gallons rectified spirits. I wonder what news of the river boat for
Mesopotamia? After they had landed and were at work:--I have wired
asking for another hospital for the base. I know you have your hands
full, but I also know that if the people at home realise what their
help would mean out here just now, we would not have to ask twice. And
again:--Keep the home fires burning and let us feel their warmth. She
soon encountered the usual obstacles:--I saw that there was no good in
the world talking about regular field hospitals to them until they had
tried our mettle. The ordinary male disbelief in our capacity cannot
be argued away. It can only be worked away. So she acted. Russia
created disbelief, but the men at arms of all nations saw and believed. In November she wrote back incredulously:--Rumours of falling back. Anxious about the equipment. In bombardments, in
retreat, and evacuations the equipment was her one thought. Stand by
the equipment became a joke in her unit. On one occasion one of the
orderlies had a heavy fall from a lorry on which she was in charge of
the precious stuff. Dusty and shaken, she was gathering herself up,
when the voice of the chief rang out imperatively urgent, Stand by the
equipment. On the rail certain trucks, bearing all the equipment, got
on a wrong line, and were carried away:--The blue ribbon belongs to
Miss Borrowman and Miss Brown. They saw our wagons disappearing with
a refugee train, whereupon these two ran after it and jumped on, and
finally brought the equipment safely to Galatz. They invented a General
Popovitch who would be very angry if it did not get through. Without
those two girls and their ingenuity, the equipment would not have got
through.

She details all the difficulties of packing up and evacuating after
the despatch rider came with the order that the hospitals were to
fall back to Galatz. The only method their own, all else chaotic and
helpless, working night and day, the unit accomplished everything. At
the station, packed with a country and army in flight, Dr. Inglis had a
talk with a Rumanian officer. He told her that he had been in Glasgow,
and had there been invited out to dinner, and had seen English
customs. It was good to feel those English customs were still going
on quietly, whatever was happening here, breakfast coming regularly and
hot water for baths, and everything as it should be. It was probably
absurd, but it came like a great wave of comfort to feel that England
was there quiet and strong and invincible behind everything and
everybody.

As we read these natural vivid diary reports, we too can feel it was
good of England that Dr. Inglis was to the last on that front--

    Ambassador from Britains Crown,
      And type of all her race.

Dr. Inglis never lost sight of the Army she went out to serve. She
refused to return unless they were brought away from the Russian front
with her. I wonder if a proper account of what happened then went home to
 the English papers? The Serbian Division went into the fight 15,000
 strong. They were in the centre--the Rumanians on their left, and the
 Russians on their right. The Rumanians broke, and they fought for
 twenty-four hours on two fronts. They came out of the fight, having
 lost 11,000 men. It is almost incredible, and that is when we ought to
 have been out, and could have been out if we had not taken so long to
 get under way.

In the last Report, dated October 29, 1917, she tells her Committee she
has been tied by the leg to bed. There are notes on coming events:--

 There really seems a prospect of getting away soon. The Foreign
 Office knows us only too well. Only 6000 of the Division go in this
 lot, the rest (15,000) to follow.

There is a characteristic last touch. I have asked Miss Onslow to get English paper-back novels for the
 unit on their journey. At a certain shop, they can be got for a rouble
 each, and good ones.

To members of that unit, doctors, sisters, orderlies, we are indebted
for many personal details, and for the story of the voyage west,
when for her the sun was setting. Her work was accomplished when on
the transport with her and her unit were the representatives of that
Serbian Army with whom she served, faithful unto death. Miss Arbuthnot, the granddaughter of Sir William Muir, the friend of
John Inglis, was one of those who helped to nurse Dr. Inglis:--

 I sometimes looked after her when the Sister attending her was
 off duty. Her consideration and kindness were quite extraordinary,
 while her will and courage were quite indomitable. To die as she did
 in harness, having completed her great work in getting the Serbs away
 from Russia, is what she would have chosen. Inglis at Hadji Abdul, a small mud village about ten
 miles from Galatz. She was looking very ill, but was always busy. For
 some time she had been ill with dysentery, but she never even stayed
 in bed for breakfast till it was impossible for her to move from bed. During our time at Hadji we had about forty Serbian patients, a few
 wounded, but mostly sick. Inglis did a few minor operations, but
 her last major one was a gastro-enterotomy performed on one of our own
 chauffeurs, a Serb, Joe, by name. The operation took three hours and
 was entirely satisfactory, although Dr. Inglis did not consider him
 strong enough to travel back to England. She was particularly fond of
 this man, and took no end of trouble with him. Even after she became
 so very ill she used constantly to visit him. The Serbs entertained us to several picnics, which we duly returned. Inglis was always an excellent hostess, so charming and genial
 to every one, and so eager that both entertainers and entertained
 should equally enjoy themselves. Provided her permission was asked
 first, and duty hours or regular meals not neglected, she was always
 keen every one should enjoy themselves riding, walking, or going for
 picnics. If any one was ill, she never insisted on their getting up
 in spite of everything, as most doctors, and certainly all matrons,
 wish us to do. She was strict during duty hours, and always required
 implicit obedience to her orders--whatever they were. She was always
 so well groomed--never a hair out of place. One felt so proud of her among the dirty and generally
 unsuitably dressed women in other hospitals. She was very independent,
 and would never allow any of us to wait on her. The cooks were not
 allowed to make her any special dishes that the whole unit could not
 share. As long as she could, she messed with the unit, and there was
 no possibility of avoiding her quick eye; anything which was reserved
 for her special comfort was rejected. Once, a portion of chicken was
 kept as a surprise for her. She asked whether there had been enough
 for all, and when the cooks reluctantly confessed there was only the
 one portion she sent it away. During one of the evacuations, an order had been given that there
 were only two blankets allowed in each valise. Some one, mindful of
 her weakness, stuffed an extra one into Dr. Inglis bag, because in
 her emaciated condition she suffered much from the cold. It stirred
 her to impetuous anger, and with something of the spirit of David, as
 he poured out the water brought him at the peril of the lives of his
 followers, she flung the blanket out of the railway carriage, as a
 lesson to those of her unit who had disobeyed an order. Inglis read the Church service with great dignity
 and simplicity. On the weekday evenings, before she became so ill,
 she would join us in a game of bridge, and played nearly every night. During the retreats when nothing more could be done, and she felt
 anxious, she would sit down and play a game of patience. During the
 weeks of uncertainty, when the future of the Serbs was doubtful, and
 she was unable to take any active part, she fretted very much. After endless conflicting rumours and days of waiting, the
 news arrived that they were to go to England. Her delight was
 extraordinary, for she had lain in her bed day after day planning how
 she could help them, and sending endless wires to those in authority
 in England, but feeling herself very impotent. Once the good news
 arrived, her marvellous courage and tenacity helped her to recover
 sufficiently, and prepare all the details for the journey with the
 Serbs. We left on the 29th October, with the H.G. Staff and two
 thousand Serbian soldiers, in a special train going to Archangel. Inglis spent fifteen days on the train, in a second-class
 compartment, with no proper bed. Her strength varied, but she was
 compelled to lie down a great deal, although she insisted on dressing
 every morning. On two occasions she walked for five minutes on the
 station platform; each time it absolutely exhausted her. Though she
 suffered much pain and discomfort, she never complained. She could
 only have benger, chicken broth and condensed milk, and she often
 found it impossible to take even these. If one happened to bring her
 tea, or her food, she thanked one so charmingly. At Archangel there was no means of carrying her on to the boat, so
 with help (one orderly in front, and one lifting her behind), she
 climbed a ladder twenty feet high, from the platform to the deck of
 the transport. She was a good sailor, and had a comfortable cabin on
 the ship. She improved on board slightly, and used to sit in the small
 cabin allotted to us on the upper deck. She played patience, and was
 interested in our sea-sick symptoms. There was a young naval officer
 very seriously ill on the boat. Our people were nursing him, and she
 constantly went to prescribe; she feared he would not live, and he
 died before we reached our port. Inglis had a relapse; violent pain set
 in, and she had to return to bed. Even then, a few days before we
 reached England, she insisted on going through all the accounts,
 and prepared fresh plans to take the unit on to join the Serbs at
 Salonika. In six weeks she expected to be ready to start. She sent for
 each of us in turn, and asked if we would go with her. Needless to
 say, only those who could not again leave home, refused, and then with
 the deepest regret. Inglis
 had a violent attack of pain, and had no sleep all night. Next morning
 she insisted on getting up to say good-bye to the Serbian staff. It was a wonderful example of her courage and fortitude, to see her
 standing unsupported--a splendid figure of quiet dignity. Her face
 ashen and drawn like a mask, dressed in her worn uniform coat, with
 the faded ribbons that had seen such good service. As the officers
 kissed her hand, and thanked her for all she had done for them, she
 said to each of them a few words accompanied with her wonderful smile.

As they looked on her, they also must have understood, sorrowing most
of all, that they should see her face no more.

 After that parting was over, Dr. She left the boat Sunday afternoon, 25th November, and
 arrived quite exhausted at the hotel. I was allowed to see her for
 a minute before the unit left for London that night. She could only
 whisper, but was as sweet and patient as she ever was. She said we
 should meet soon in London.

After her death, many who had watched her through these strenuous
years, regretted that she did not take more care of herself. Symptoms
of the disease appeared so soon, she must have known what overwork and
war rations meant in her state. This may be said of every follower of
the One who saved others, but could not save Himself. The life story
of Saint and Pioneer is always the same. To continue to ill-treat
brother body meant death to St. Francis; to remain in the fever
swamps of Africa meant death to Livingstone. The poor, and the freedom
of the slave, were the common cause for which both these laid down
their lives. Of the same spirit was this daughter of our race. Had she
remained at home on her return from Serbia she might have been with us
to-day, but we should not have the woman we now know, and for whom we
give thanks on every remembrance of her. Miss Arbuthnot makes no allusion to
its dangers. Everything written by the unit is instinct with the
high courage of their leader. We know now how great were the perils
surrounding the transports on the North seas. Old, and unseaworthy, the
menace below, the storm above, through the night of the Arctic Circle,
she was safely brought to the haven where all would be. More than once
death in open boats was a possibility to be faced; there were seven
feet of water in the engine-room, and only the stout hearts of her
captain and crew knew all the dangers of their long watch and ward. As the transport entered the Tyne a blizzard swept over the country. We who waited for news on shore wondered where on the cold grey seas
laboured the ship bringing home Dr. Elsie and her unit.

In her last hours she told her own people of the closing days on
board:--

 When we left Orkney we had a dreadful passage, and even after we got
 into the river it was very rough. We were moored lower down, and,
 owing to the high wind and storm, a big liner suddenly bore down upon
 us, and came within a foot of cutting us in two, when our moorings
 broke, we swung round, and were saved. I said to the one who told
 me--Who cut our moorings? She answered, No one cut them, they
 broke.

There was a pause, and then to her own she broke the knowledge that she
had heard the call and was about to obey the summons. The same hand who cut our moorings then is cutting mine now, and I am
 going forth.

Her niece Evelyn Simson notes how they heard of the arrival:--

 A wire came on Friday from Aunt Elsie, saying they had arrived in
 Newcastle. We tried all Saturday to get news by wire and phone,
 but got none. We think now this was because the first news came by
 wireless, and they did not land till Sunday. Aunt Elsie answered our prepaid wire, simply saying, I am in bed, do
 not telephone for a few days. I was free to start off by the night
 train, and arrived about 2 A.M. were
 at the Station Hotel, and I saw Aunt Elsies name in the book. I did
 not like to disturb her at that hour, and went to my room till 7.30. I
 found her alone; the night nurse was next door. She was surprised to
 see me, as she thought it would be noon before any one could arrive. She looked terribly wasted, but she gave me such a strong embrace that
 I never thought the illness was more than what might easily be cured
 on land, with suitable diet. I felt her pulse, and she said. It is not very good, Eve dear, I
 know, for I have a pulse that beats in my head, and I know it has been
 dropping beats all night. She wanted to know all about every one, and
 we had a long talk before any one came in. Ward had been to her, always, and we arranged that Dr. Aunt Elsie then packed me off to get some breakfast, and
 Dr. Ward told me she was much worse than she had been the night before. I telephoned to Edinburgh saying she was very ill. When Dr. Williams came, I learnt that there was practically no hope of her
 living. They started injections and oxygen, and Aunt Elsie said, Now
 dont think we didnt think of all these things before, but on board
 ship nothing was possible.

 It was not till Dr. Williams second visit that she asked me if the
 doctor thought this was the end. When she saw that it was so, she
 at once said, without pause or hesitation, Eve, it will be grand
 starting a new job over there,--then, with a smile, although there
 are two or three jobs here I would like to have finished. After this
 her whole mind seemed taken up with the sending of last messages to
 her committees, units, friends, and relations. It simply amazed me how
 she remembered every one down to her grand-nieces and nephews. When I
 knew mother and Aunt Eva were on their way, I told her, and she was
 overjoyed. Early in the morning she told me wonderful things about
 bringing back the Serbs. I found it very hard to follow, as it was an
 unknown story to me. I clearly remember she went one day to the Consul
 in Odessa, and said she must wire certain things. She was told she
 could only wire straight to the War Office--and so I got into touch
 straight with the War Office.

 Mrs. MLaren at one moment commented--You have done magnificent
 work. Back swiftly came her answer, Not I, but my unit.

 Mrs. MLaren says: Mrs. Simson and I arrived at Newcastle on Monday
 evening. It was a glorious experience to be with her those last two
 hours. She was emaciated almost beyond recognition, but all sense
 of her bodily weakness was lost in the grip one felt of the strong
 alert spirit, which dominated every one in the room. She was clear
 in her mind, and most loving to the end. The words she greeted us
 with were--So, I am going over to the other side. When she saw we
 could not believe it, she said, with a smile, For a long time I
 _meant_ to live, but now I _know_ I am going. She spoke naturally
 and expectantly of going over. Certainly she met the unknown with a
 cheer! As the minutes passed she seemed to be entering into some great
 experience, for she kept repeating, This is wonderful--but this is
 wonderful. Then, she would notice that some one of us was standing,
 and she would order us to sit down--another chair must be brought if
 there were not enough. To the end, she would revert to small details
 for our comfort. As flesh and heart failed, she seemed to be breasting
 some difficulty, and in her own strong way, without distress or fear,
 she asked for help, You must all of you help me through this. We
 repeated to her many words of comfort. Again and again she answered
 back, I know. One, standing at the foot of the bed, said to her,
 You will give my love to father; instantly the humorous smile lit
 her face, and she answered, Of course I will.

 At her own request her sister read to her words of the life
 beyond--Let not your heart be troubled--In my Fathers house are many
 mansions; if it were not so I would have told you, and, even as they
 watched her, she fell on sleep. After she had left us, there remained with those that loved her only
 a great sense of triumph and perfect peace. The room seemed full of a
 glorious presence. One of us said, This is not death; it makes one
 wish to follow after.

As We waited those anxious weeks for the news of the arrival of Dr. Inglis and her Army, there were questionings, how we should welcome
and show her all love and service. The news quickly spread she was not
well--might be delayed in reaching London; the manner of greeting her
must be to ensure rest. The storm had spent itself, and the moon was riding high in a cloudless
heaven, when others waiting in Edinburgh on the 26th learnt the news
that she too had passed through the storm and shadows, and had crossed
the bar. That her work here was to end with her life had not entered the minds
of those who watched for her return, overjoyed to think of seeing her
face once more. She had concealed her mortal weakness so completely,
that even to her own the first note of warning had come with the words
that she had landed, but was in bed:--then we thought it was time one
of us should go to her.

Her people brought her back to the city of her fathers, and to the
hearts who had sent her forth, and carried her on the wings of their
strong confidence. There was to be no more going forth of her active
feet in the service of man, and all that was mortal was carried for
the last time into the church she had loved so well. Then we knew and
understood that she had been called where His servants shall serve Him. The Madonna lilies, the lilies of France and of the fields, were placed
around her. Over her hung the torn banners of Scotlands history. The
Scottish women had wrapped their countrys flag around them in one of
their hard-pressed flights. On her coffin, as she lay looking to the
East in high St. Giles, were placed the flags of Great Britain and
Serbia. She had worn the faded ribbons of the orders bestowed on her by
France, Russia, and Serbia. It has often been asked at home and abroad
why she had received no decorations at the hands of her Sovereign. It
is not an easy question to answer. Inglis was buried, amid marks of respect
and recognition which make that passing stand alone in the history of
the last rites of any of her fellow-citizens. Great was the company
gathered within the church. The chancel was filled by her family and
relatives--her Suffrage colleagues, representatives from all the
societies, the officials of the hospitals and hostels she had founded
at home, the units whom she had led and by whose aid she had done great
things abroad. Last and first of all true-hearted mourners the people
of Serbia represented by their Minister and members of the Legation. The chief of the Scottish Command was present, and by his orders
military honours were paid to this happy warrior of the Red Cross. The service had for its keynote the Hallelujah Chorus, which was played
as the procession left St. It was a thanksgiving instinct with
triumph and hope. The Resurrection and the Life was in prayer and
praise. The Dean of the Order of the Thistle revealed the thoughts of
many hearts in his farewell words:--

 We are assembled this day with sad but proud and grateful hearts to
 remember before God a very dear and noble lady, our beloved sister,
 Elsie Inglis, who has been called to her rest. We mourn only for
 ourselves, not for her. She has died as she lived, in the clear light
 of faith and self-forgetfulness, and now her name is linked for ever
 with the great souls who have led the van of womanly service for God
 and man. A wondrous union of strength and tenderness, of courage
 and sweetness, she remains for us a bright and noble memory of high
 devotion and stainless honour. Especially to-day, in the presence of
 representatives of the land for which she died, we think of her as an
 immortal link between Serbia and Scotland, and as a symbol of that
 high courage which will sustain us, please God, till that stricken
 land is once again restored, and till the tragedy of war is eradicated
 and crowned with Gods great gifts of peace and of righteousness.

The buglers of the Royal Scots sounded the Reveille to the waking
morn, and the coffin with the Allied flags was placed on the gun
carriage. Women were in the majority of the massed crowd that awaited
the last passing. Why did they no gie her the V.C.? asked the
shawl-draped women holding the bairns of her care: these and many
another of her fellow-citizens lined the route and followed on foot
the long road across the city. As the procession was being formed,
Dr. Inglis last message was put into the hands of the members of the
London Committee for S.W.H. It ran:--

      _November 26, 1917._

 So sorry I cannot come to London. Will send Gwynn in a day or two with
 explanations and suggestions. Colonel Miliantinovitch and Colonel
 Tcholah Antitch were to make appointment this week or next from
 Winchester; do see them, and also as many of the committee as possible
 and show them every hospitality. They have been very kind to us, and
 whatever happens, dear Miss Palliser, do beg the Committee to make
 sure that they (the Serbs) have their hospitals and transport, for
 they do need them. Many thanks to the Committee for their kindness to me and their
 support of me. Dictated to Miss Evelyn Simson.

How the people loved her! was the thought, as she passed through the
grief-stricken crowds. These, who knew her best, smiled as they said
one to another, How all this would surprise her!

Edinburgh is a city of spires and of Gods acres, the graves cut in
the living rock, within gardens and beside running waters. Across the
Water of Leith the long procession wound its way. Within sight of the
grave, it was granted to her grateful brethren, the representatives
of the Serbian nation, to carry her coffin, and lower it to the place
where the mortal in her was to lie in its last rest. Her lifes story
was grouped around her--the Serbian officers, the military of her own
nation at war, the women comrades of the common cause, the poor and
suffering--to one and all she had been the inspiring succourer. November mists had drifted all day across the city, veiling the
fortress strength of Scotland, and the wild wastes of seas over which
she had returned home to our island strength. Even as we turned and
left her, the grey clouds at eventide were transfused and glorified by
the crimson glow of the sunset on the hills of Time. Printed in Great Britain by T. and A. CONSTABLE, Printers to His
Majesty at the Edinburgh University Press




      *      *      *      *      *      *




Transcribers note:

Illustrations have been moved to be near the text they illustrate. A very few changes have been made to punctuation for consistency. On page 210 Ctat has been changed to Ctait in Ctait
magnifique, magnifique! Ils sont les hros. At the opposite end, and near the inquisitor, Dellon was placed,
and, hoping to soften his judge, fell on his knees before him. But the
inquisitor commanded him to rise, asked whether he knew the reason of
his arrest, and advised him to declare it at large, as that was the only
way to obtain a speedy release. Dellon caught at the hope of release,
began to tell his tale, mixed with tears and protestations, again
fell at the feet of Don Francisco Delgado Ematos, the inquisitor, and
implored his favorable attention. Don Francisco told him, very coolly,
that he had other business on hand, and, nothing moved, rang a silver
bell. The alcayde entered, led the prisoner out into a gallery, opened,
and searched his trunk, stripped him of every valuable, wrote an
inventory, assured him that all should be safely kept, and then led him
to a cell about ten feet square, and left him there, shut up in utter
solitude. In the evening they brought him his first meal, which he ate
heartily, and slept a little during the night following. Next morning he
learnt that he could have no part of his property, not even a breviary
was, in that place, allowed to a priest, for they had no form of
religion there, and for that reason he could not have a book. His hair
was cropped close; and therefore "he did not need a comb." "Thus began his acquaintance with the holy house, which he describes
as "great and magnificent," on one side of the great space before the
church of St Catharine. There were three gates in front; and, it was
by the central, or largest, that the prisoners entered, and mounted a
stately flight of steps, leading into the great hall. The side gates
provided entrance to spacious ranges of apartments, belonging to the
inquisitors. Behind the principal building, was another, very spacious,
two stories high, and consisting of double rows of cells, opening into
galleries that ran from end to end. The cells on the ground-floor were
very small, without any aperture from without for light or air. Those of
the upper story were vaulted, white-washed, had a small strongly grated
window, without glass, and higher than the tallest man could reach. Towards the gallery every cell was shut with two doors, one on the
inside, the other one outside of the wall. The inner door folded, was
grated at the bottom, opened towards the top for the admission of food
and was made fast with very strong bolts. The outer door was not so
thick, had no window, but was left open from six o'clock every morning
until eleven--a necessary arrangement in that climate, unless it were
intended to destroy life by suffocation. "To each prisoner was given as earthen pot with water wherewith to wash,
another full of water to drink, with a cup; a broom, a mat whereon
to lie, and a large basin with a cover, changed every fourth day. The
prisoners had three meals a day; and their health so far as food could
contribute to it in such a place, was cared for in the provision of
a wholesome, but spare diet. Physicians were at hand to render all
necessary assistance to the sick, as were confessors, ready to wait
upon the dying; but they gave no viaticum, performed no unction, said
no mass. The place was under an impenetrable interdict. If any died,
and that many did die is beyond question, his death was unknown to all
without; he was buried within the walls without any sacred ceremony;
and if, after death, he was found to have died in heresy, his bones were
taken up at the next Auto, to be burned. Unless there happened to be
an unusual number of prisoners, each one was alone in his own cell. He
might not speak, nor groan, nor sob aloud, nor sigh. [Footnote: Limborch
relates that on one occasion, a poor prisoner was heard to cough; the
jailer of the Inquisition instantly repaired to him, and warned him to
forbear, as the slightest noise was not tolerated in that house. The
poor man replied that it was not in his power to forbear; a second time
they admonished him to desist; and when again, unable to do otherwise,
he repeated the offence, they stripped him naked, and cruelly beat him. This increased his cough, for which they beat him so often, that at last
he died through pain and anguish of the stripes he had received.] His
breathing might be audible when the guard listened at the grating, but
nothing more. Four guards were stationed in each long gallery, open,
indeed, at each end, but awfully silent, as if it were the passage of
a catacomb. If, however, he wanted anything, he might tap at the inner
door, when a jailer would come to hear the request, and would report to
the alcayde, but was not permitted to answer. If one of the victims, in
despair, or pain, or delirium, attempted to pronounce a prayer, even to
God, or dared to utter a cry, the jailers would run to the cell, rush
in, and beat him cruelly, for terror to the rest. Once in two months the
inquisitor, with a secretary and an interpreter, visited the prisons,
and asked each prisoner if he wanted anything, if his meat was regularly
brought, and if he had any complaint against the jailers. His want after
all lay at the mercy of the merciless. His complaint, if uttered, would
bring down vengeance, rather than gain redress. But in this visitation
the holy office professed mercy with much formality, and the
inquisitorial secretary collected notes which aided in the crimination,
or in the murder of their victims. "The officers of Goa were;--the inquisidor mor or grand inquisitor, who
was always a secular priest; the second inquisitor, Dominican friar;
several deputies, who came, when called for, to assist the inquisitors
at trials, but never entered without such a summons; qualifiers,
as usual, to examine books and writings, but never to witness an
examination of the living, or be present at any act of the kind; a
fiscal; a procurator; advocates, so called, for the accused; notaries
and familiars. The authority of this tribunal was absolute in Goa. There does not appear to have been anything peculiar in the manner of
examining and torturing at Goa where the practice coincided with that of
Portugal and Spain. "The personal narrative of Dellon affords a distinct exemplification of
the sufferings of the prisoners. He had been told that, when he desired
an audience, he had only to call a jailer, and ask it, when it would be
allowed him. But, notwithstanding many tears and entreaties, he could
not obtain one until fifteen days had passed away. Then came the alcayde
and one of his guards. This alcayde walked first out of the cell; Dellon
uncovered and shorn, and with legs and feet bare, followed him; the
guard walked behind. The alcayde just entered the place of audience,
made a profound reverence, stepped back and allowed his charge to enter. The door closed, and Dellon remained alone with the inquisitor and
secretary. He knelt; but Don Fernando sternly bade him to sit on a
bench, placed there for the use of the culprits. Near him, on a table,
lay a missal, on which they made him lay his hand, and swear to keep
secrecy, and tell them the truth. They asked if he knew the cause of his
imprisonment, and whether he was resolved to confess it. He told
them all he could recollect of unguarded sayings at Damaun, either in
argument or conversation, without ever, that he knew, contradicting,
directly or indirectly, any article of faith. He had, at some time
dropped an offensive word concerning the Inquisition, but so light a
word, that it did not occur to his remembrance. Don Fernando told him he
had done well in ACCUSING HIMSELF so willingly, and exhorted him in the
name of Jesus Christ, to complete his self accusation fully, to the end
that he might experience the goodness and mercy which were used in
that tribunal towards those who showed true repentance by a sincere
and UNFORCED confession. The secretary read aloud the confession and
exhortation, Dellon signed it, Don Fernando rang a silver bell, the
alcayde walked in, and, in a few moments, the disappointed victim was
again in his dungeon. "At the end of another fortnight, and without having asked for it, he
was again taken to audience. After a repetition of the former questions,
he was asked his name, surname, baptism, confirmation, place of abode,
in what parish? They made him kneel,
and make the sign of the cross, repeat the Pater Noster, Hail Mary,
creed, commandments of God, commandments of the church, and Salve
Begins. He did it all very cleverly, and even to their satisfaction;
but the grand inquisitor exhorted him, by the tender mercies of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to confess without delay, and sent him to the cell again. They required him to do what was impossible--to
confess more, after he had acknowledged ALL. In despair, he tried to
starve himself to death; 'but they compelled him to take food.' Day and
night he wept, and at length betook himself to prayer, imploring pity
of the 'blessed Virgin,' whom he imagined to be, of all beings, the most
merciful, and the most ready to give him help. "At the end of a month, he succeeded in obtaining another audience, and
added to his former confessions what he had remembered, for the first
time, touching the Inquisition. But they told him that that was not what
they wanted, and sent him back again. In a frenzy
of despair he determined to commit suicide, if possible. Feigning
sickness, be obtained a physician who treated him for a fever, and
ordered him to be bled. Never calmed by any treatment of the physician,
blood-letting was repeated often, and each time he untied the bandage,
when left alone, hoping to die from loss of blood, but death fled from
him. A humane Franciscan came to confess him, and, hearing his tale of
misery, gave him kind words, asked permission to divulge his attempt
at self-destruction to the inquisitor, procured him a mitigation of
solitude by the presence of a fellow-prisoner, a <DW64>, accused of
magic; but, after five months, the <DW64> was removed, and his mind,
broken with suffering, could no longer bear up under the aggravated
load. By an effort of desperate ingenuity he almost succeeded in
committing suicide, and a jailer found him weltering in his blood and
insensible. Having restored him by cordials, and bound up his wounds,
they carried him into the presence of the inquisitor once more; where he
lay on the floor, being unable to sit, heard bitter reproaches, had his
limbs confined in irons, and was thus carried back to a punishment that
seemed more terrible than death. In fetters he became so furious, that
they found it necessary to take them off, and, from that time, his
examinations assumed another character, as he defended his positions
with citations from the Council of Trent, and with some passages of
scripture, which he explained in the most Romish sense, discovering
a depth of ignorance in Don Fernando that was truly surprising. That
'grand Inquisitor,' had never heard the passage which Dellon quoted to
prove the doctrine of baptismal regeneration, 'Except a man be born
of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.' Neither did he know anything of that famous passage in the twenty-fifth
session of the Council of Trent, which declares that images are only to
be reverenced on account of the persons whom they represent. He
called for a Bible, and for the acts of the council, and was evidently
surprised when he found them where Dellon told him they might be seen. "The time for a general auto drew near. During the months of November
and December, 1675, he heard every morning the cries of persons under
torture, and afterwards saw many of them, both men and women, lame and
distorted by the rack. On Sunday January 11th, 1676, he was surprised
by the jailer refusing to receive his linen to be washed--Sunday being
washing-day in the 'holy house.' While perplexing himself to think
what that could mean, the cathedral bells rang for vespers, and then,
contrary to custom, rang again for matins. He could only account for
that second novelty by supposing that an auto would be celebrated the
next day. They brought him supper, which he refused, and, contrary to
their wont at all other times, they did not insist on his taking it, but
carried it away. Assured that those were all portents of the horrible
catastrophe, and reflecting on often-repeated threats in the audience
chamber that he should be burnt, he gave himself up to death, and
overwhelmed with sorrow, fell asleep a little before midnight. "Scarcely had he fallen asleep when the alcayde and guards entered the
cell, with great noise, bringing a lamp, for the first time since his
imprisonment that they had allowed a lamp to shine there. The alcayde,
laying down a suit of clothes, bade him put them on, and be ready to go
out when he came again. At two o'clock in the morning they returned, and
he issued from the cell, clad in a black vest and trowsers, striped with
white, and his feet bare. About two hundred prisoners, of whom he
was one, were made to sit on the floor, along the sides of a spacious
gallery, all in the same black livery, and just visible by the
gleaming of a few lamps. A large company of women were also ranged in a
neighboring gallery in like manner. But they were all motionless, and
no one knew his doom. Every eye was fixed, and each one seemed benumbed
with misery. "A third company Dellon perceived in a room not far distant, but they
were walking about, and some appeared to have long habits. Those were
persons condemned to be delivered to the secular arm, and the long
habits distinguished confessors busily collecting confessions in order
to commute that penalty for some other scarcely less dreadful. At four
o'clock, servants of the house came, with guards, and gave bread and
figs to those who would accept the refreshment. One of the guards gave
Dellon some hope of life by advising him to take what was offered,
which he had refused to do. 'Take your bread,' said the man, 'and if you
cannot eat it now, put it in your pocket; you will be certainly hungry
before you return.' This gave hope, that he should not end the day at
the stake, but come back to undergo penance. "A little before sunrise, the great bell of the cathedral tolled, and
its sound soon aroused the city of Goa. The people ran into the streets,
lining the chief thoroughfares, and crowding every place whence a view
could be had of the procession. Day broke, and Dellon saw the faces
of his fellow-prisoners, most of whom were Indians. He could only
distinguish, by their complexion, about twelve Europeans. Every
countenance exhibited shame, fear, grief, or an appalling blackness of
apathy, AS IF DIRE SUFFERING IN THE LIGHTLESS DUNGEONS UNDERNEATH HAD
BEREFT THEM OF INTELLECT. The company soon began to move, but slowly,
as one by one the alcayde led them towards the door of the great hall,
where the grand inquisitor sat, and his secretary called the name of
each as he came, and the name of a sponsor, who also presented himself
from among a crowd of the bettermost inhabitants of Goa, assembled there
for that service. 'The general of the Portuguese ships in the Indies'
had the honor of placing himself beside our Frenchman. As soon as the
procession was formed, it marched off in the usual order. "First, the Dominicans, honored with everlasting precedence on all such
occasions, led the way. Singing-boys also preceded, chanting a litany. The banner of the Inquisition was intrusted to their hands. After the
banner walked the penitents--a penitent and a sponsor, two and two. A
cross bearer brought up the train, carrying a crucifix aloft, turned
towards them, in token of pity; and, on looking along the line, you
might have seen another priest going before the penitents with a
crucifix turned backwards, inviting their devotions. They to whom the
Inquisition no longer afforded mercy, walked behind the penitents, and
could only see an averted crucifix. These were condemned to be burnt
alive at the stake! On this occasion there were but two of this class,
but sometimes a large number were sentenced to this horrible death, and
presented to the spectator a most pitiable spectacle. Many of them
bore upon their persons the marks of starvation, torture, terror, and
heart-rending grief. Some faces were bathed in tears, while others
came forth with a smile of conquest on the countenance and words of
triumphant faith bursting from the lips. These, however, were known as
dogmatizers, and were generally gagged, the month being filled with a
piece of wood kept in by a strong leather band fastened behind the head,
and the arms tied together behind the back. Two armed familiars walked
or rode beside each of these, and two ecclesiastics, or some other
clerks or regulars, also attended. After these, the images of heretics
who had escaped were carried aloft, to be thrown into the flames; and
porters came last, tagging under the weight of boxes containing the
disinterred bodies on which the execution of the church had fallen, and
which were also to be burnt. "Poor Dellon went barefoot, like the rest, through the streets of Goa,
rough with little flint stones scattered about, and sorely were his feet
wounded during an hour's march up and down the principal streets. Weary,
covered with shame and confusion, the long train of culprits entered
the church of St. Francis, where preparation was made for the auto, the
climate of India not permitting a celebration of that solemnity
under the burning sky. They sat with their sponsors, in the galleries
prepared, sambenitos, grey zamarras with painted flames and devils,
corozas, tapers, and all the other paraphernalia of an auto, made up a
woeful spectacle. The inquisitor and other personages having taken their
seats of state, the provincial of the Augustinians mounted the pulpit
and delivered the sermon. The
preacher compared the Inquisition to Noah's ark, which received all
sorts of beasts WILD, but sent them out TAME. The appearance of hundreds
who had been inmates of that ark certainly justified the figure. "After the sermon, two readers went up, one after the other, into the
same pulpit, and, between them, they read the processes and pronounced
the sentences, the person standing before them, with the alcayde, and
holding a lighted taper in his hand. Dellon, in turn, heard the cause
of his long-suffering. He had maintained the invalidity of baptismus
flaminis, or desire to be baptised, when there is no one to administer
the rite of baptism by water. He had said that images ought not to be
adored, and that an ivory crucifix was a piece of ivory. He had spoken
contemptuously of the Inquisition. And, above all, he had an ill
intention. His punishment was to be confiscation of his property,
banishment from India, and five years' service in the galleys in
Portugal, with penance, as the inquisitors might enjoin. As all the
prisoners were excommunicate, the inquisitor, after the sentence had
been pronounced, put on his alb and stole, walked into the middle of the
church, and absolved them all at once. Dellon's sponsor, who would not
even answer him before, when he spoke, now embraced him, called him
brother, and gave him a pinch of snuff, in token of reconciliation. "But there were two persons, a man and a woman, for whom the church had
no more that they could do; and these, with four dead bodies, and the
effigies of the dead, were taken to be burnt on the Campo Santo Lazaro,
on the river side, the place appointed for that purpose, that the
viceroy might see justice done on the heretics, as he surveyed the
execution from his palace-windows." The remainder of Dellon's history adds nothing to what we have already
heard of the Inquisition. He was taken to Lisbon, and, after working in
a gang of convicts for some time, was released on the intercession of
some friends in France with the Portuguese government. With regard to
his despair, and attempts to commit suicide, when in the holy house,
we may observe that, as he states, suicide was very frequent there. The contrast of his disconsolate impatience with the resignation and
constancy of Christian confessors in similar circumstances, is obvious. As a striking illustration of the difference between those who suffer
without a consciousness of divine favor, and those who rejoice with joy
unspeakable and full of glory, we would refer the reader to that noble
band of martyrs who suffered death at the stake, at the Auto held in
Seville, on Sunday, September 24, 1559. At that time twenty-one
were burnt, followed by one effigy, and eighteen penitents, who were
released. "One of the former was Don Juan Gonzales, Presbyter of Seville, an
eminent preacher. With admirable constancy he refused to make any
declaration, in spite of the severe torture, saying that he had not
followed any erroneous opinions, but that he had drawn his faith from
the holy Scriptures; and for this faith he pleaded to his tormentors in
the words of inspiration. He maintained that he was not a heretic, but
a Christian, and absolutely refused to divulge anything that would bring
his brethren into trouble. Two sisters of his were also brought out to
this Auto, and displayed equal faith. They would confess Christ, they
said, and suffer with their brother, whom they revered as a wise and
holy man. They were all tied to stakes on the quemadero, a piece of
pavement, without the walls of the city, devoted to the single use of
burning human victims. Sometimes this quemadero [Footnote: Llorente, the
historian of the Spanish Inquisition, says, "So many persons were to be
put to death by fire, the governor of Seville caused a permanent raised
platform of masonry to be constructed outside the city, which has
lasted to our time (until the French revolution) retaining its name of
Quemadero, or burning-place, and at the four corners four large hollow
stalutes of limestone, within which they used to place the impenitent
alive, that they might die by slow fires."] was a raised platform of
stone, adorned with pillows or surrounded with statues, to distinguish
and beautify the spot. Just as the fire was lit, the gag, which had
hitherto silenced Don Juan, was removed, and as the flames burst from
the fagots, he said to his sisters, 'Let us sing, Deus laudem meam ne
tacueris.' And they sang together, while burning, 'Hold not thy peace,
O God of my praise; for the mouth of the wicked and the mouth of the
deceitful are opened against me: they have spoken against me with a
lying tongue.' Thus they died in the faith of Christ, and of his holy
gospel." INQUISITION OF GOA, CONCLUDED. The Inquisition of Goa continued its Autos for a century after the
affair of Dellon. Claudius Buchanan visited
that city, and had been unexpectedly invited by Joseph a Doloribus,
second and most active inquisitor, to lodge with him during his
visit. Buchanan found himself, heretic,
schismatic, and rebel as he was, politely entertained by so dread a
personage. Regarding his English visitor merely as a literary man, or
professing to do so, Friar Joseph, himself well educated, seemed to
enjoy his company, and was unreservedly communicative on every subject
not pertaining to his own vocation. When that subject was first
introduced by an apparently incidental question, he did not hesitate
to return the desired information, telling Dr. Buchanan that the
establishment was nearly as extensive as in former times. In the library
of the chief inquisitor he saw a register containing the names of all
the officers, who still were numerous. On the second evening after his arrival, the doctor was surprised to see
his host come from his apartment, clothed in black robes from head to
foot, instead of white, the usual color of his order (Augustinian). He
said that he was going to sit on the tribunal of the holy office, and it
transpired that, so far from his "august office" not occupying much of
his time, he had to sit there three or four days every week. After his
return, in the evening, the doctor put Dellon's book into his hand,
asking him if he had ever seen it. He had never seen it before, and,
after reading aloud and slowly, "Relation de l'Inquisition de Goa,"
began to peruse it with eagerness. Buchanan employed himself in writing, Friar Joseph devoured
page after page; but as the narrative proceeded, betrayed evident
symptoms of uneasiness. He then turned to the middle, looked at the end,
skimmed over the table of contents, fixed on its principal passages,
and at one place exclaimed, in his broad Italian accent, "Mendacium! The doctor requested him to mark the passages that were
untrue, proposed to discuss them afterwards, and said he had other books
on the subject. The mention of other books startled him; he looked up
anxiously at some books on the table, and then gave himself up to the
perusal of Dellon's "Relation," until bedtime. Even then, he asked
permission to take it to his chamber. The doctor had fallen asleep under the roof of the inquisitor's convent,
confident, under God, in the protection at that time guaranteed to
a British subject, his servants sleeping in the gallery outside
the chamber-door. About midnight, he was waked by loud shrieks and
expressions of terror from some one in the gallery. In the first moment
of surprise, he concluded it must be the alguazils of the holy office
seizing his servants to carry them to the Inquisition. But, on going
out, he saw the servants standing at the door, and the person who
had caused the alarm, a boy of about fourteen, at a little distance,
surrounded by some of the priests, who had come out of their cells on
hearing the noise. The boy said he had seen a spectre; and it was a
considerable time before the agitations of his body and voice
subsided. Next morning at breakfast, the inquisitor apologized for
the disturbance, and said the boy's alarm proceeded from a phantasma
animi,--phantom of the imagination. As to
Dellon's book, the inquisitor acknowledged that the descriptions
were just; but complained that he had misjudged the motives of the
inquisitors, and written uncharitably of Holy Church. Their conversation
grew earnest, and the inquisitor was anxious to impress his visitor with
the idea that the Inquisition had undergone a change in some respects,
and that its terrors were mitigated. Buchanan plainly
requested to see the Inquisition, that he might judge for himself as to
the humanity shown to the inmates,--according to the inquisitor,--and
gave, as a reason why he should be satisfied, his interest in the
affairs of India, on which he had written, and his purpose to write on
them again, in which case he could scarcely be silent concerning the
Inquisition. The countenance of his host fell; but, after some further
observations, he reluctantly promised to comply. Next morning, after
breakfast, Joseph a Doloribus went to dress for the holy office, and
soon returned in his black robes. He said he would go half an hour
before the usual time, for the purpose of showing him the Inquisition. The doctor fancied he looked more severe than usual, and that his
attendants were not as civil as before. But the truth was, that the
midnight scene still haunted him. They had proceeded in their palanquins
to the holy house, distant about a quarter of a mile from the convent,
and the inquisitor said as they were ascending the steps of the great
entrance, that he hoped the doctor would be satisfied with a transient
view of the Inquisition, and would retire when he should desire him to
do so. The doctor followed with tolerable confidence, towards the
great hall aforementioned, where they were met by several well-dressed
persons, familiars, as it afterwards appeared, who bowed very low to the
inquisitor, and looked with surprise at the stranger. Buchanan paced
the hall slowly, and in thoughtful silence; the inquisitor thoughtful
too, silent and embarrassed. A multitude of victims seemed to haunt the
place, and the doctor could not refrain from breaking silence. "Would
not the Holy Church wish, in her mercy, to have those souls back again,
that she might allow them a little further probation?" The inquisitor
answered nothing, but beckoned him to go with him to a door at one end
of the hall. By that door he conducted him to some small rooms, and
thence, to the spacious apartments of the chief inquisitor. Having
surveyed those, he brought him back again to the great hall, and seemed
anxious that the troublesome visitor should depart; but only the very
words of Dr. B. can adequately describe the close of this extraordinary
interview." "Now, father," said I, "lead me to the dungeons below: I want to see the
captives." "No," said he, "that cannot be." I now began to suspect that
it had been in the mind of the inquisitor, from the beginning, to show
me only a certain part of the Inquisition, in the hope of satisfying
my inquiries in a general way. I urged him with earnestness; but he
steadily resisted, and seemed offended, or, rather, agitated, by my
importunity. I intimated to him plainly, that the only way to do justice
to his own assertion and arguments regarding the present state of the
Inquisition, was to show me the prisons and the captives. I should
then describe only what I saw; but now the subject was left in awful
obscurity. "Lead me down," said I, "to the inner building, and let me
pass through the two hundred dungeons, ten feet square, described by
your former captives. Let me count the number of your present captives,
and converse with them. I WANT, TO SEE IF THERE BE ANY SUBJECTS OF THE
BRITISH GOVERNMENT, TO WHOM WE OWE PROTECTION. I want to ask how long
they have been there, how long it is since they have seen the light
of the sun, and whether they ever expect to see it again. Show me the
chamber of torture, and declare what modes of execution or punishment
are now practiced inside the walls of the Inquisition, in lieu of the
public Auto de Fe. If, after all that has passed, father, you resist
this reasonable request, I should be justified in believing that you are
afraid of exposing the real state of the Inquisition in India." To these observations the inquisitor made no reply; but seemed impatient
that I should withdraw. "My good father," said I; "I am about to take
my leave of you, and to thank you for your hospitable attentions; and I
wish to preserve on my mind a favorable sentiment of your kindness and
candor. You cannot, you say, show me the captives and the dungeons; be
pleased, then, merely to answer this question, for I shall believe
your word: how many prisoners are there now below in the cells of the
Inquisition?" He replied, "That is a question which I cannot answer." On his pronouncing these words, I retired hastily towards the door, and
wished him farewell. We shook hands with as much cordiality as we could,
at the moment, assume; and both of us, I believe, were sorry that our
parting took place with a clouded countenance. Buchanan, feeling as if he could
not refrain from endeavoring to get another and perhaps a nearer view,
returned to avail himself of the pretext afforded by a promise from
the chief inquisitor, of a letter to one of the British residents at
Travancore, in answer to one which he had brought him from that officer. The inquisitors he expected to find within, in the "board of the holy
office." The door-keepers surveyed him doubtfully, but allowed him to
pass. He entered the great hall, went up directly to the lofty crucifix
described by Dellon, sat down on a form, wrote some notes, and then
desired an attendant to carry in his name to the inquisitor. As he was
walking across the hall, he saw a poor woman sitting by the wall. She
clasped her hands, and looked at him imploringly. The sight chilled
his spirits; and as he was asking the attendants the cause of her
apprehension,--for she was awaiting trial,--Joseph a Doloribus came, in
answer to his message, and was about to complain of the intrusion,
when he parried the complaint by asking for the letter from the chief
inquisitor. He promised to send it after him, and conducted him to the
door. As they passed the poor woman, the doctor pointed to her, and said
with emphasis, "Behold, father, another victim of the Holy Inquisition." The other answered nothing; they bowed, and separated without a word. Buchanan published his "Christian Researches in Asia," in the
year 1812, the Inquisition still existed at Goa; but the establishment
of constitutional government in Portugal, put an end to it throughout
the whole Portuguese dominions. APPENDIX V.

INQUISITION AT MACERATA, ITALY. I never pretended that it was for the sake of religion alone, that I
left Italy, On the contrary, I have often declared, that, had I never
belonged to the Inquisition, I should have gone on, as most Roman
Catholics do, without ever questioning the truth of the religion I was
brought up in, or thinking of any other. But the unheard of cruelties
of that hellish tribunal shocked me beyond all expression, and rendered
me,--as I was obliged, by my office of Counsellor, to be accessary to
them,--one of the most unhappy men upon earth. I therefore began
to think of resigning my office; but as I had on several occasions,
betrayed some weakness as they termed it, that is, some compassion and
humanity, and had upon that account been reprimanded by the Inquisitor,
I was well apprized that my resignation would be ascribed by him to
my disapproving the proceedings of the holy tribunal. And indeed, to
nothing else could it be ascribed, as a place at that board was a
sure way to preferment, and attended with great privileges, and a
considerable salary. Being, therefore, sensible how dangerous a thing it
would be to give the least ground for any suspicions of that nature,
and no longer able to bear the sight of the many barbarities practised
almost daily within those walls, nor the reproaches of my conscience for
being accessary to them, I determined, after many restless nights, and
much deliberation, to withdraw at the same time from the Inquisition,
and from Italy. In this mind, and in the most unhappy and tormenting
situation that can possibly be imagined, I continued near a
twelve-month, not able to prevail on myself to execute the resolution
I had taken on account of the many dangers which I foresaw would
inevitably attend it, and the dreadful consequences of my failing in
the attempt. But, being in the mean time ordered by the Inquisitor, to
apprehend a person with whom I had lived in the greatest intimacy and
friendship, the part I was obliged to act on that occasion, left so deep
an impression on my mind as soon prevailed over all my fears, and made
me determine to put into execution, at all events, and without delay,
the design I had formed. Of that transaction I shall give a particular
account, as it will show in a very strong light the nature and
proceedings of that horrid court. The person whom the Inquisitor appointed me to apprehend was Count
Vicenzo della Torre, descended from an illustrious family in Germany,
and possessed of a very considerable estate in the territory of
Macerata. He was one of my very particular friends, and had lately
married the daughter of Signior Constantini, of Fermo, a lady no less
famous for her good sense than her beauty. With her family too, I had
contracted an intimate acquaintance, while Professor of Rhetoric in
Fermo, and had often attended the Count during his courtship, from
Macerata to Fermo, but fifteen miles distant. I therefore lived with
both in the greatest friendship and intimacy; and the Count was the
only person that lived with me, after I was made Counsellor of the
Inquisition, upon the same free footing as he had done till that time. My other friends had grown shy of me, and gave me plainly to understand
that they no longer cared for my company. As this unhappy young gentleman was one day walking with another, he met
two Capuchin friars, and turning to his companion, when they had passed,
"what fools," said he, "are these, to think they shall gain heaven by
wearing sackcloth and going barefoot! Fools indeed, if they think so,
or that there is any merit in tormenting one's self; they might as well
live as we do, and they would get to heaven quite as soon." Who informed
against him, whether the friars, his companion, or somebody else, I
know not; for the inquisitors never tell the names of informers to the
Counsellors, nor the names of the witnesses, lest they should except
against them. It is to be observed, that all who hear any proposition
that appears to them repugnant to, or inconsistent with the doctrines of
holy mother church, are bound to reveal it to the Inquisitor, and also
to discover the person by whom it was uttered; and, in this affair no
regard is to be had to any ties, however sacred. The brother being bound
to accuse the brother, the father the son, the son the father, the wife
her husband, and the husband his wife; and all bound on pain of eternal
damnation, and of being treated as accomplices if they do not denounce
in a certain time; and no confessor can absolve a person who has heard
anything said in jest or in earnest, against the belief or practice
of the church, till that person has informed the Inquisitor of it, and
given him all the intelligence he can concerning the person by whom it
was spoken. Whoever it was that informed against my unhappy friend, whether the
friars, his companion, or somebody else who might have overheard him,
the Inquisitor acquainted the board one night, (for to be less observed,
they commonly meet, out of Rome, in the night) that the above mentioned
propositions had been advanced, and advanced gravely, at the sight of
two poor Capuchins; that the evidence was unexceptionable; and that
they were therefore met to determine the quality of the proposition, and
proceed against the delinquent. There are in each Inquisition twelve Counsellors, viz: four Divines,
four Canonists, and four Civilians. It is chiefly the province of the
divines to determine the quality of the proposition, whether it is
heretical, or only savors of heresy; whether it is blasphemous and
injurious to God and His saints or only erroneous, rash, schismatical,
or offensive to pious ears. The part of the proposition, "Fools! if
they think there is any merit in tormenting one's self," was judged and
declared heretical, as openly contradicting the doctrine and practice of
holy mother church recommending austerities as highly meritorious. The
Inquisitor observed, on this occasion, that by the proposition, "Fools
indeed" &c., were taxing with folly, not only the holy fathers, who had
all to a man practised great austerities, but St. Paul himself as the
Inquisitor understood it, adding that the practice of whipping one's
self, so much recommended by all the founders of religious orders, was
borrowed of the great apostle of the gentiles. The proposition being declared heretical, it was unanimously agreed by
the board that the person who had uttered it should be apprehended, and
proceeded against agreeably to the laws of the Inquisition. And now the
person was named; for, till it is determined whether the accused person
should or should not be apprehended, his name is kept concealed from
the counsellors, lest they should be biased, says the directory, in
his favor, or against him. For, in many instances, they keep up an
appearance of justice and equity, at the same time that, in truth, they
act in direct opposition to all the known laws of justice and equity. No words can express the concern and astonishment it gave me to hear,
on such an occasion, the name of a friend for whom I had the greatest
esteem and regard. The Inquisitor was apprised of it; and to give me an
opportunity of practising what he had so often recommended to me, viz. conquering nature with the assistance of grace, he appointed me to
apprehend the criminal, as he styled him, and to lodge him safe, before
daylight, in the prison of the holy inquisition. I offered to excuse
myself, but with the greatest submission, from being in any way
concerned in the execution of that order; an order, I said, which I
entirely approved of, but only wished it might be put in execution by
some other person; for your lordship knows, I said, the connection. But
the Inquisitor shocked at the word, said with a stern look and angry
tone of voice, "What! There is your guard," (pointing to the Sbirri or bailiffs in waiting)
"let the criminal be secured in St. Luke's cell," (one of the worst,)
"before three in the morning." He then withdrew, and as he passed me
said, "Thus, nature is conquered." I had betrayed some weakness or sense
of humanity, not long before, in fainting away while I attended the
torture of one who was racked with the utmost barbarity, and I had on
that occasion been reprimanded by the Inquisitor for suffering nature
to get the better of grace; it being an inexcusable weakness, as he
observed, to be in any degree affected with the suffering of the body,
however great, when afflicted, as they ever are in the Holy Inquisition,
for the good of the soul. And it was, I presume, to make trial of the
effect of that reprimand, that the execution of this cruel order was
committed to me. As I could by no possible means decline it, I summoned
all my resolution, after passing an hour by myself, I may say in the
agonies of death, and set out a little after two in the morning for my
unhappy friend's house, attended by a notary of the Inquisition, and six
armed Sbirri. We arrived at the house by different ways and knocking
at the door, a maid-servant looked out of the window, and asked who
knocked. "The Holy Inquisition," was the answer, and at the same time
she was ordered to awake nobody, but to come down directly and open the
door, on pain of excommunication. At these words, the servant hastened
down, half naked as she was, and having with much ado, in her great
fright, opened the door, she conducted us as she was ordered to her
master's chamber. She often looked very earnestly at me, as she knew me,
and showed a great desire to speak with me; but of her I durst take no
kind of notice. I entered the bed-chamber with the notary, followed by
the Sbirri, when the lady awakening at the noise, and seeing the bed
surrounded by armed men, screamed out aloud and continued screaming as
out of her senses, till one of the Sbirri, provoked at the noise gave
her a blow on the forehead that made the blood flow, and she swooned
away. I rebuked the fellow severely, and ordered him to be whipped as
soon as I returned to the Inquisition. In the mean time, the husband awakening, and seeing me with my
attendants, cried out, in the utmost surprise, "MR. He said no
more, nor could I for some time utter a single word; and it was with
much ado that, in the end I so far mastered my grief as to be able
to let my unfortunate friend know that he was a prisoner of the Holy
Inquisition. "Alas I what have I
done? He said many affecting things;
but as I knew it was not in my power to befriend him, I had not the
courage to look him in the face, but turning my back to him, withdrew,
while he dressed, to a corner of the room, to give vent to my grief. The
notary stood by, quite unaffected. Indeed, to be void of all humanity,
to be able to behold one's fellow-creatures groaning under the most
exquisite torments cruelty can invent, without being in the least
affected with their sufferings, is one of the chief qualifications of
an inquisitor, and what all who belong to the Inquisition must strive to
attain to. It often happens, at that infernal tribunal, that while the
unhappy, and probably innocent, person is crying out in their presence
on the rack, and begging by all that is sacred for one moment's relief,
in a manner one would think no human heart could withstand, it often
happens, I say, that the inquisitor and the rest of his infamous crew,
quite unaffected with his complaints, and deaf to his groans, to his
tears and entreaties, are entertaining one another with the news of the
town; nay, sometimes they even insult, with unheard of barbarity, the
unhappy wretches in the height of their torment. He was no sooner dressed than I
ordered the Bargello, or head of the Sbirri, to tie his hands with
a cord behind his back, as is practised on such occasions without
distinction of persons; no more regard being paid to men of the first
rank, when charged with heresy, than to the meanest offender. Heresy
dissolves all friendship; so that I durst no longer look upon the man
with whom I had lived in the greatest friendship and intimacy as my
friend, or show him, on that account, the least regard or indulgence. As we left the chamber, the countess, who had been conveyed out of the
room, met us, and screaming out in the most pitiful manner upon seeing
her husband with his hands tied behind his back like a thief or robber,
flew to embrace him, and hanging on his neck, begged, with a flood of
tears, we would be so merciful as to put an end to her life, that she
might have the satisfaction--the only satisfaction she wished for in
this world, of dying in the bosom of the man from whom she had vowed
never to part. The count, overwhelmed with grief, did not utter a single
word. I could not find it in my heart, nor was I in a condition to
interpose; and indeed a scene of greater distress was never beheld by
human eyes. However, I gave a signal to the notary to part them, which
he did accordingly, quite unconcerned; but the countess fell into a
swoon, and the count was meantime carried down stairs, and out of the
house, amid the loud lamentations and sighs of his servants, on all
sides, for he was a man remarkable for the sweetness of his temper, and
his kindness to all around him. Being arrived at the Inquisition, I consigned my prisoner into the
hands of a gaoler, a lay brother of St. Dominic, who shut him up in the
dungeon above-mentioned, and delivered the key to me. I lay that night
at the palace of the Inquisition, where every counsellor has a room, and
returned next morning the key to the inquisitor, telling him that his
order had been punctually complied with. The inquisitor had been already
informed of my conduct by the notary, and therefore, upon my delivering
the key to him, he said, "You have acted like one who is at least
desirous to overcome, with the assistance of grace, the inclinations of
nature;" that is, like one who is desirous, by the assistance of grace,
to metamorphose himself from a human creature into a brute or a devil. In the Inquisition, every prisoner is kept the first week of his
imprisonment in a dark narrow dungeon, so low that he cannot stand
upright in it, without seeing anybody but the gaoler, who brings him,
EVERY OTHER DAY, his portion of bread and water, the only food allowed
him. This is done, they say, to tame him, and render him, thus weakened,
more sensible of the torture, and less able to endure it. At the end of
the week, he is brought in the night before the board to be examined;
and on that occasion my poor friend appeared so altered, in a week's
time, that, had it not been for his dress, I should not have known him. And indeed no wonder; a change of condition so sudden and unexpected;
the unworthy and barbarous treatment he had already met with; the
apprehension of what he might and probably should suffer; and perhaps,
more than anything else, the distressed and forlorn condition of his
once happy wife, whom he tenderly loved, whose company he had enjoyed
only six months, could be attended with no other effect. Being asked, according to custom, whether he had any enemies, and
desired to name them, he answered, that he bore enmity to no man, and he
hoped no man bore enmity to him. For, as in the Inquisition the person
accused is not told of the charge brought against him, nor of the person
by whom it is brought, the inquisitor asks him if he has any enemies,
and desires him to name them. If he names the informer, all further
proceedings are stopped until the informer is examined anew; and if the
information is found to proceed from ill-will and no collateral proof
can be produced, the prisoner is discharged. Of this piece of justice
they frequently boast, at the same time that they admit, both as
informers and witnesses, persons of the most infamous characters,
and such as are excluded by all other courts. In the next place, the
prisoner is ordered to swear that he will declare the truth, and conceal
nothing from the holy tribunal, concerning himself or others, that he
knows and the holy tribunal desires to know. He is then interrogated for
what crime he has been apprehended and imprisoned by the Holy Court of
the Inquisition, of all courts the most equitable, the most cautious,
the most merciful. To that interrogatory the count answered, with a
faint and trembling voice, that he was not conscious to himself of any
crime, cognizable by the Holy Court, nor indeed by any other; that he
believed and ever had believed whatever holy mother church believed or
required him to believe. He had, it seems quite forgotten what he
had unthinkingly said at the sight of the two friars. The inquisitor,
therefore, finding that he did not remember or would not own his crime,
after many deceitful interrogatories, and promises which he never
intended to fulfil, ordered him back to his dungeon, and allowing him
another week, as is customary in such cases, to recollect himself, told
him that if he could not in that time prevail upon himself to declare
the truth, agreeably to his oath, means would be found of forcing it
from him; and he must expect no mercy. At the end of the week he was brought again before the infernal
tribunal; and being asked the same questions, returned the same answers,
adding, that if he had done or said anything amiss, unwittingly or
ignorantly, he was ready to own it, provided the least hint of it were
given him by any there present, which he entreated them most earnestly
to do. He often looked at me, and seemed to expect--which gave me such
concern as no words can express--that I should say something in his
favor. But I was not allowed to speak on this occasion, nor were any of
the counsellors; and had I been allowed to speak, I durst not have said
anything in his favor; the advocate appointed by the Inquisition, and
commonly styled, "The Devil's Advocate," being the only person that
is suffered to speak for the prisoner. The advocate belongs to the
Inquisition, receives a salary from the Inquisition, and is bound by an
oath to abandon the defence of the prisoner, if he undertakes it, or not
to undertake it, if he finds it cannot be defended agreeably to the laws
of the Holy Inquisition; go that the whole is mere sham and imposition. I have heard this advocate, on other occasions, allege something in
favor of the person accused; but on this occasion he declared that he
had nothing to offer in defence of the criminal. In the Inquisition, the person accused is always supposed guilty, unless
he has named the accuser among his enemies. And he is put to the torture
if he does not plead guilty, and own the crime that is laid to his
charge, without being so much as told what it is; whereas, in all other
courts, where tortures are used, the charge is declared to the party
accused before he is tortured; nor are they ever inflicted without
a credible evidence of his guilt. But in the Inquisition, a man is
frequently tortured upon the deposition of a person whose evidence would
be admitted in no other court, and in all cases without hearing the
charge. As my unfortunate friend continued to maintain his innocence,
not recollecting what he had said, he was, agreeably to the laws of
the Inquisition, put to the torture. He had scarcely borne it twenty
minutes, crying out the whole time, "Jesus Maria!" when his voice failed
him at once, and he fainted away. He was then supported, as he hung
by his arms, by two of the Sbirri, whose province it is to manage the
torture, till he returned to himself. He still continued to declare that
he could not recollect his having said or done anything contrary to the
Catholic faith, and earnestly begged they would let him know with what
he was charged, being ready to own it if it was true. The Inquisitor was then so gracious as to put him in mind of what he had
said on seeing the two Capuchins. The reason why they so long conceal
from the party accused the crime he is charged with, is, that if he
should be conscious to himself of his having ever said or done anything
contrary to the faith, which he is not charged with, he may discover
that too, imagining it to be the very crime he is accused of. After a
short pause, the poor gentleman owned that he had said something to that
purpose; but, as he had said it with no evil intention, he had never
more thought of it, from that time to the present. He added, but with a
voice so faint, as scarce could be heard, that for his rashness he was
willing to undergo what punishment soever the holy tribunal should,
think fit to impose on him; and he again fainted away. Being eased for
a while of his torment, and returned to himself, he was interrogated by
the promoter fiscal (whose business it is to accuse and to prosecute, as
neither the informer nor the witnesses, are ever to appear,) concerning
his intention. For in the Inquisition, it is not enough for the party
accused to confess the fact, he must declare whether his intention was
heretical or not; and many, to redeem themselves from the torments
they, can no longer endure, own their intention was heretical, though
it really was not. My poor friend often told us, he was ready to say
whatever he pleased, but as he never directly acknowledged his intention
to have been heretical, as is required by the rules of the court, he
was kept on the torture still, quite overcome with the violence of the
anguish, he was ready to expire. Being taken down, he was carried quite
senseless, back to his dungeon, and there, on the third day, death put
an end to his sufferings. The Inquisitor wrote a note to his widow, to
desire her to pray for the soul of her late husband, and warn her not
to complain of the holy Inquisition, as capable of any injustice or
cruelty. The estate was confiscated to the Inquisition, and a small
jointure allowed out of it to the widow. As they had only been
married six months, and some part of the fortune was not yet paid, the
inquisitor sent an order to the Constantini family, at Ferno, to pay the
holy office, and without delay, what they owed to the late Count Della
Torre. The effects of heretics are all ipso facto confiscated to the
Inquisition from the very day, not of their conviction, but of their
crime, so that all donations made after that time are void; and whatever
they may have given, is claimed by the Inquisition, into whatsoever
hands it may have passed; even the fortunes they have given to their
daughters in marriage, have been declared to belong to, and are claimed
by the Inquisition; nor can it be doubted, that the desire of those
confiscations is one great cause of the injustice and cruelty of that
court. The death of the unhappy Count Della Torre was soon publicly known; but
no man cared to speak of it, not even his nearest relations, nor so much
as to mention his name, lest anything should inadvertently escape them
that might be construed into a disapprobation of the proceedings of the
most holy tribunal; so great is the awe all men live in of that jealous
and merciless court. The deep impression that the death of my unhappy friend, the barbarous
and inhuman treatment he had met with, and the part I had been obliged
to act in so affecting a tragedy, made on my mind, got at once the
better of my fears, so that, forgetting in a manner the dangers I had
till then so much apprehended, I resolved, without further delay to put
in execution the design I had formed, of quitting the Inquisition, and
bidding forever adieu to Italy. To execute that design with some safety,
I proposed to beg leave to visit the Virgin of Loretto, but thirteen
miles distant, and to pass a week there; but in the mean time, to make
the best of my way out of the reach of the Inquisition. Having, therefore, after many conflicts with myself, asked leave to
visit the neighboring sanctuary, and obtained it, I set out on horseback
the very next morning, leaving, as I proposed to keep the horse, his
full value with the owner. I took the road to Loretto, but turned out
of it a short distance from Recanati, after a most violent struggle with
myself, the attempt appearing to me at that juncture, quite desperate
and impracticable; and the dreadful doom reserved for me should I
miscarry, presented itself to my mind in the strongest light. But the
reflection that I had it in my power to avoid being taken alive, and
a persuasion that a man in my situation might lawfully avoid it, when
every other means failed him, at the expense of his life, revived my
staggered resolution; and all my fears ceasing at once, I steered my
course, leaving Loretto behind me, to Rocca Contrada, to Fossonbrone, to
Calvi in the dukedom of Urbino, and from thence through the Romagna into
Bolognese, keeping the by-roads, and at a good distance from the cities
through which the high road passed. Thus I advanced very slowly, travelling in very bad roads, and often in
places where there was no road at all, to avoid, not only the cities,
and towns, but also the villages. In the mean time I seldom had any
other support but some coarse provisions, and a very small quantity
even, of them, that the poor shepherds, the countrymen or wood cleavers
I met in those unfrequented by-places, could spare me. My horse fared
not much better than myself; but, in choosing my sleeping-place I
consulted his convenience as much as my own, passing the night where I
found most shelter for myself, and most grass for him. In Italy there
are very few solitary farm-houses or cottages, the country people all
living together in villages; and I thought it far safer to lie where I
could be in any way sheltered, than to venture into any of them. Thus I
spent seventeen days before I got out of the ecclesiastical state; and
I very narrowly escaped being taken or murdered, on the very borders of
that state; it happened thus. I had passed two whole days without any kind of subsistence whatever,
meeting with no one in the by-roads that could supply me with any, and
fearing to come near any house, as I was not far from the borders of the
dominions of the Pope. I thought I should be able to hold out till I
got into the Modanese, where I believed I should be in less danger than
while I remained in the papal dominions. But finding myself, about noon
of the third day, extremely weak and ready to faint away, I came into
the high road that leads from Bologna to Florence, a few miles distant
from the former city, and alighted at a post house, that stood quite
by itself. Having asked the woman of the house whether she had any
victuals, and being told that she had, I went to open the door of the
only room in the house, (that being a place where gentlemen only stop
to change horses,) and saw to my great surprise, a placard pasted on it,
with a minute description of my whole person, sad a promise of a reward
of 900 crowns (about 200 pounds English money) for delivering me up
alive to the Inquisition, being a fugitive from that holy tribunal,
and of 600 crowns for my head. By the same placard, all persons were
forbidden, on pain of the greater excommunication, to receive or
harbor, entertain, conceal, or screen me, or to be in any way aiding, or
assisting me to make my escape. This greatly alarmed me, as the reader
may well imagine; but I was still more frightened, when entering the
room, I saw two fellows drinking there, who, fixing their eyes on me as
soon as I went in, continued looking at me very steadfastly. I strove,
by wiping my face and blowing my nose, and by looking out of the window,
to prevent their having a full view of my features. But, one of
them saying, "The gentleman seems afraid to be seen," I put up my
handkerchief, and turning to the fellow, said boldly, "What do you mean
you rascal? Look at me; am I afraid to be seen?" He said nothing, but
looking again steadfastly at me, and nodding his head, went out, and
his companion immediately followed him. I watched them, and seeing them,
with two or three more, in close conference, and no doubt consulting
whether they should apprehend me or not, I walked that moment into
the stable, mounted my horse unobserved by them, and while they were
deliberating in an orchard behind the house, rode off at full speed, and
in a few hours got into the Modanese, where I refreshed both with food
and rest, as I was there in no immediate danger, my horse and myself. I
was indeed surprised to find that those fellows did not pursue me, nor
can I in any other way account for it, but by supposing, what is not
improbable, that, as they were strangers as well as myself, and had all
the appearance of banditti or ruffians flying out of the dominions of
the Pope, the woman of the house did not care to trust them with her
horses. From the Modanese I continued my journey, more leisurely through
the Parmesan, the Milanese, and part of the Venetian territory, to
Chiavenna, subject to the Grisons, who abhor the very name of the
Inquisition, and are ever ready to receive and protect all who, flying
from it, take refuge, as many Italians do, in their dominions. Still
I carefully concealed who I was, and whence I came, for, though no
Inquisition prevails among the Swiss, yet the Pope's nuncio who resides
at Lucerne, (a popish canton through which I was to pass,) might have
persuaded the magistrate to stop me as an apostate and deserter from the
order. Having rested a few days at Chiavenna, I resumed my journey quite
refreshed, continuing it through the country of the Grisons, and the two
small cantons of Ury and Underwald, to the canton of Lucerne. There
I missed my way, as I was quite unacquainted with the country, and
discovering a city at a distance, was advancing to it, but slowly, as I
knew not where I was, when a countryman whom I met, informed me that the
city before me was Lucerne. Upon that intelligence, I turned out of the
road as soon as the countryman was out of sight, and that night I
passed with a good natured shepherd in his cottage, who supplied me with
sheep's milk, and my horse with plenty of grass. I set out early next
morning, making my way westward, as I knew that Berne lay west of
Lucerne. But, after a few miles, the country proved very mountainous,
and having travelled the whole day over mountains I was overtaken among
them by night. As I was looking out for a place where I might shelter
myself during the night, against the snow and rain, (for it both snowed
and rained,) I perceived a light at a distance, and making towards it,
I got into a kind of foot-path, but so narrow and rugged that I was
obliged to lead my horse, and feel my way with one foot, (having no
light to direct me,) before I durst move the other. Thus, with much
difficulty I reached the place where the light was, a poor little
cottage, and knocking at the door, was asked by a man within who I was,
and what I wanted? I answered that I was a stranger and had lost my way. exclaimed the man, "There is no way here to lose." I
then asked him what canton I was in? and upon his answering that I was
in the canton of Berne, I cried out transported with joy, "I thank God
that I am." The good man answered, "And so do I." I then told him who I
was, and that I was going to Berne but had quite lost myself by keeping
out of all the high roads, to avoid falling into the hands of those
who sought my destruction. He thereupon opened the door, received and
entertained me with all the hospitality his poverty would admit of;
regaled me with sour crout and some new laid eggs, the only provision
he had, and clean straw with a kind of rug for a bed, he having no other
for himself and wife. The good woman expressed as much good nature as
her husband, and said many kind things in the Swiss language, which
her husband interpreted to me in the Italian; for that language he well
understood, having learned it in his youth, while servant in a public
home on the borders of Italy, where both languages are spoken. I never
passed a more comfortable night; and no sooner did I begin to stir in
the morning, than the good man and his wife both came to know how
I rested; and, wishing they had been able to accommodate me better,
obliged me to breakfast on two eggs, which providence, they said, had
sent them for that purpose. I took leave of the wife, who seemed most
sincerely to wish me a good journey. As for the husband, he would by all
means attend me to the high road leading to Berne; which road he said
was but two miles distant from that place. But he insisted on my first
going back with him, to see the way I had come the night before; the
only way, he said, I could have possibly come from the neighboring
canton of Lucerne. I saw it, and shuddered at the danger I had escaped;
for I found I had walked and led my horse a good way along a very narrow
path on the brink of a very dangerous precipice. The man made so
many pertinent and pious remarks on the occasion, as both charmed and
surprised me. I no less admired his disinterestedness than his piety;
for, upon our parting, after he had attended me till I was out of all
danger of losing my way, I could by no means prevail upon him to accept
of any reward for his trouble. He had the satisfaction, he said, of
having relieved me in the greatest distress, which was in itself a
sufficient reward, and he wished for no other. Having at length got safe into French Flanders, I there repaired to the
college of the Scotch Jesuits at Douay, and discovering myself to the
rector, I acquainted him with the cause of my sudden departure from
Italy, and begged him to give notice of my arrival, as well as the
motives of my flight to Michael Angelo Tambuvini, general of the order,
and my very particular friend. The rector wrote as I desired him, to the general, and he, taking no
notice of my flight, in his answer, (for he could not disapprove, and
did not think it safe to approve of it,) ordered me to continue where I
was till further notice. I arrived at Douay early in May, and continued
there till the beginning of July, when the rector received a second
letter from the general, acquainting him that he had been commanded by
the congregation of the Inquisition, to order me, wherever I was, back
into Italy; to promise me, in their name, full pardon and forgiveness if
I obeyed, but if I did not obey, to treat me as an apostate. He added,
that the same order had been transmitted, soon after my flight, to
the nuncios at the different Roman Catholic courts; and he, therefore,
advised me to consult my own safety without further delay. Upon the receipt of the general's kind letter, the rector was of opinion
that I should repair by all means, and without loss of time, to England,
not only as the safest asylum I could fly to, in my present situation,
but as a place where I should soon recover my native language, and be
usefully employed, either there or in Scotland. The place being thus
agreed on, and it being at the same time settled between the rector and
me, that I should set out the very next morning, I solemnly promised, at
his request and desire, to take no kind of notice, after my arrival
in England, of his having been in any way privy to my flight, or the
general's letter to him. This promise I have faithfully and honorably
observed; and should have thought myself guilty of the blackest
ingratitude if I had not observed it, being sensible that, had it been
known at Rome, that, either the rector or general had been accessary to
my flight, THE INQUISITION WOULD HAVE RESENTED IT SEVERELY IN BOTH. For
although a Jesuit in France, in Flanders, or in Germany, is out of the
reach of the Inquisition, the general is not; and the high tribunal not
only have it in their power to punish the general himself, who resides
constantly at Rome, but may oblige him to inflict what punishment they
please on any of the order obnoxious to them. The rector went that very night out of town, and in his absence, but not
without his privity, I took one of the horses of the college, early
next morning, as if I were going for a change of air, being somewhat
indisposed, to pass a few days at Lisle; but steering a different
course, I reached Aire that night and Calais the next day. I was there
in no danger of being stopped and seized at the prosecution of the
Inquisition, a tribunal no less abhorred in France than in England. But being informed that the nuncios at the different courts had been
ordered, soon after my flight, to cause me to be apprehended in Roman
Catholic countries through which I must pass, as an apostate and
deserter from the order, I was under no small apprehension of being
discovered and apprehended as such even at Calais. No sooner, therefore,
did I alight at the Inn, than I went down to the quay, and there as I
was very little acquainted with the sea, and thought the passage much
shorter than it is, I endeavored to engage some fishermen to carry me
that very night, in one of their small vessels, over to England. This
alarmed the guards of the harbor, and I should have been certainly
apprehended as a person guilty, or suspected of some great crime,
fleeing from justice, had not Lord Baltimore, whom I had the good luck
to meet in the Inn, informed me of my danger, and pitying my condition,
attended me that moment, with all his company, to the port, and conveyed
me immediately on board his yacht. There I lay that night, leaving every
thing I had but the clothes on my back, in the Inn; and the next day his
Lordship set me ashore at Dover, from whence I came in the common stage
to London. In the year 1706, the Inquisition at Arragon was broken up by the French
troops, under the command of the Duke of Orleans. The Holy Inquisitors
were driven from their beautiful house, and in answer to their indignant
remonstrance were told that the king wanted the house to quarter his
troops in, and they were therefore compelled to leave it immediately. The doors of the prisons were then thrown open, and among the four
hundred prisoners who were set at liberty were sixty young women, very
beautiful in person, and clad in the richest attire. Anthony Gavin, formerly one of the Roman Catholic priests of Saragossa,
Spain, relates (in a book published by him after his conversion) that
when travelling in France he met one of those women in the inn at
Rotchfort; the son of the inn-keeper, formerly an officer in the French
army, having married her for her great beauty and superior intelligence. In accordance with his request, she freely related to him the incidents
of her prison life, from which we take the following extract:

"Early the next morning, Mary got up, and told me that nobody was up
yet in the house; and that she would show me the DRY PAN and the GRADUAL
FIRE, on condition that I should keep it a secret for her sake as well
as my own. This I promised, and she took me along with her, and showed
me a dark room with a thick iron door, and within it an oven and a large
brass pan upon it, with a cover of the same and a lock to it. The oven
was burning at the time, and I asked Mary for what purpose the pan was
there. Without giving me any answer, she took me by the hand and led
me to a large room, where she showed me a thick wheel, covered on both
sides with thick boards, and opening a little window in the center of
it, desired me to look with a candle on the inside of it, and I saw all
the circumference of the wheel set with SHARP RAZORS. After that she
showed me a PIT FULL OF SERPENTS AND TOADS. Then she said to me, 'Now,
my good mistress, I'll tell you the use of these things. The dry pan and
gradual fire are for those who oppose the holy father's will, and for
heretics. They are put naked and alive into the pan, and the cover of it
being locked up, the executioner begins to put in the oven a small fire,
and by degrees he augmenteth it, till the body is burned to ashes. The
second is designed for those who speak against the Pope and the holy
fathers. They are put within the wheel, and the door being locked, the
executioner turns the wheel till the person is dead. The third is for
those who contemn the images, and refuse to give the due respect and
veneration to ecclesiastical persons; for they are thrown alive into the
pit, and there they become the food of serpents and toads.' Then Mary
said to me that another day she would show me the torments for public
sinners and transgressors of the commandments of holy mother church;
but I, in deep amazement, desired her to show me no more places; for the
very thought of those three which I had seen, was enough to terrify me
to the heart. So we went to my room, and she charged me again to be very
obedient to all commands, for if I was not, I was sure to undergo the
torment of the dry pan." Llorente, the Spanish historian and secretary-general of the
Inquisition, relates the following incident: "A physician, Juan de
Salas, was accused of having used a profane expression, twelve months
before, in the heat of debate. He denied the accusation, and produced
several witnesses to prove his innocence. But Moriz, the inquisitor at
Valladolid, where the charge was laid, caused de Salas to be brought
into his presence in the torture-chamber, stripped to his shirt, and
laid on a LADDER or DONKEY, an instrument resembling a wooden trough,
just large enough to receive the body, with no bottom, but having a
bar or bars to placed that the body bent, by its own weight, into an
exquisitely painful position. His head was lower than his heels, and the
breathing, in consequence, became exceedingly difficult. The poor man,
so laid, was bound around the arms and legs with hempen cords, each of
them encircling the limb eleven times. "During this part of the operation they admonished him to confess the
blasphemy; but he only answered that he had never spoken a sentence
of such a kind, and then, resigning himself to suffer, repeated the
Athanasian creed, and prayed to God and our Lady many times. Being
still bound, they raised his head, covered his face with a piece of fine
linen, and, forcing open the mouth, caused water to drip into it from an
earthen jar, slightly perforated at the bottom, producing in addition
to his sufferings from distension, a horrid sensation of choking. But
again, when they removed the jar for a moment, he declared that he had
never uttered such a sentence; and this he often repeated. They then
pulled the cords on his right leg, cutting into the flesh, replaced the
linen on his face, dropped the water as before, and tightened the cords
on his right leg the second time; but still he maintained that he
had never spoken such a thing; and in answer to the questions of his
tormentors, constantly reiterated that he HAD NEVER SPOKEN THOSE WORDS. Moriz then pronounced that the said torture should be regarded as
begun, but not finished; and De Salas was released, to live, if he could
survive, in the incessant apprehension that if he gave the slightest
umbrage to a familiar, he would be carried again into the same chamber,
and be RACKED IN EVERY LIMB." Llorente also relates, from the original records, another case quite as
cruel and unjust as the above. "On the 8th day of December, 1528, one
Catalina, a woman of BAD CHARACTER, informed the inquisitors that,
EIGHTEEN YEARS BEFORE she had lived in the house with a Morisco named
Juan, by trade a coppersmith, and a native of Segovia; that she had
observed that neither he nor his children ate pork or drank wine, and
that, on Saturday nights and Sunday mornings they used to wash their
feet, which custom, as well as abstinence from pork and wine, was
peculiar to the Moors. The old man was at that time an inhabitant of
Benevente, and seventy-one years of age. But the inquisitors at once
summoned him into their presence, and questioned him at three several
interviews. All that he could tell was, that he received baptism when he
was forty-five years of age; that having never eaten pork or drunk wine,
he had no taste for them; and that, being coppersmiths, they found it
necessary to wash themselves thoroughly once a week. After some other
examinations, they sent him back to Benevente, with prohibition to go
beyond three leagues' distance from the town. Two years afterwards the
inquisitor determined that he should be threatened with torture, IN
ORDER TO OBTAIN INFORMATION THAT MIGHT HELP THEM TO CRIMINATE OTHERS. He was accordingly taken to Valladolid, and in a subterranean chamber,
called the 'chamber, or dungeon, of torment,' stripped naked, and bound
to the 'ladder.' This might well have extorted something like confession
from an old man of seventy-one; but he told them that whatever he might
say when under torture would be merely extorted by the extreme anguish,
and therefore unworthy of belief; that he would not, through fear of
pain, confess what had never taken place. They kept him in close prison
until the next Auto de Fe, when he walked among the penitents, with a
lighted candle in his hand, and, after seeing others burnt to death,
paid the holy office a fee of four ducats, and went home, not acquitted,
but released. He was not summoned again, as he died soon afterwards." It sometimes happened that an individual was arrested by mistake, and
a person who was entirely innocent was tortured instead of the real or
supposed criminal. Bower found related at length
in the "Annals of the Inquisition at Macerata." "An order was sent from the high tribunal at Rome to all the inquisitors
throughout Italy, enjoining them to apprehend a clergyman minutely
described in that order. One Answering the description in many
particulars being discovered in the diocese of Osimo, at a small
distance from Macerata, and subject to that Inquisition, he was there
decoyed into the holy office, and by an order from Rome SO RACKED AS TO
LOSE HIS SENSES. In the mean time, the true person being apprehended,
the unhappy wretch was dismissed, by a second order from Rome, but he
never recovered the use of his senses, NOR WAS ANY CARE TAKEN OF HIM BY
THE INQUISITION." It would be easy to fill a volume with such narratives as the above, but
we forbear. We are not writing a history of the Inquisition. We simply
wish to exhibit the true spirit by which the Romanists are actuated in
their dealings with those over whom they have power. We therefore, in
closing this chapter of horrors, beg leave to place before our readers
one of the FATHERLY BENEDICTIONS with which, His Holiness, the Pope,
dismisses his refractory subjects. Does it not show most convincingly
what he would do here in America, if he had, among us, the power he
formerly possessed in the old world, when the least inadvertent word
might perchance seal the doom of the culprit? A POPISH BULL OK CURSE. "Pronounced on all who leave the Church of Rome. By the authority of God
Almighty, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and the undefiled Virgin
Mary, mother and patroness of our Saviour, and of all celestial virtues,
Angels, Archangels, Thrones, Dominions, Powers, Cherubim and Seraphim,
and of all the holy Patriarchs, Prophets, and of all the Apostles and
Evangelists, of the holy innocents, who in the sight of the holy Lamb
are found worthy to sing the new song of the Holy Martyrs and Holy
Confessors, and of all the Holy Virgins, and of all the Saints, together
with the Holy Elect of God,--MAY HE BE DAMNED. We excommunicate and
anathematize him, from the threshold of the holy church of God Almighty. We sequester him, that he may be tormented, disposed, and be delivered
over with Datham and Abiram, and with those who say unto the Lord,
'Depart from us, we desire none of thy ways;' as a fire is quenched with
water, so let the light of him be put out forevermore, unless it shall
repent him, and make satisfaction. "May the Father who creates man, curse him. May the Son, who suffered
for us, curse him! May the Holy Ghost who is poured out in baptism,
curse him! May the Holy Cross, which Christ for our salvation,
triumphing over his enemies, ascended, curse him! "May the Holy Mary, ever Virgin and Mother of God, curse him! May all
the Angels, Principalities, and Powers, and all heavenly Armies curse
him! May the glorious band of the Patriarchs and Prophets curse him! John the Precursor, and St John the Baptist, and St. Andrew and all other of Christ's Apostles together
curse him and may the rest of the Disciples and Evangelists who by their
preaching converted the universe, and the Holy and wonderful company
of Martyrs and Confessors, who by their works are found pleasing to God
Almighty; may the holy choir of the Holy Virgins, who for the honor of
God have despised the things of the world, damn him. May all the Saints
from the beginning of the world to everlasting ages, who are found to be
beloved of God, damn him! "May he be damned wherever he be, whether in the house or in the alley,
in the woods or in the water, or in the church! May he be cursed in
living or dying! "May he be cursed in eating and drinking, in being hungry, in being
thirsty, in fasting and sleeping, in slumbering, and in sitting, in
living, in working, in resting, and in blood letting! May he be cursed
in all the faculties of his body! "May he be cursed inwardly and outwardly. May he be cursed in his hair;
cursed be he in his brains, and his vertex, in his temples, in his
eyebrows, in his cheeks, in his jaw-bones, in his nostrils, in his
teeth, and grinders, in his lips, in his shoulders, in his arms, and in
his fingers. "May he be damned in his mouth, in his breast, in his heart, and
purtenances, down to the very stomach! "May he be cursed in his reins and groins, in his thighs and his hips,
and in his knees, his legs and his feet, and his toe-nails! "May he be cursed in all his joints, and articulation of the members;
from the crown of the head to the soles of his feet, may there be no
soundness! "May the Son of the living God, with all the glory of his majesty, CURSE
HIM! And may Heaven, with all the powers that move therein, rise
up against him, and curse and damn him; unless he repent and make
satisfaction! Such was the CURSE pronounced on the Rev. Hogan, (a converted Roman
Catholic priest) a few years since, in Philadelphia. As a further proof of the cruel, persecuting spirit of Catholicism, let
us glance at a few extracts from their own publications. "Children," they say, "are obliged to denounce their parents or
relations who are guilty of heresy; ALTHOUGH THEY KNOW THAT THEY WILL BE
BURNT. They may refuse them all nourishment, and permit them to die
with hunger; or they may KILL THEM as enemies, who violate the rights of
humanity.--Escobar, Theolg. "A man condemned by the Pope, may be killed wherever he is found." "Children may kill their parents, if they would turn their children
from the Popish faith." "If a judge decide contrary to law, the injured
person may defend himself by killing the judge." --Fangundez Precept
Decal, vol. "To secretly kill your calumniator, to avoid scandal, is
justifiable." "You may kill before hand, any person who may put you to death,
not EXCEPTING THE JUDGE, AND WITNESSES, because it is
self-defence." "A priest may kill those who hinder him from taking possession of any
Ecclesiastical office." "You may charge your opponent with false crime to take away his credit,
as well as kill him." --Guimenius, prop, 8, p. "Priests may kill the laity to preserve their goods." "You may kill any man to save a crown." "BY THE COMMAND OF GOD IT IS LAWFUL TO MURDER THE INNOCENT, TO ROB, AND
TO COMMIT ALL KIND OF WICKEDNESS, BECAUSE HE IS THE LORD OF LIFE
AND DEATH, AND ALL THINGS; AND THUS TO FULFILL HIS MANDATE IS OUR
DUTY." Again, in the Romish Creed found in the pocket of Priest Murphy, who was
killed in the battle of Arklow, 1798, we find the following articles. "We acknowledge that the priests can make vice virtue, and virtue vice,
according to their pleasure. "We are bound to believe that the holy massacre was lawful, and lawfully
put into execution, against Protestants, and likewise WE ARE TO CONTINUE
THE SAME, PROVIDED WITH SAFETY TO OUR LIVES! "We are bound not to keep our oaths with heretics, though bound by the
most sacred ties. We are bound not to believe their oaths; for their
principles are damnation. We are bound to drive heretics with fire,
sword, <DW19>, and confusion, out of the land; as our holy fathers say,
if their heresies prevail we will become their slaves. We are bound
to absolve without money or price, those who imbrue their hands in
the blood of a heretic!" Do not these extracts show very clearly that
Romanism can do things as bad as anything in the foregoing narrative? Whenever we refer to the relentless cruelties of the Romanists, we are
told, and that, too, by the influential, the intelligent, those who are
well-informed on other subjects, that "these horrid scenes transpired
only in the 'dark ages;'" that "the civilization and refinement of the
present age has so modified human society, so increased the milk of
human kindness, that even Rome would not dare, if indeed she had the
heart, to repeat the cruelties of by-gone days." For the honor of humanity we could hope that this opinion was correct;
but facts of recent date compel us to believe that it is as false as it
is ruinous to the best interests of our country and the souls of men. A few of these facts, gathered from unquestionable sources, and some of
them related by the actors and sufferers themselves, we place before the
reader. In November, 1854, Ubaldus Borzinski, a monk of the Brothers of Mercy,
addressed an earnest petition to the Pope, setting forth the shocking
immoralities practised in the convents of his order in Bohemia. He specifies nearly forty crimes, mostly perpetrated by priors and
subpriors, giving time, place, and other particulars, entreating the
Pope to interpose his power, and correct those horrible abuses. For sending this petition, he was thrown into a madhouse of the Brothers
of Mercy, at Prague, where he still languishes in dreary confinement,
though the only mark of insanity he ever showed was in imagining that
the Pope would interfere with the pleasures of the monks. This Ubaldus has a brother, like minded with himself, also a member of
the same misnamed order of monks, who has recently effected his escape
from durance vile. John Evangelist Borzinski was a physician in the convent of the Brothers
of Mercy at Prague. By the
study of the Psalms and Lessons from the New Testament, which make up
a considerable part of the Breviary used in cloisters, he was first
led into Protestant views. He had been for seventeen years resident in
different cloisters of his order, as sick-nurse, alms gatherer,
student, and physician, and knew the conventual life out and out. As he
testifies: "There was little of the fear of God, so far as I could
see, little of true piety; but abundance of hypocrisy, eye-service,
deception, abuse of the poor sick people in the hospitals, such love
and hatred as are common among the children of this world, and the most
shocking vices of every kind." He now felt disgust for the cloister life, and for the Romish religion,
and he sought, by the aid of divine grace, to attain to the new birth
through the Word of God. Speaking of his change of views to a Prussian
clergyman, he thus describes his conversion: "Look you, it was thus I
became a Protestant. I found a treasure in that dustheap, and went away
with it." He then thought
within himself, if these detached passages can give such light, what an
illumination he must receive if he could read and understand the whole
Bible. He did not, however, betray his dissatisfaction, but devoted himself
to his professional duties with greater diligence. He might still have
remained in the Order, his life hid with Christ in God, had not the
hierarchy, under pretence of making reforms and restoring the neglected
statutes of the Order, brought in such changes for the worse as led him
to resolve to leave the order, and the Romish church as well. Following
his convictions, and the advice of a faithful but very cautious
clergyman, he betook himself to the territories of Prussia, where, on
the 17th of January, 1855, he was received into the national church at
Petershain, by Dr. Nowotny, himself formerly a Bohemian priest. This was
not done till great efforts had been made to induce him to change his
purpose, and also to get his person into the power of his adversaries. As he had now left the church of Rome, become an openly acknowledged
member of another communion, he thought he might venture to return to
his own country. Taking leave of his Prussian friends, to whom he had
greatly endeared himself by his modesty and his lively faith, he went
back to Bohemia, with a heart full of peace and joy. He lived for some time amidst many perplexities, secluded in the house
of his parents at Prosnitz, till betrayed by some who dwelt in the same
habitation. On the 6th of March he was taken out of bed, at eight, by
the police, and conveyed first to the cloister in Prosnitz, where he
suffered much abuse, and from thence to the cloister in Prague. Here the
canon Dittrich, "Apostolical Convisitator of the Order of the Brothers
of Mercy," justified all the inhuman treatment he had suffered, and
threatened him with worse in case he refused to recant and repent. Dittrich not only deprived him of his medical books, but told him that
his going over to Protestantism was a greater crime than if he had
plundered the convent of two thousand florins. He was continually dinned
with the cry, "Retract, retract!" He was not allowed to see his brother,
confined in the same convent, nor other friends, and was so sequestered
in his cell as to make him feel that he was forgotten by all the world. He managed, through some monks who secretly sympathized with him, to get
a letter conveyed occasionally to Dr. These letters were filled
with painful details of the severities practised upon him. In one of
them he says, "My only converse is with God, and the gloomy walls around
me." He was transferred to a cell in the most unwholesome spot, and
infested with noisome smells not to be described. Close by him were
confined some poor maniacs, sunk below the irrational brutes. Under date of April 23d he writes: "Every hour, in this frightful
dungeon seems endless to me. For many weeks have I sat idle in this
durance, with no occupation but prayer and communion with God." His
appeals to civil authority and to the Primate of Hungary procured him no
redress, but only subjected him to additional annoyances and hardships. His aged father, a man of four-score years, wept to see him, though of
sound understanding, locked up among madmen; and when urged to make his
son recant, would have nothing to do with it, and returned the same
day to his sorrowful home. As he had been notified that he was to be
imprisoned for life, he prayed most earnestly to the Father of mercies
for deliverance; and he was heard, for his prayers and endeavors wrought
together. The sinking of his health increased his efforts to escape;
for, though he feared not to die, he could not bear the thought of dying
imprisoned in a mad-house, where he knew that his enemies would take
advantage of his mortal weakness to administer their sacraments to him,
and give out that he had returned to the bosom of the church, or at
least to shave his head, that he might be considered as an insane
person, and his renunciation of Romanism as the effect of derangement
of mind. Several plans of escape were projected, all beset with much
difficulty and danger. The one he decided upon proved to be successful. On Saturday, the 13th of October, at half-past nine in the evening, he
fastened a cord made of strips of linen to the grate of a window, which
grate did not extend to the top. Having climbed over this, he lowered
himself into a small court-yard. He had now left that part of the
establishment reserved for the insane, and was now in the cloistered
part where the brethren dwelt. He saw
at a distance a servant of the insane approaching with a light; and
with aching heart and trembling limbs, by a desperate effort, climbed
up again. He returned to his cell, concealing his cord, and laid himself
down to rest. On the following Monday, he renewed his efforts to escape. He lowered
himself, as before, into the little court-yard; but being weak in health
and much shaken in his nervous system by all he had suffered in body and
mind, he was seized with palpitation of the heart and trembled all over,
so that he could not walk a step. He laid down to rest and recover his
breath. He felt as if he could get no further. "But," he says in his
affecting narrative, "My dear Saviour to whom I turned in this time of
need, helped me wonderfully. I felt now, more than ever in my life, His
gracious and comforting presence, and believed, in that dismal moment,
with my whole soul, His holy word;" "My grace is sufficient for thee;
for my strength is made perfect in weakness." Borzinski now arose, pulled off his boots, and though every step was
made with difficulty, he ascended the stairs leading to the first story. He went along the passage way until he came to a door leading into
corridors where the cloister brethren lodged. But the trembling fit came
over him again, with indescribable anguish, as he sought to open the
door with a key with which he had been furnished. He soon rallied again,
and, like a spectre, gliding by the doors of the brethren, who occupied
the second and third corridors, many of whom had lights still burning,
he came with his boots in one hand, and his bundle in the other, to
a fourth passage way, in which was an outside window he was trying to
reach. The cord was soon fastened to the window frame, yet still in
bitter apprehension; for this window was seldom opened, and opened
hard, and with some noise. It was also only two steps distant from the
apartment of the cloister physician, where there was a light, and it was
most likely that, on the first grating of the window, he would rush
out and apprehend the fugitive. However the window was opened without
raising any alarm, and now it was necessary to see that no one was
passing below; for though the spot is not very much frequented, yet
the streets cross there, and people approach it from four different
directions. During these critical moments, one person and another kept
passing, and poor Borzinski tarried shivering in the window for near a
quarter of an hour before he ventured to let himself down. While he
was waiting his opportunity he heard the clock strike the third quarter
after nine and knew that he had but fifteen minutes to reach the house
where he was to conceal himself, which would be closed at ten. When all
was still, he called most fervently on the Saviour, and grasping the
cord, slid down into the street. He could scarce believe his feet were
on the ground. Trembling now with joy and gratitude rather than fear, he
ran bareheaded to his place of refuge, where he received a glad welcome. Having changed his garb, and tarried till three o'clock in the morning,
he took leave of his friends and passing through the gloomy old capital
of Bohemia, he reached the Portzitscher Gate, in order to pass out
as early as possible. Just then a police corporal let in a wagon, and
Borzinski, passed out unchallenged. It is needless to follow him further
in his flight. We have given enough, of his history to prove that
conventual establishments are at this moment what they ever have
been--dangerous alike to liberty and life. AMERICAN AND FOREIGN
CHRISTIAN UNION. In place of labored arguments we give the following history of personal
suffering as strikingly illustrative of the spirit of Romanism at the
present day. APPENDIX VII

NARRATIVE OP SIGNORINA FLORIENCIA D' ROMANI, A NATIVE OF THE CITY OF
NAPLES. I was born in the year 1826, of noble and wealthy parents. Our mansion
contained a small chapel, with many images, sacred paintings, and a
neatly furnished mass altar. As he lived on the rents and income
of his estates, he had little to do, except to amuse himself with his
friends. My mother, who was of as mild and sweet disposition, loved my
father very dearly, but was very unhappy the most of the time because
my father spent so much of his time in drinking with his dissolute
companions, card playing, and in balls, parties, theatres, operas,
billiards, &c. Father did not intend to be unkind to my mother, for he
gave her many servants, and abundance of gold, horses, carriages and
grooms, and said frequently in my hearing, that his wife should be as
happy as a princess. Such was the state of society in Italy that men
thought their wives had no just reason to complain, so long as they were
furnished with plenty of food, raiment and shelter. One of my father's most intimate friends was the very Rev. Father
Salvator, a Priest of the order of St. Francis; he wore the habit of
the order, his head was about half shaved. The sleeves of his habit were
very large at the elbow; in these sleeves he had small pockets, in which
he usually carried his snuff box, handkerchief, and purse of gold. This
priest was merry, full of fun and frolic; he could dance, sing, play
cards, and tell admirably funny stories, such as would make even the
devils laugh in their chains. Such was the influence and power this Franciscan had over my father and
mother, that in our house, his word was law. He was our confessor, knew
the secrets and sins, and all the weak points of every mind in the whole
household. My own dear mother taught me to read before I was seven years
of age. As I was the only child, I was much petted and caressed, indeed,
such was my mother's affection for me that I was seldom a moment out of
her sight. There was a handsome mahogany confessional in our own chapel. When the priest wanted any member of the household to come to him to
confession, he wrote the name on a slate that hung outside the chapel
door, saying that he would hear confessions at such a time to-morrow. Thus, we would always have time for the full examination of our
consciences. Only one at a time was ever admitted into the chapel, for
confessional duty, and the priest always took care to lock the door
inside and place the key in his sleeve pocket. My mother and myself were
obliged to confess once a week; the household servants, generally once a
month. My father only once a year, during Lent, when all the inhabitants
of seven years, and upwards, are obliged to kneel down to the priests,
in the confessional, and receive the wafer God under the severest
penalties. Woe to the individual who resists the ecclesiastical mandate. When I was about fourteen years of age, I was sent to the Ursuline
Convent, to receive my education. My dear mother would have preferred
a governess or a competent teacher to teach me at home but her will was
but a mere straw in the hands of our confessor and priestly tyrant. It
was solely at the recommendation of the confessor, that I was imprisoned
four years in the Ursuline Convent. As my confessor was also the
confessor of the convent, he called himself my guardian and protector,
and recommended me to the special care of the Mother Abbess, and her
holy nuns, the teachers, who spent much of their time in the school
department. As my father paid a high price, quarterly, for my tuition
and board, I had a good room to myself, my living was of the best kind,
and I always had wine at dinner. The nuns, my teachers, took much more
pains to teach me the fear of the Pope, bishops and confessors, than
the fear of God, or the love of virtue. In fact, with the exception of a
little Latin and embroidery, which I learned in those four years, I came
out as ignorant as I was before, unless a little hypocrisy may be called
a useful accomplishment. For, of all human beings on earth, none can
teach hypocrisy so well as the Romish priests and nuns. In the school
department young ladies seldom have much to complain of, unless they are
charity scholars; in that case the poor girls have to put up with very
poor fare, and much hard work, hard usage and even heavy blows; how my
heart has ached for some of those unfortunate girls, who are treated
more like brutes, than human beings, because they are orphans, and poor. Yet they in justice are entitled to good treatment, for thousands of
scudi (dollars) are sent as donations to the convents for the support
of these orphans, every year, by benevolent individuals. So that as poor
and unfortunate as these girls are, they are a source of revenue to the
convents. For the first three years of my convent life, I passed the time in
the school department, without much anxiety of mind. I was gay and
thoughtless, my great trouble was to find something to amuse myself,
and kill time in some way. Though I treated all the school-mates with
kindness, and true Italian politeness, I became intimate with only one. She was a beautiful girl, from the dukedom of Tuscany. She made me her
confidant, and told me all her heart. Her parents were wealthy, and both
very strict members of the Romish Church. But she had an aunt in the
city of Geneva, who was a follower of John Calvin, or a member of the
Christian church of Switzerland. This aunt had been yearly a visitor at
her father's house. She being her father's only sister, an affectionate
intimacy was formed between the aunt and niece. The aunt, being a very
pious, amiable woman, felt it her duty to impress the mind of the niece,
with the superiority of the religion of the holy bible over popish
traditions; and the truth of the Scriptures soon found its way to the
heart of my young friend. But her confessor soon found out that some
change was going on in her mind, and told her father. There were
only two ways to save her soul from utter ruin; one was to give her
absolution and kill her before she got entirely out of the holy mother
church; the other, was to send her to the Ursuline convent at Naples,
where by the zeal and piety of those celebrated nuns, she might be
secured from further heresy. From this, the best friend of my school days, I learned more about God's
word, and virtue, and truth, and the value of the soul, than from all
other sources. There was a garden surrounded by a high wall, in which we
frequently walked, and whispered to each other, though we trembled all
the while for fear our confessor would by some means, find out that we
looked upon the Romish church as the Babylon destined to destruction,
plainly spoken of by St. My young friend stood in great fear of the priests; she trembled at the
very sight of one. Her aunt had read to her the history and sufferings of the persecuted
Protestants of Europe. She was a frail, and timid girl, yet such was the
depth of her piety and the fervor of her religious faith, that she often
declared to me that she would prefer death to the abandonment of those
heavenly principles she had embraced, which were the source of her
joy and hope. Her aunt gave her a pocket New Testament, in the Italian
language, which she prized above all the treasures of earth, and carried
with her carefully, wherever she went. I borrowed it and read it every
opportunity I had. I took much
pains to commit to memory all I could of the blessed book, for in
case of our separation, I knew not where I could obtain another. My
god-father who was a bishop, called to see me on my fifteenth birth day,
and presented me with a splendid gold watch and chain richly studded
with jewels, made in England, and valued at 200 scudi, saying that
he had it imported expressly for my use. I had also several diamond
articles of jewelry, presents I had received from my father from time to
time. I had also, in my purse, 100 scudi in gold, which I had saved from
my pin money. All the above property, I should have cheerfully given for
a copy of the Holy Bible, in my own beautiful Italian language. A few
months after I received the rich present from the Bishop, he called with
my father and my confessor to see me. My heart almost came into my mouth
when I saw them alight from my father's carriage, and enter the chapel
door of the convent. Very soon the lady porter came to me and said,
"Signorina, you are wanted in the parlor." As my Tuscan friend had taught me to pray, and ask the Lord Jesus for
grace and strength, I walked into my room, locked the door, and on my
knees, called upon the Lord to save me from becoming a nun--for I
knew then it was a determination on the part of the Abbess, bishop
and confessor, that I should take the veil. I was the only child, and
heiress of an immense fortune, of course, too good a prize to be lost. After a short and fervent prayer to my Lord and Saviour, I walked down
to see what was to be my doom. I kissed my father's cheek, and kissed
the hands of the Bishop and confessor--yet my very soul revolted
from the touch of these whited sepulchres. All received me with great
cordiality, yea, even more than usual affection. Soon after our meeting,
my father asked permission of the Bishop to speak to me privately and
taking me into a small room, said to me, "My dear daughter, you are not
aware of the great misfortune that has recently come upon your father. While I was excited with wine at the card-table last evening, betting
high and winning vast sums of money, I so far forgot myself and my duty
to the laws of the country, that I called for a toast, and induced
a number of my inebriated companions to drink the health of Italian
liberty, and we all drank and gave three cheers for liberty and a
liberal constitution. A Benedictine Friar being present, took all our
names to the Commissary General, and offered to be a witness against
us in the King's Court. As this is my first and only offence, the holy
Bishop your god-father offers on certain conditions, to visit Rome
immediately on my behalf, and secure the mediation of the holy Father
Pius IX. Your venerable god-father has great influence at Rome, being
a special favorite with his holiness, and his holiness can obtain any
favor he asks of King Ferdinand. So if you will only consent to take the
Black Veil, your father will be saved from the State prison." This was terrible news to my young and palpitating heart. It was the
first heavy blow that I had experienced in this vale of tears. I did not
speak for some minutes; I could not. My trembling bosom heaved like the
waves of the ocean before the blast. My veins were almost bursting; my
hands and feet became as cold as marble, and when I attempted to speak
my words seemed ready to choke me to death. I fell upon my knees and called upon God for mercy and help. My
father, thinking I had gone mad, was greatly alarmed. The Bishop
and confessor, who were anxiously waiting the result of my father's
proposition, hearing my father weep and sob aloud, came in to see what
the matter was. In the midst of my prayer, I fainted away, and became
entirely unconscious. When I came to myself, I found myself on the bed. As I opened my eyes, it all seemed like a dream. The abbess spoke to me
very kindly, and sprinkled my bed with holy water, and at the same time
laid a large bronze crucifix on my breast, saying that Satan must be
driven from my soul, for had it not been for the devil, I would have
leaped for joy, and not fainted when father mentioned the black veil. "No," said the holy mother, "had it not been for the devil you would
rejoice to take the holy black veil blessed by the Holy Madonna and the
blessed saints Clara and Theresa. It is a holy privilege that very few
can enjoy on earth. Yea, my daughter, there can not be a greater sin
in the sight of the Madonna and the blessed saints, than to reject a
secluded life. Yea," said the crafty old nun, (who was thinking much
more about my gold, than my soul,) "I never knew a young lady who had
the offer of becoming a nun and rejected it, who ever came to a good
end. If they refuse, and marry, they generally die in child-bed with the
first child, or they will marry cruel husbands, who beat them and kill
them by inches. Therefore, dear daughter, let me most affectionately
warn you as you have had the honor of being selected by the holy Bishop
and our holy confessor to the high dignity and privilege of a professed
nun, of the order of St. Ursula, reject it not at your peril. Be
assured, heaven knows how to punish such rebellion." My head ached so violently at the time, and I was so feverish that I
begged the old woman to send for my mother, and to talk to me no more on
the subject of the black veil, but to drop it until some future time. In
my agony on account of the foul plot against my liberty, my virtue, and
my gold, I felt such a passion of rage come upon me, that had I absolute
power for the moment I would have cast every Abbess, Pope, Bishop and
Priest into the bottomless pit. May the Lord forgive me, but I would
have done it at that time with a good will. The greatest comfort I now
had was reading my Tuscan friend's New Testament, or hearing it read by
her when we had a chance to be by ourselves, which was not very often. In the evening of the same day of my illness, father and mother came to
see me, and Satan came also in the shape of the confessor; so that I
had not a moment alone with my dear parents. The confessor feared my
determined opposition to a convent's life, for he had previous to this,
several times in the confessional, dropped hints to me on the great
happiness, purity, serenity and joy of all holy nuns. But I always told
him I would not be a nun for the world. I should be so good, it would
kill me in a short time. "No, no, father," said I, "I WILL NOT BE A
NUN." Father spoke to me again of his great misfortune--told me that his trial
would come on in a few days and that he was now at liberty on a
very heavy bail; that the Bishop was only waiting my answer to start
immediately for the holy city, and throw himself at the feet of the holy
Pope to procure father's unconditional pardon from the King. I said
"my dear father, how long will you be imprisoned if you do not get a
pardon?" "From two to five years," he replied. "My daughter, it is
my first offence, and I have witnesses to prove that the priest who
appeared against me, urged me to drink wine several times after I had
drank a large quantity, and was the direct cause of my saying what
I did." Now it all came to me, that the whole of it was a plot, a
Jesuitical trick, to get my father in the clutches of the law, and then
make a slave of me for life through my sympathy for my dear father. The vile priests knew that I loved my father most ardently; in fact, my
father and mother were the only two beings on earth that I did love. My
mother I loved most tenderly, but my affection for my father was of a
different kind. I loved him most violently, with all the ardor of my
soul. Mother seemed all the home to me; but father was to me all the
world beside. He would frequently
come home, and get me to go out into the garden and play with him,
just as though he was my brother. There we would swing, run, jump and
exercise in several healthy games, common in our climate. He never gave
me an unkind word or an unkind reproof. If I did say anything wrong, he
would take me to my mother and say, "Clara, here I bring you a prisoner,
let her be kept on bread and water till dinner time." Even when mother
had displeased him about some trifle, so that he had not a smile for
her, he always had a smile for his Flora. Even now, while I write, a
chill comes over my frame, while I think of that vile Popish plot. I
said to my father, "You shall not be imprisoned if I can prevent it; at
the same time I do not see any great gain, comfort or profit in having
your only daughter put in prison for life, without the hope of liberty
ever more, to save you from two years imprisonment." At these words, the eyes of the confessor flashed like lurid lightnings;
his very frame shook, as though he had the fever and ague. Truth seemed
so strange to the priest, that he found it hard of digestion. Father
and mother both wept, but made no reply. The idea of putting their only
child in a dungeon for life, though it might be done in the sacred name
of religion, did not seem to give them much comfort "Father," said I, "I
wish to see you at ten o'clock to-morrow morning, without fail--I wish
to see you alone; don't bring mother or any one else with you. You shall
not go to prison, all will yet be well." On account of this reasonable
request, to see my father alone, the confessor arose in a terrible rage
and left the apartment As quick as the mad priest left us to ourselves,
I told my father my plan, or what I would like to do with his
permission. My plan was, for my mother and myself to get into our
carriage and drive to the palace of King Ferdinand and make him
acquainted with all the truth; for I was aware from what I had heard,
that the King had heard only the priest's side of the story. My father
stood in such fear of the priests that he only consented to my plan with
great reluctance, saying that we ought first to make our plan known to
the confessor, lest he should be offended. To this my mother responded,
saying, "My daughter, it would be very wrong for us to go to the King,
or take any step without the advice of our spiritual guide." Here,
I felt it to be my duty to reveal to my deceived parents some of the
secrets of the confessional, though I might, in their estimation,
be guilty of an unpardonable sin by breaking the seal of iniquity. I
revealed to my parents the frequent efforts of the priest to obtain my
consent to take the veil, and that I had opposed from first to last,
every argument made use of to rob me of the society of my parents, of my
liberty, and of everything I held dear on earth. As to the happiness of
the nuns so much talked of by the priests, from what I had seen in their
daily walk and general deportment, I was fully convinced that there was
no reality in it; they were mere slaves to their superiors, and not half
so happy as the free slaves on a plantation who have a kind master. My
parents saw my determination to resist to the death every plan for my
imprisonment in the hateful nunnery. Therefore they promised that I
should have the opportunity to see the King on the morrow in company
with my mother. On the following day, at twelve o'clock, we left the convent in our
carriage for the palace. We were very politely received by the gentleman
usher, who conducted us to seats in the reception-room. After sending
our cards to the king, we waited nearly one hour before he made his
appearance. His majesty received us with much kindness, raised us
immediately from our knees, and demanded our business. I was greatly
embarrassed at first, but the frank and cordial manner of the sovereign
soon restored me to my equilibrium, and I spoke freely in behalf of my
dear father. The king heard me through very patiently, with apparent
interest, and said, "Signorina, I am inclined to believe you have spoken
the truth; and as your father has always been a good loyal subject, I
shall, for your sake, forgive him this offence; but let him beware that
henceforth, wine or no wine, he does not trespass against the laws
of the kingdom, for a second offence I will not pardon. Go in peace,
signoras, you have my royal word." We thanked his majesty, and returned to our home with the joyful
tidings. My father, who had been waiting the
result of our visit to the palace with great impatience, received us
with open arms, and pressed us to his heart again and again. I was so excited that, long before we got to him, I cried out, "All is
well, all is well, father. We drove
home, and father went immediately to spread the happy news amongst
his friends. All our faithful domestics, including my old affectionate
nurse, were so overjoyed at the news that they danced about like
maniacs. My father was always a very indulgent and liberal master,
furnished his servants with the best of Italian fare, plenty of
fresh beef, wine, and macaroni. We had scarcely got rested, when our
tormenter, the confessor, came into our room and said, "Signoras, what
is the meaning of all this fandango and folly amongst the servants? ARE
THE HERETICS ALL KILLED, that there should be such joy, or has the queen
been delivered of a son, an heir to the throne?" My dear mother was now as pale as death, and silent, for she saw that
the priest was awfully enraged; for, although he feigned to smile, his
smile was similar to that of the hyena when digging his prey out of
the grave. The priest's dark and villainous visage had the effect of
confirming in my mother's mind all the truth regarding the plot to
enslave me for life, and secure all my father's estate to the pockets
of the priests. The confessor was now terribly mad, for two obvious
reasons: one was because he was not received by us with our usual
cordiality and blind affection; the other, because, by the king's
pardon, I was not under the necessity to sacrifice my liberty and
happiness for life to save my father from prison; and what tormented him
the most was, that he believed that I, though young, could understand
and thwart his hellish plans. As my mother trembled and was silent,
fearing the priest was cursing her and her only daughter in his
heart,--for the priests tell such awful stories about the effects of a
priest's curse that the great mass of the Italian people fear it more
than the plague or any earthly misfortune. Peter is the doorkeeper of the great
city of God, the heavenly Jerusalem, that he has the keys of the kingdom
of heaven, and has received strict orders not to admit any soul, under
any circumstances, who has been cursed by a holy priest, unless that
curse has been removed by the same priest in the tribunal of penance. I
was obliged to speak to his reverence, and I felt so free, so happy in
Christ as my only hope, that I opened my mind to the priest very freely,
and told him what I thought of him and his plot. "Sir priest," said I,
"I shall never return to the convent to stay long. As soon as the time
for my education ends, I shall return to liberty and domestic life. I
am not made of the proper material to make a nun of. I love the social
domestic circle; I love my father and mother, and all our domestics,
even the dogs and the cats, pigeons, and canaries, the fish-ponds,
play-grounds, gardens, rivers, and landscapes, mountain and ocean,--all
the works of God I love. I shall live out of the convent to enjoy these
things; therefore, reverend sir, if you value my peace and good-will,
never speak to me or my parents on the subject of my becoming a nun in
any convent. I shall prefer death to the loss of my personal liberty." I was so decided, and had received such strength and grace from heaven,
that the priest was dumbfounded,--my smooth stone out of the sling
had hit him in the right place. After much effort to appear bland and
good-natured, he drew near my chair, seized my hand, and said, "My dear
daughter, you mistake me. I love you as a daughter, I wish only your
happiness. Your god-father, the holy Bishop, does not intend that you
shall remain a common nun more than a year. After the first year you
shall be raised to the highest dignity in the convent. You shall be the
Lady Superior, and all the nuns shall bow at your feet, and implicitly
obey your commands. Clara is now very old, and his lordship wishes
soon to fill her place. For that purpose he has selected his adopted
daughter. Your talents, education, wealth, and high position in society,
eminently fit you for one of the highest dignities on earth." "A thousand thanks for the kindness of my lord Bishop," said I; "but
your reverence has not altered my mind in the least. I can never bow
down to the feet of any Lady Superior, neither will I ever consent to
see a single human being degraded at my feet. The holy Bible says, 'Thou
shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.'" exclaimed the priest, "Where did you see that dangerous
book? Know you not that his holiness the Pope has placed it in the
Index Expurgatorius, because it has been the means of the damnation of
millions of souls? Not because it is in itself a bad book, but because
it is a theological work, prepared only for the priests and ministers of
our holy religion. Therefore, it is always a very dangerous book in
the hands of women or laymen, who wrest the Scriptures to their own
destruction." "Well, reverend sir," I replied, "you seem determined to differ from the
Lord Jesus and his apostles. I read in the New Testament that we should
search the Scriptures because they testify of Christ. And one of the
apostles, I don't remember which, said, 'all scripture is given by the
inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine and for instruction
in righteousness.' Now, reverend sir, if the people have souls, as well
as the priests, why should they not read the word of God which speaks of
Christ and is profitable for instruction?" exclaimed the priest, "and you talk very
much like one." His countenance changed to a pale sickly hue, as he
said, "My daughter, where did you get that dangerous book? If you have,
it in your possession, give it to me, and I will bless you, and pray for
you to the blessed Madonna that she may save you from the infernal pit
of heresy." "I do not own the blessed book," said I, "but I wish I did. I would give
one hundred scudi in gold for a copy of the New Testament. I borrowed a
copy from a friend, and returned it to the owner again. But I understand
that there are copies to be had in London, and when I have a good
opportunity I shall send for a copy, if I can do it unbeknown to any
one." "I shall be in the tribunal of
penance at six o'clock P.M. You need
pardon immediately, and spiritual advice. Should you die as you now are
without absolution, you would be lost and damned forever. I tremble for
you, my dear daughter, seeing that the devil has got such a powerful
hold of you. It may even be absolutely necessary to kill the body to
save your soul; for should you relapse again into heresy after due
penance for this crime has been performed, it would be impossible to
renew you again to repentance, seeing you crucify the Lord and the
Madonna afresh, and put them to an open shame." Here my mother fainted and shook like an aspen leaf. But God gave me
strength, and I said in a moment that as his reverence thought my sins
so great, I would not go to any man, no, not even to the Pope; I
would go to God alone, and leave my cause in his hands, life or death. "Therefore, reverend sir, I shall save you from all further trouble in
attending the confessional any more on my account. From henceforth no
earthly power shall drag me alive and with my consent to the tribunal of
penance." exclaimed the priest furiously, "are you mad? There are ten
thousand devils in you, and we must drive them out by some means." After
this discharge of priestly venom, the priest left in a rage giving the
door a terrible slam, which awoke my mother from her sorrowful trance. During the whole conversation, such was the electrical power of the
priest over my mother's weak and nervous system, that if she attempted
to say a word in my behalf, the keen, snakish black eye of the priest
would at once make her tremble and quail before him, and the half
uttered word would remain silent on her lips. The priest went at once
in search of my father. He came home boiling over with rage, saying he
wished I had never been born. The
cause of all this paternal fury upon my poor devoted head was the foul
misrepresentations of my father confessor, who was now in league with
the Bishop, both determined to shut me up in a prison convent, or end my
mortal career. My poor mother remained mute and heart-broken. My sweet mother; never
did she utter one word of unkindness to me; her very look to the last
was one of gentleness and love. But my father loved honor and reputation
amongst men above all other things. The idea of being the father of an
accursed heretic, tormented his pride, and he being suspected of heresy
himself caused him to be forsaken by many of his proud friends and
acquaintances. He was even insulted in the streets by the numerous
Lazaroni, with the epithet of Maldito Corrobonari, so that I lost my
father's love. And when the confessor told him there was no other way
to save me from hell than an entire life of penance in a convent, he
heartily and freely gave his consent. Mother, my own sweet mother, my
only remaining friend, turned as pale as death, but was enabled to say a
word in my behalf. I saw that my earthly doom was sealed; there was not a single voice in
all Naples to save me from imprisonment for life. Not a tongue in four
hundred thousand that would dare speak one word in my behalf. Father
commanded me to get ready to leave his house forever that very night,
saying the carriage and confessor would be on hand to take me away at
eight o'clock P.M., by moonlight. I got on my knees and begged my father
as a last request that he would allow me to remain three days with my
mother, but he refused. Said he, "That is now beyond my power. Not an
hour can you remain after eight o'clock." As I knew not when I should see my Tuscan friend again, I begged the
privilege of seeing her for a few moments. I was anxious to ask her
prayers and sympathy, and to put her on her guard, for should the
priests discover her New Testament, they would punish her as they did
me, or as they intended to do to me. But this favor was denied me, and I
could not write to her, for all letters of the scholars in the
convents, are opened under the pretence to prevent them from receiving
love-letters. The Romish church keeps all her dark plans a secret, but
never allows any secret to be kept from the priests. I went into my room to bid farewell to my home forever. I fell on my
knees and prayed to God for his dear Son's sake to help me, to give me
patience, and to keep me from the sin of suicide. The more I thought
of my utterly unprotected situation and of the savage disposition of my
foes, the priests, the more I thought of the propriety of taking my own
life, rather than live in a dungeon all my days. Such was the power of
superstition over our domestics that they looked upon me as one accursed
of the church, a Protestant heretic, and not one of them would take my
hand or bid me good bye. At tea-time I was not allowed to sit at table
with father, mother, and the confessor, as formerly. But I had my supper
sent up to my room. A short time after the bell rang for vespers, the carriage being ready,
my father and the confessor with myself and one small trunk got into the
best seats inside, and rode off at a rapid rate. I kept my veil over my
face, and said not a word neither did I shed a single tear; my sorrow,
and indignation was too deep for utterance or even for tears. The priest
and my father uttered not a word. Perhaps my father's conscience
made him ashamed of such vile work--that of laying violent hands on a
defenceless girl of eighteen years of age, for no crime whatever, only
the love of liberty and pure Bible religion. But if the priest was
silent, his vile countenance indicated a degree of hellish pleasure and
satisfaction. Never did piratical captain glory more in seeing a rich
prize along side with all hands killed and out of the way, than my
reverend confessor; yet a short time before he said he loved me as a
daughter. Yes, he did love me, as the wolf loves the lamb, as the cat
loves the mouse and as the boa constrictor the beautiful gazelle. To
my momentary satisfaction we entered the big gate of St. Ursula, for
although I knew I should suffer there perhaps even death, there was some
satisfaction in seeing a few faces that I had seen in my gay and happy
days, now alas! I was somewhat grieved by the cold
reception I received. But none
of these things moved me; I looked to God for strength, for I felt that
He alone could nerve me for the conflict. The hardest blow of all was,
my dear father left me at the mercy of the priest without one kind look
or word. He did not even shake hands with me, nor did he say farewell. Oh Popery, what a mysterious power is thine! Thou canst in a few hours
destroy powerful love which it took long years to cement in loving
hearts. When my father had left and I heard the porter lock the heavy
iron gate I felt an exquisite wretchedness come over me. I would have
given worlds for death at that moment. In a few moments the priest rung
a bell, and the old Jezebel the mother Abbess made her appearance. "Take
this heretic, Holy Mother, and place her in confinement in the lower
regions; GIVE HER BREAD AND WATER ONCE IN TWENTY-FOUR HOURS, THE WATER
THAT YOU HAVE WASHED YOUR SACRED FEET IN, NO OTHER; give her straw
to sleep on, but no pillow. Take all her clothing away and give her a
coarse tunic; one single coarse garment to cover her nakedness, but no
shoes. She has grievously sinned against the holy mother church, and now
she mercifully imposes upon her years of severe penance, that her body
of sin may be destroyed and her soul saved after suffering one million
of years in holy purgatory. Our chief duty now, holy mother, in order
to save this lost soul from mortal sin will be to examine her carefully
every, day to ascertain if possible what she most dislikes, or what
is most revolting to her flesh, that whatever it may be, she, must be
compelled to perform it whatever it may cost. Let a holy wax candle burn
in her cell at night, until further orders. And let the Tuscan heretic
be treated in the same way. At
the word "Tuscan heretic," possessing the spirit of Christ that I knew
on earth. Yet how true it is that misery loves company; there was even
satisfaction in being near my unfortunate friend though our sufferings
might be unutterable. Still I was unhappy in the thought that she was
suffering on my account. Had I never said a word about borrowing a New
Testament, she would never have been suspected as being the direct
cause of my conversion to the truth, and of my renunciation of the vile
confessional. I was somewhat puzzled to know what kind of a place was meant by the
lower regions; I had never heard of these regions before. But soon two
women in black habits with their faces entirely covered excepting
two small holes for the eyes to peep through, came to me and without
speaking, made signs for me to follow them. I did so without resistance,
and soon found myself in an under-ground story of the infernal building. "There is your cell," said the cowled inquisitors, "look all around, see
every thing, but speak not; no not for your life. The softest whisper
will immediately reach the ears of the Mother Abbess, and then you are
loaded with heavy chains until you die, for there must be no talking
or whispering in this holy retreat of penance. And," said my jailor
further, "take off your clothes, shoes and stockings, and put on this
holy coarse garment which will chafe thy flesh but will bless thy soul. As resistance was worse than useless, I complied, and soon found my poor
feet aching with the cold on the bare stone floor. I was soon made to
feel the blessing of St. My sufferings were
indescribable. It seemed as though ten thousand bees had stung me in
every part. I laid on my
coarse straw and groaned and sighed for death to come and relieve me of
my anguish. As soon as the holy wax candle was left with me I took it
in my hand and went forth to survey my dungeon; but I did not enjoy
my ramble. In one of the cells, I found my Tuscan friend--that dear
Christian sister--in great agony, having had on the accursed garment for
several days. Her body was one entire blister, and very much inflamed. Her bones were racked with pain, as with the most excruciating
inflammatory rheumatism. We recognized each other; she pointed to heaven
as if to say 'trust in the Lord, my sister, our sufferings will soon
be over.' I kissed my hand to her and returned again to my cell. I
saw other victims half dead and emaciated that made my heart sick. I
refrained from speaking to any one for I feared my condition, wretched
as it was, might be rendered even worse, if possible by the fiends who
had entire power over me. said I to myself, "why was I born? O give my soul patience to suffer every pain." On the fourth day of my imprisonment the jailor brought me some water
and soap, a towel, brush and comb, and the same clothes I wore when I
entered the foul den. They told me to make haste and prepare myself to
appear before the holy Bishop. Hope revived in my soul, for I always
thought that my god-father had some regard for me, and had now come to
release me from the foul den I was in. Cold water seemed to afford much
relief to my tortured body. I made my toilet as quick as I could in such
a place. My feet were so numb and swollen that it was difficult for me
to get my shoes on. At last the Bishop arrived as I supposed, and I
was conducted--not into his presence as I expected, but into that of
my bitterest enemy, the confessor. At the very sight of the monster, I
trembled like a reed shaken by the wind. The priest walked to each of
the doors, locked them, put the keys into a small writing desk, locked
it, took out the key and placed it carefully in his sleeve pocket. This
he did to assure me that we were alone, that not one of the inmates
could by any means disturb for the present the holy meditations of the
priest. He bade me take a seat on the sofa by him. In kind soft words he
said to me, that if I was only docile and obedient, he would cause me
to be treated like a princess, and that in a short time I should have
my liberty if I preferred to return to the world. At the same time he
attempted to put his arm around my waist. While he was talking love to me, I was looking at two large alabaster
vases full of beautiful wax flowers; one of them was as much as I could
lift. Without one thought about consequences, I seized the nearest vase
and threw it with all the strength I had at the priest's head. He fell
like a log and uttered one or two groans. It
struck the priest on the right temple, close to the ear. For a moment I
listened to see if any one were coming. I then looked at the priest, and
saw the blood running out of his wound. I quaked with fear lest I had
killed the destroyer of my peace. I did not intend to kill him, I only
wished to stun him, that I might take the keys, open the door and run,
for the back door of the priest's room led right into a back path where
the gates were frequently opened daring the day time. This was about
twelve o'clock, and a most favorable moment for me to escape. In a
moment I had searched the sleeve pocket of the priest, found the key and
a heavy purse of gold which I secured in my dress pocket. I opened the
little writing desk and took out the key to the back door. I saw that
the priest was not dead, and I had not the least doubt from appearances,
but that he would soon come to. I trembled for fear he might wake before
I could get away. I thought of my dear Tuscan sister in her wretched
cell, but I could not get to her without being discovered. I opened the door with the greatest facility and gained
the opening into the back path. I locked the door after me, and brought
the key with me for a short distance, then placed all the keys tinder
a rock. I had no hat but only a black veil. I threw that over my head
after the fashion of Italy and gained the outer gate. There were masons
at work near the gate which was open and I passed through into the
street without being questioned by any one. As I had not a nun's dress on, no one supposed I belonged to the
Institution. I could speak a
few English words which I had learned from some English friends of my
father. Before I got to where the boats lay I saw a gentleman whom I
took to be an English or American gentleman. He had a pleasant face,
looked at me very kindly, saw my pale dejected face and at once felt a
deep sympathy for me. As I appeared to be in trouble and needed help,
he extended his hand to me and said in tolerable good Italian, "Como va'
le' signorina?" that is "How do you do young lady?" "Me," said he, "Americano, Americano, capitano de
Bastimento." "Signor Capitano," said I,
"I wish to go on board your ship and see an American ship." "Well," said
he, "with a great deal of pleasure; my ship lies at anchor, my men are
waiting; you shall dine with me, Signorina." I praised God in my soul for this merciful providence of meeting a
friend, though a stranger, whose face seemed to me so honest and so
true. Any condition, even honest slavery, would have been preferred by
me at that time to a convent. The American ship was the most
beautiful thing I ever saw afloat; splendid and neat in all her cabin
arrangements. The mates were polite, and the sailors appeared neat and
happy. Even the black cook showed his beautiful white teeth, as though
he was glad to see one of the ladies of Italy. Little did
they know at that time what peril I was in should I be found out and
taken back to my dungeon again. I informed the captain of my situation,
of having just escaped from a convent into which I had been forced
against my will. I told him I would pay him my passage to America, if
he would hide me somewhere until the ship was well out to sea. He said
I had come just in time, for he was only waiting for a fair wind, and
hoped to be off that evening. "I have," said he, "a large number of
bread-casks on board, and two are empty. I shall have you put into one
of these, in which I shall make augur-holes, so that you can have plenty
of fresh air. Down in the hold amongst the provisions you will be safe." I thanked my kind friend and requested him to buy me some needles, silk,
and cotton thread, and some stuff for a couple of dresses, and one-piece
of fine cotton, so that I might make myself comfortable during the
voyage. After I ate my dinner, the men called the captain and said there were
several boats full of soldiers coming to the ship, accompanied by the
priests. "Lady," exclaimed the captain, "they are after you. There is
not a moment to be lost. Smith, tell
the men to be careful and not make known that there is a lady on board." I followed my friend quickly, and soon
found myself coiled in a large cask. The captain coopered the head,
which was missing, and made holes for me to get the air; but the
perspiration ran off my face in a stream. Lots of things were piled on
the cask, so that I had hard work to breathe; but such was my fear
of the priests that I would rather have perished in the cask than be
returned to die by inches. The captain had been gone but a short time when I heard steps on deck,
and much noise and confusion. As the hatches were open, I could hear
very distinctly. After the whole company were on deck, the captain
invited the priests and friars, about twenty in number, to walk down to
the cabin, and explain the cause of their visit. They talked through an
interpreter, and said that "a woman of bad character had robbed one of
the churches of a large amount of gold, had attempted to murder one
of the holy priests, but they were happy to say that the holy father,
though badly wounded, was in a fair way of recovery. This woman is
young, but very desperate, has awful raving fits, and has recently
escaped from a lunatic institution. When her fits of madness come on
they are obliged to put her into a straight jacket, for she is the most
dangerous person in Italy. A great reward is offered for her by her
father and the government--five thousand scudi. Is not this enough to
tempt one to help find her? She was seen coming towards the shipping,
and we want the privilege of searching your ship." "Gentlemen," said the captain, "I do not know that the Italian
authorities have any right to search an American ship, under the stars
and stripes of the United States, for we do not allow even the greatest
naval power on earth to do that thing. But if such a mad and dangerous
woman as you have described should by any means have smuggled herself
on board my ship, you are quite welcome to take her away as soon as
possible, for I should be afraid of my life if I was within one hundred
yards of such an unfortunate creature. If you can get her into your
lunatic asylum, the quicker the better; and the five thousand scudi will
come in good time, for I am thinking of building me a larger ship on my
return home. Now, gentlemen, come; I will assist you, for I should like
to see the gold in my pocket." The captain opened all his closets and
secret places, in the cabin and forecastle and in the hold; everything
was searched, all but the identical bread-cask in which I was snugly
coiled. After something like half an hour's search, the soldiers of King
Ferdinand and the priests of King Pope left the ship, satisfied that the
crazy nun was not on board; for, judging the captain by themselves, they
thought he certainly would have given up a mad woman for the sake of
five thousand scudi in gold, and for the safety of his own peace and
comfort. A few moments after the Pope's friends had left, the excellent
benevolent captain came down, and speedily and gently knocking off a
few hoops with a hammer, took the head out, and I was free once more
to breathe God's free air. I lifted my trembling heart in thanksgiving,
while tears of gratitude rolled down my cheeks. Yet, as we were still
within the reach of the guns of the papal forts, my heart was by no
means at rest. But the good captain assured me repeatedly that
all danger was past, for he had twenty-five men on board, all true
Protestants, and he declared that all the priests of Naples would walk
over their dead bodies before they should reach his vessel a second
time. "And besides," said the captain, "there are two American
men-of-war in port, who will stand up for the rights of Americans. They
have not yet forgotten Captain Ingraham, of the United States ship
St. Louis, and his rescue from the Austrian <DW7>s of the Hungarian
patriot, Martin Kozsta." The captain wisely refused to purchase any
needles or thread for me on shore, or any articles of ladies' dress,
for fear of the Jesuitical spies, who might surmise something and cause
further trouble. But he kindly furnished me with some goods he had
purchased for his own wife, and there were needles and silk enough on
board, so that I soon cut and made a few articles that made me very
comfortable during our voyage of thirty-two days to London. Early the next morning we sailed out of the beautiful harbor of Naples,
with a fair wind. The beautiful ship seemed to fly over the blue sea. I staid on deck gazing at my native city as long as I could. I thought
then of my once happy home, of my poor, broken-hearted mother, of my
unhappy father. Although he had cast me off through the foul play of
Jesuitical intrigue, my love for my dear father remained the same. "Farewell, my dear Italy," I said to myself. "When, my poor native land,
wilt thou be happy? Never, never, so long as the Pope lives, and his
wicked, murderous priests, to curse thee by their power." After we got out into the open sea, the motion of the ship made me feel
very sick, and I was so starved out before I came on board, that what
good provisions I ate on board did not seem to agree with me. My stomach
was in a very bad state, for while I was in the lower regions of the
convent I ate only a small quantity of very stale hard bread once in
twenty-four hours, at the ringing of the vesper bells every evening, and
the water given me was that in which the holy Mother Abbess had washed
her sacred feet. But I must give the holy mother credit for one good
omission--she did not use any soap. The captain gave me a good state-room which I occupied with an English
lady passenger. This good lady was accustomed to the sea, therefore, she
did not suffer any inconvenience from sea-sickness; but I was very sick,
so that I kept my berth for five days. This good Protestant lady was
very kind and attentive during the whole passage, and kindly assisted me
in getting my garments made up on board. On our arrival in London, the
captain said that he would sail for America in two weeks time, and very
kindly offered me a free passage to his happy, native land; and I could
not persuade him to take any money for my passage from Naples, nor for
the clothing he had given me. My fellow passenger being wealthy, and well acquainted with people in
England, took me to her splendid home, a few miles from London. At her
residence I was introduced to a young French gentleman, a member of the
Evangelical protestant church in France, and a descendant of the pious
persecuted Huguenots. This gentleman speaks good English and Italian,
having enjoyed the privilege of a superior education. His fervent
prayers at the family altar morning and evening made a very deep
impression on my mind. He became deeply interested in my history, and
offered to take me to France, after I should become his lawful wife. Though I did not like the idea of choosing another popish country for my
residence, yet as my friend assured me that I should enjoy my protestant
religion unmolested, I gave him my hand and my heart. My lady fellow
passenger was my bridesmaid. We were married by a good protestant
minister. My husband is a wealthy merchant--gives me means and
opportunities for doing good. Our
home is one of piety and peace and happiness. The blessed Bible is read
by us every day. Morning and evening we sing God's praise, and call upon
the name of the Lord. Our prayer is that God may deliver beloved France
and Italy from the curse of popery. Another proof of the persecuting spirit of Rome is furnished by the
"Narrative of Raffaele Ciocci, formerly a Benedictine Monk, but who now
'comes forth from Inquisitorial search and torture, and tells us what
he has seen, heard and felt.'" We can make but a few extracts from
this interesting little volume, published by the American and Foreign
Christian Union, who,--to use their own language--"send it forth as a
voice of instruction and warning to the American people. They are not to be set aside by an apology for the
dark ages, nor an appeal to the refinement of the nineteenth century. Here is Rome, not as she WAS in the midnight of the world, but as she
IS at the present moment. There is the same opposition to private
judgment--the same coercive measures--the same cruel persecution--the
same efforts to crush the civil and religious liberties of her own
subjects, for which she has ever been characterized." Ciocci, compelled at an early age to enter the Catholic College--forced,
notwithstanding his deep disgust and earnest remonstrance, to become a
monk--imprisoned--deceived--the victim of priestly artifice and fraud,
at length becomes a Christian. He is of course thrown into a deeper
dungeon; and more exquisite anguish inflicted upon him that he may be
constrained to return to the Romish faith. Of his imprisonment he says,
"We traversed long corridors till we arrived at the door of an apartment
which they requested me to enter, and they themselves retired. On
opening the door I found myself in a close dark room, barely large
enough for the little furniture it contained, which consisted of a small
hard bed, hard as the conscience of an inquisitor, a little table cut
all over, and a dirty ill-used chair. The window which was shut and
barred with iron resisted all my efforts to open it My heart sunk within
me, and I began to cogitate on the destiny in store for me." The Jesuit
Giuliani entering his room, he asked that the window might be opened
for the admission of light and air. Before the words were finished he
exclaimed in a voice of thunder, "How! wretched youth, thou complainest
of the dark, whilst thou art living in the clouds of error? Dost thou
desire the light of heaven, while thou rejectest the light of the
Catholic faith?" Ciocci saw that remonstrance was useless, but he reminded his jailer
that he had been sent there for three days, to receive instruction, not
to be treated as a criminal. "For three days," he resumed, counterfeiting my tone of voice, "for
three days! The dainty youth will not forsooth,
be roughly treated; it remains to be seen whether he desires to be
courteously entertained. Fortunate is it for thee that thou art come to this place. THOU WILT
NEVER quit it excepting with the real fruits of repentance! Among these
silent shades canst thou meditate at thy leisure upon the deplorable
state into which thou hast fallen. Woe unto thee, if thou refusest to
listen to the voice of God, who conducts souls into solitude that he
may speak with them." "So saying," he continues, "he abruptly left me. I
remained alone drooping under the weight of a misfortune, which was the
more severe, because totally unexpected. I stood, I know not how long,
in the same position, but on recovering from this lethargy, my first
idea was of flight. Without giving a minute account of the manner
in which I passed my wearisome days and nights in this prison, let it
suffice to say that they were spent in listening to sermons preached to
me four times a day by the fathers Giuliani and Rossini, and in the most
gloomy reflections. "In the mean time the miseries I endured were aggravated by the heat of
the season, the wretchedness of the chamber, scantiness of food, and the
rough severity of those by whom I was occasionally visited. Uncertainty
as to when this imprisonment would be at an end, almost drove me wild,
and the first words I addressed to those who approached me were, 'Have
the kindness to tell me when I shall be permitted to leave this place?' One replied, 'My son, think of hell.' I interrogated another; the answer
was, 'Think my son, how terrible is the death of the sinner!' I spoke
to a third, to a fourth, and one said to me, 'My son, what will be your
feeling, if, on the day of judgment you find yourself on the left hand
of God?' the other, 'Paradise, my son, Paradise!' No one gave me a
direct answer; their object appeared to be to mistify and confound me. After the first few days, I began to feel most severely the want of
a change of clothing. Accustomed to cleanliness, I found myself
constrained to wear soiled apparel. * * * For the want of a comb, my
hair became rough and entangled. After the fourth day my portion of food
was diminished; a sign, that they were pressing the siege, that it was
their intention to adopt both assault and blockade--to conquer me by
arms, or induce me to capitulate through hunger. I had been shut up in
this wretched place for thirteen days, when, one day, about noon, the
Father Mislei, the author of all my misery, entered my cell. "At the sight of this man, resentment overcame every other
consideration, and I advanced towards him fully prepared to indulge my
feelings, when he, with his usual smile, expressed in bland words
his deep regret at having been the cause of my long detention in this
retreat. 'Never could I have supposed,' said he, 'that my anxiety
for the salvation of your soul would have brought you into so much
tribulation. But rest assured the fault is not entirely mine. You have
yourself, in a great degree, by your useless obstinacy, been the cause
of your sufferings. Ah, well, we will yet remedy all.' Not feeling any
confidence in his assurance, I burst out into bitter invectives and
fierce words. He then renewed his protestations, and clothed them with
such a semblance of honesty and truth, that when he ended with this
tender conclusion, 'Be assured, my son, that I love you,' my anger
vanished. * * * I lost sight of the Jesuit, and thought I was addressing
a man, a being capable of sympathising in the distresses of others. 'Ah,
well, father,' said I, 'I need some one on whom I can rely, some one
towards whom I can feel kindly; I will therefore place confidence in
your words.'" After some further conversation, Ciocci was asked if
he wished to leave that place. he replied, "what a
strange question! You might as well ask a condemned soul whether he
desires to escape from hell!" At these words the Jesuit started like a
goaded animal, and, forgetting his mission of deceiver, with, knit brows
and compressed lips, he allowed his ferocious soul for one moment
to appear; but, having grown old in deceit, he immediately had the
circumspection to give this movement of rage the appearance of religious
zeal, and exclaimed, "What comparisons are these? Are you not ashamed to
assume the language of the Atheist? By speaking in this way you clearly
manifest how little you deserve to leave this place. But since I have
told you that I love you, I will give you a proof of it by thinking no
more of those irreligious expressions; they shall be forgotten as though
they had never been spoken. Well, the Cardinal proposes to you an easy
way of returning to your monastery." "Here is
the way," said he, presenting me with a paper: "copy this with your
own hand; nothing more will be required of you." "I took the paper with
convulsive eagerness. It was a recantation of my faith, there condemned
as erroneous. * * * Upon reading this, I shuddered, and, starting to my
feet, in a solemn attitude and with a firm voice, exclaimed, 'Kill me,
if you please; my life is in your power; but never will I subscribe
to that iniquitous formulary.' The Jesuit, after laboring in vain
to persuade me to his wishes, went away in anger. I now momentarily
expected to be conducted to the torture. Whenever I was taken from my
room to the chapel, I feared lest some trap-door should open beneath
my feet, and therefore took great care to tread in the footsteps of the
Jesuit who preceded me. No one acquainted with the Inquisition will say
that my precaution was needless. My imagination was so filled with the
horrors of this place, that even in my short, interrupted, and feverish
dreams I beheld daggers and axes glittering around me; I heard the noise
of wheels, saw burning piles and heated irons, and woke in convulsive
terror, only to give myself up to gloomy reflections, inspired by the
reality of my situation, and the impressions left by these nocturnal
visions. What tears did I shed in those dreary moments! How innumerable
were the bitter wounds that lacerated my heart! My prayers seemed to me
unworthy to be received by a God of charity, because, notwithstanding
all my efforts to banish from my soul every feeling of resentment
towards my persecutors, hatred returned with redoubled power. I often
repeated the words of Christ, 'Father, forgive them, they know not what
they do;' but immediately a voice would answer, 'This prayer is not
intended for the Jesuits; they resemble not the crucifiers, who were
blind instruments of the rage of the Jews; while these men are fully
conscious of what they are doing; they are the modern Pharisees.' The
reading of the Bible would have afforded me great consolation, but this
was denied me." * * *

The fourteenth day of his imprisonment he was taken to the council
to hear his sentence, when he was again urged to sign the form of
recantation. The Father Rossini then spoke: "You are
decided; let it be, then, as you deserve. Rebellious son of the church,
in the fullness of the power which she has received from Christ, you
shall feel the holy rigor of her laws. She cannot permit tares to grow
with the good seed. She cannot suffer you to remain among her sons and
become the stumbling-block for the ruin of many. Abandon, therefore,
all hope of leaving this place, and of returning to dwell among the
faithful. KNOW, ALL IS FINISHED FOR YOU!" For the conclusion of this narrative we refer the reader to the volume
itself. If any more evidence were needed to show that the spirit of Romanism is
the same to-day that it has ever been, we find it in the account of
a legal prosecution against ten Christians at Beldac, in France,
for holding and attending a public worship not licensed by the civil
authority. They had made repeated, respectful, and earnest applications
to the prefect of the department of Hante-Vienne for the authorization
required by law, and which, in their case, ought to have been given. They persisted in rendering to God that worship
which his own command and their consciences required. For this they were
arraigned as above stated, on the 10th of August, 1855. On the 26th of
January, 1856, the case was decided by the "tribunal," and the three
pastors and one lady, a schoolmistress, were condemned to pay a fine
of one thousand francs each, and some of the others five-hundred francs
each, the whole amount, together with legal expenditures, exceeding the
sum of nine thousand francs. Meantime, the converts continue to hold their worship-meetings in the
woods, barns, and secret places, in order not to be surprised by the
police commissioner, and to avoid new official reports. "Thus, you see," says V. De Pressense, in a letter to the 'American and
foreign Christian Union,' "that we are brought back to the religious
meetings of the desert, when the Protestants of the Cevennes evinced
such persevering fidelity. The only difference is, that these Christians
belonged only a short time ago to that church which is now instigating
persecutions against them." DESTRUCTION OF THE INQUISITION IN SPAIN. Lehmanowsky was attached to the part of Napoleon's army
which was stationed in Madrid. L., "I
used to speak freely among the people what I thought of the Priests
and Jesuits, and of the Inquisition. It had been decreed by the Emperor
Napoleon that the Inquisition and the Monasteries should be suppressed,
but the decree, he said, like some of the laws enacted in this country,
was not executed." Months had passed away, and the prisons of the Inquisition had not been
opened. One night, about ten or eleven o'clock, as he was walking one of
the streets of Madrid, two armed men sprang upon him from an alley, and
made a furious attack. He instantly drew his sword, put himself in a
posture of defence, and while struggling with them, he saw at a distance
the lights of the patrols,--French soldiers mounted, who carried
lanterns, and who rode through the streets of the city at all hours of
the night, to preserve order. He called to them in French, and as they
hastened to his assistance, the assailants took to their heels and
escaped; not, however, before he saw by their dress that they belonged
to the guards of the Inquisition. He went immediately to Marshal Soult, then Governor of Madrid, told him
what had taken place, and reminded him of the decree to suppress this
institution. Marshal Soult told him that he might go and suppress it The
Colonel said that his regiment (the 9th. of the Polish Lancers,) was not
sufficient for such a service, but if he would give him two additional
regiments, the 117th, and another which he named, he would undertake the
work. The 117th regiment was under the command of Col. De Lile, who
is now, like Col. L., a minister of the gospel, and pastor of an
evangelical church in Marseilles, France. "The troops required were
granted, and I proceeded," said Col. L., "to the Inquisition which was
situated about five miles from the city. It was surrounded by a wall of
great strength, and defended by a company of soldiers. When we arrived
at the walls, I addressed one of the sentinels, and summoned the holy
fathers to surrender to the Imperial army, and open the gates of the
Inquisition. The sentinel who was standing on the wall, appeared to
enter into conversation with some one within, at the close of which he
presented his musket, and shot one of my men. This was the signal of
attack, and I ordered my troops to fire upon those who appeared on the
walls." It was soon obvious that it was an unequal warfare. The soldiers of the
holy office were partially protected by a breast-work upon the walls
which were covered with soldiers, while our troops were in the open
plain, and exposed to a destructive fire. We had no cannon, nor could
we scale the walls, and the gates successfully resisted all attempts at
forcing them. I could not retire and send for cannon to break through
the walls without giving them time to lay a train for blowing us up. I saw that it was necessary to change the mode of attack, and directed
some trees to be cut down and trimmed, to be used as battering rams. Two
of these were taken up by detachments of men, as numerous as could work
to advantage, and brought to bear upon the walls with all the power they
could exert, while the troops kept up a fire to protect them from the
fire poured upon them from the walls. Presently the walls began to
tremble, a breach was made, and the Imperial troops rushed into the
Inquisition. Here we met with an incident, which nothing but Jesuitical
effrontery is equal to. The Inquisitor General, followed by the father
confessors in their priestly robes, all came out of their rooms, as we
were making our way into the interior of the Inquisition, and with long
faces, and arms crossed over their breasts, their fingers resting on
their shoulders, as though they had been deaf to all the noise of
the attack and defence, and had just learned what was going on, they
addressed themselves in the language of rebuke to their own soldiers,
saying, "WHY DO YOU FIGHT OUR FRIENDS, THE FRENCH?" Their intention, no doubt, was to make us think that this defence was
wholly unauthorized by them, hoping, if they could make us believe
that they were friendly, they should have a better opportunity, in the
confusion of the moment, to escape. Their artifice was too shallow, and
did not succeed. I caused them to be placed under guard, and all
the soldiers of the Inquisition to be secured as prisoners. We then
proceeded to examine all the rooms of the stately edifice. We passed
through room after room; found all perfectly in order, richly furnished,
with altars and crucifixes, and wax candles in abundance, but we could
discover no evidences of iniquity being practiced there, nothing of
those peculiar features which we expected to find in an Inquisition. We found splendid paintings, and a rich and extensive library. Here was
beauty and splendor, and the most perfect order on which my eyes
had ever rested. The
ceilings and floors of wood were scoured and highly polished. The marble
floors were arranged with a strict regard to order. There was everything
to please the eye and gratify a cultivated taste; but where were those
horrid instruments of torture, of which we had been told, and where
those dungeons in which human beings were said to be buried alive? The holy father assured us that they had been
belied; that we had seen all; and I was prepared to give up the search,
convinced that this Inquisition was different from others of which I had
heard. De Idle was not so ready as myself to give up the search, and
said to me, "Colonel, you are commander to-day, and as you say, so it
must be; but if you will be advised by me, let this marble floor be
examined. Let water be brought and poured upon it, and we will watch
and see if there is any place through which it passes more freely than
others." I replied to him, "Do as you please, Colonel," and ordered
water to be brought accordingly. The slabs of marble were large and
beautifully polished. When the water had been poured over the floor,
much to the dissatisfaction of the inquisitors, a careful examination
was made of every seam in the floor, to see if the water passed through. De Lile exclaimed that he had found it. By the side of
one of these marble slabs the water passed through fast, as though
there was an opening beneath. All hands were now at work for further
discovery; the officers with their swords and the soldiers with their
bayonets, seeking to clear out the seam, and pry up the slab; others
with the butts of their muskets striking the slab with all their might
to break it, while the priests remonstrated against our desecrating
their holy and beautiful house. While thus engaged, a soldier, who was
striking with the butt of his musket, struck a spring, and the marble
slab flew up. Then the faces of the inquisitors grew pale as Belshazzar
when the hand writing appeared on the wall; they trembled all over;
beneath the marble slab, now partly up, there was a stair-case. I
stepped to the altar, and took from the candlestick one of the candles
four feet in length, which was burning that I might explore the room
below. As I was doing this, I was arrested by one of the inquisitors,
who laid his hand gently on my arm, and with a very demure and holy look
said "My son, you must not take those lights with your bloody hands they
are holy." "Well," said I, "I will take a holy thing to shed light
on iniquity; I will bear the responsibility." I took the candle, and
proceeded down the stair-case. As we reached the foot of the stairs
we entered a large room which was called the hall of judgment. In the
centre of it was a large block, and a chain fastened to it. On this they
were accustomed to place the accused, chained to his seat. On one side
of the room was an elevated seat called the Throne of Judgment. This,
the Inquisitor General occupied, and on either side were seats less
elevated, for the holy fathers when engaged in the solemn business of
the Holy Inquisition. From this room we proceeded to the right, and obtained access to small
cells extending the entire length of the edifice; and here such sights
were presented as we hoped never to see again. Three cells were places
of solitary confinement, where the wretched objects of inquisitorial
hate were confined year after year, till death released them from their
sufferings, and their bodies were suffered to remain until they were
entirely decayed, and the rooms had become fit for others to occupy. To prevent this being offensive to those who occupied the Inquisition,
there were flues or tubes extending to the open air, sufficiently
capacious to carry off the odor. In these cells we found the remains
of some who had paid the debt of nature: some of them had been dead
apparently but a short time, while of others nothing remained but their
bones, still chained to the floor of their dungeon. In others we found living sufferers of both sexes and of every age, from
three score years and ten down to fourteen or fifteen years--all naked
as they were born into the world! Here were old men
and aged women, who had been shut up for many years. Here, too, were the
middle aged, and the young man and the maiden of fourteen years old. The soldiers immediately went to work to release the captives from
their chains, and took from their knapsacks their overcoats and
other clothing, which they gave to cover their nakedness. They were
exceedingly anxious to bring them out to the light of day; but Col. L., aware of the danger, had food given them, and then brought them
gradually to the light, as they were able to bear it. L., to explore another room on the left. Here we found the instruments of torture, of every kind which the
ingenuity of men or devils could invent. L., here described four
of these horrid instruments. The first was a machine by which the victim
was confined, and then, beginning with the fingers, every joint in the
hands, arms and body, were broken or drawn one after another, until the
victim died. The second was a box, in which the head and neck of the
victim were so closely confined by a screw that he could not move in any
way. Over the box was a vessel, from which one drop of water a second,
fell upon the head of the victim;--every successive drop falling upon
precisely the same place on the head, suspended the circulation in a few
moments, and put the sufferer in the most excruciating agony. The third
was an infernal machine, laid horizontally, to which the victim was
bound; the machine then being placed between two beams, in which were
scores of knives so fixed that, by turning the machine with a crank, the
flesh of the sufferer was torn from his limbs, all in small pieces. The
fourth surpassed the others in fiendish ingenuity. Its exterior was
a beautiful woman, or large doll, richly dressed, with arms extended,
ready, to embrace its victim. Around her feet a semi-circle was drawn. The victim who passed over this fatal mark, touched a spring which
caused the diabolical engine to open; its arms clasped him, and a
thousand knives cut him into as many pieces in the deadly embrace. L., said that the sight of these engines of infernal cruelty kindled the
rage of the soldiers to fury. They declared that every inquisitor and
soldier of the inquisition should be put to the torture. They might have turned their
arms against him if he had attempted to arrest their work. The first they put to death in the machine for
breaking joints. The torture of the inquisitor put to death by the
dropping of water on his head was most excruciating. The poor man cried
out in agony to be taken from the fatal machine. The inquisitor general
was brought before the infernal engine called "The Virgin." "No" said they, "you have caused others to kiss her, and
now you must do it." They interlocked their bayonets so as to form large
forks, and with these pushed him over the deadly circle. The beautiful
image instantly prepared for the embrace, clasped him in its arms,
and he was cut into innumerable pieces. L. said, he witnessed the
torture of four of them--his heart sickened at the awful scene--and he
left the soldiers to wreak their vengeance on the last guilty inmate of
that prison-house of hell. In the mean time it was reported through Madrid that the prisons of the
Inquisition were broken open, and multitudes hastened to the fatal spot. And, Oh, what a meeting was there! About a
hundred who had been buried for many years were now restored to life. There were fathers who had found their long lost daughters; wives were
restored to their husbands, sisters to their brothers, parents to their
children; and there were some who could recognize no friend among the
multitude. The scene was such as no tongue can describe. L. caused the library, paintings,
furniture, etc., to be removed, and having sent to the city for a wagon
load of powder, he deposited a large quantity in the vaults beneath
the building, and placed a slow match in connection with it. All had
withdrawn to a distance, and in a few moments there was a most joyful
sight to thousands. The walls and turrets of the massive structure rose
majestically towards the heavens, impelled by the tremendous explosion,
and fell back to the earth an immense heap of ruins. Lehmanowsky of the destruction of the
inquisition in Spain. Was it then finally destroyed, never again to be
revived? Giacinto Achilli, D. D.
Surely, his statements in this respect can be relied upon, for he is
himself a convert from Romanism, and was formerly the "Head Professor of
Theology, and Vicar of the Master of the Sacred Apostolic Palace." He certainly had every opportunity to obtain correct information on the
subject, and in a book published by him in 1851, entitled "Dealings
with the Inquisition," we find, (page 71) the following startling
announcement. "We are now in the middle of the nineteenth century, and
still the Inquisition is actually and potentially in existence. This
disgrace to humanity, whose entire history is a mass of atrocious
crimes, committed by the priests of the Church of Rome, in the name of
God and of His Christ, whose vicar and representative, the pope, the
head of the Inquisition, declares himself to be,--this abominable
institution is still in existence in Rome and in the Roman States." Again, (page 89) he says, "And this most infamous Inquisition, a hundred
times destroyed and as often renewed, still exists in Rome as in the
barbarous ages; the only difference being that the same iniquities are
at present practiced there with a little more secrecy and caution than
formerly, and this for the sake of prudence, that the Holy See may not
be subjected to the animadversions of the world at large." On page 82 of the same work we find the following language. "I do not
propose to myself to speak of the Inquisition of times past, but of what
exists in Rome at the present moment; I shall therefore assert that the
laws of this institution being in no respect changed, neither can the
institution itself be said to have undergone any alteration. The present
race of priests who are now in power are too much afraid of the popular
indignation to let loose all their inquisitorial fury, which might even
occasion a revolt if they were not to restrain it; the whole world,
moreover, would cry out against them, a crusade would be raised against
the Inquisition, and, for a little temporary gratification, much power
would be endangered. This is the true reason why the severity of its
penalties is in some degree relaxed at the present time, but they still
remain unaltered in its code." Again on page 102, he says, "Are the torments which are employed at the
present day at the Inquisition all a fiction? It requires the impudence
of an inquisitor, or of the Archbishop of Westminister to deny their
existence. I have myself heard these evil-minded persons lament and
complain that their victims were treated with too much lenity. I inquired of the inquisitor of Spoleto. Thomas Aquinas says," answered he; "DEATH TO ALL THE
HERETICS." "Hand over, then, to one of these people, a person, however respectable;
give him up to one of the inquisitors, (he who quoted St. Thomas Aquinas
to me was made an Archbishop)--give up, I say, the present Archbishop of
Canterbury, an amiable and pious man, to one of these rabid inquisitors;
he must either deny his faith or be burned alive. Is not this the spirit that invariably actuates the
inquisitors? and not the inquisitors only, but all those who in any
way defile themselves with the inquisition, such as bishops and their
vicars, and all those who defend it, as the <DW7>s do. Wiseman, the Archbishop of Westminster according to the
pope's creation, the same who has had the assurance to censure me from
his pulpit, and to publish an infamous article in the Dublin Review, in
which he has raked together, as on a dunghill, every species of filth
from the sons of Ignatius Loyola; and there is no lie or calumny that he
has not made use of against me. Well, then, suppose I were to be handed
over to the tender mercy of Dr. Wiseman, and he had the full power to
dispose of me as he chose, without fear of losing his character in
the eyes of the nation to which, by parentage more than by merit, he
belongs, what do you imagine he would do with me? Should I not have to
undergo some death more terrible than ordinary? Would not a council be
held with the reverend fathers of the company of Loyola, the same who
have suggested the abominable calumnies above alluded to, in order
to invent some refined method of putting me out of the world? I feel
persuaded that if I were condemned by the Inquisition to be burned
alive, my calumniator would have great pleasure in building my funeral
pile, and setting fire to it with his own hands; or should strangulation
be preferred, that he would, with equal readiness, arrange the cord
around my neck; and all for the honor and glory of the Inquisition, of
which, according to his oath, he is a true and faithful servant." Can we
doubt that it would lead to results as frightful as anything described
in the foregoing story? But let us listen to his further remarks on the present state of the
Inquisition. On page 75 he says, "What, then, is the Inquisition of the
nineteenth century? The same system of intolerance which prevailed in
the barbarous ages. That which raised the Crusade and roused all Europe
to arms at the voice of a monk [Footnote: Bernard of Chiaravalle.] and
of a hermit, [Footnote: Peter the Hermit.] That which--in the name of
a God of peace, manifested on earth by Christ, who, through love
for sinners, gave himself to be crucified--brought slaughter on the
Albigenses and the Waldenses; filled France with desolation, under
Domenico di Guzman; raised in Spain the funeral pile and the scaffold,
devastating the fair kingdoms of Granada and Castile, through the
assistance of those detestable monks, Raimond de Pennefort, Peter
Arbues, and Cardinal Forquemorda. That, which, to its eternal infamy,
registers in the annals of France the fatal 24th of August, and the 5th
of November in those of England." That same system which at this moment flourishes at Rome, which has
never yet been either worn out or modified, and which at this present
time, in the jargon of the priests, is called a "the holy, Roman,
universal, apostolic Inquisition. Holy, as the place where Christ was
crucified is holy; apostolic, because Judas Iscariot was the first
inquisitor; Roman and universal, because FROM ROME IT EXTENDS OVER ALL
THE WORLD. It is denied by some that the Inquisition which exists in
Rome as its centre, is extended throughout the world by means of the
missionaries. The Roman Inquisition and the Roman Propaganda are in
close connection with each other. Every bishop who is sent in partibus
infidelium, is an inquisitor charged to discover, through the means of
his missionaries, whatever is said or done by others in reference to
Rome, with the obligation to make his report secretly. The Apostolic
nuncios are all inquisitors, as are also the Apostolic vicars. Here,
then, we see the Roman Inquisition extending to the most remote
countries." Again this same writer informs us, (page 112,) that "the
principal object of the Inquisition is to possess themselves, by
every means in their power, of the secrets of every class of society. Consequently its agents (Jesuits and Missionaries,) enter the domestic
circle, observe every motion, listen to every conversation, and would,
if possible, become acquainted with the most hidden thoughts. It is in
fact, the police, not only of Rome, but of all Italy; INDEED, IT MAY BE
SAID OF THE WHOLE WORLD." Achilli are fully corroborated by the Rev. In a book published by him in 1852, entitled
"The Brand of Dominic," we find the following remarks in relation to the
Inquisition of the present time. The Roman Inquisition is, therefore,
acknowledged to have an infinite multitude of affairs constantly on
hand, which necessitates its assemblage thrice every week. Still there
are criminals, and criminal processes. The body of officials are still
maintained on established revenues of the holy office. So far from any
mitigation of severity or judicial improvement in the spirit of its
administration, the criminal has now no choice of an advocate; but one
person, and he a servant of the Inquisition, performs an idle ceremony,
under the name of advocacy, for the conviction of all. And let the
reader mark, that as there are bishops in partibus, so, in like manner,
there are inquisitors of the same class appointed in every country, and
chiefly, in Great Britain and the colonies, who are sworn to secrecy,
and of course communicate intelligence to this sacred congregation of
all that can be conceived capable of comprehension within the infinitude
of its affairs. We must, therefore, either believe that the court
of Rome is not in earnest, and that this apparatus of universal
jurisdiction is but a shadow,--an assumption which is contrary to all
experience,--or we must understand that the spies and familiars of the
Inquisition are listening at our doors, and intruding themselves on our
hearths. How they proceed, and what their brethren at Rome are doing,
events may tell; BUT WE MAY BE SURE THEY ARE NOT IDLE. They were not idle in Rome in 1825, when they rebuilt the prisons of
the Inquisition. They were not idle in 1842, when they imprisoned Dr. Achilli for heresy, as he assures us; nor was the captain, or some other
of the subalterns, who, acting in their name, took his watch from him
as he came out. They were not idle in 1843, when they renewed the old
edicts against the Jews. And all the world knows that the inquisitors on
their stations throughout the pontifical states, and the inquisitorial
agents in Italy, Germany, and Eastern Europe, were never more active
than during the last four years, and even at this moment, when every
political misdemeanor that is deemed offensive to the Pope, is,
constructively, a sin against the Inquisition, and visited with
punishment accordingly. A deliberative body, holding formal session
thrice every week, cannot be idle, and although it may please them to
deny that Dr. Achilli saw and examined a black book, containing the
praxis now in use, the criminal code of inquisitors in force at this
day,--as Archibald Bower had an abstract of such a book given him for
his use about one hundred and thirty years ago,--they cannot convince
me that I have not seen and handled, and used in the preparation of this
volume, the compendium of an unpublished Roman code of inquisitorial
regulations, given to the vicars of the inquisitor-general of Modena. They may be pleased to say that the mordacchia, or gag, of which Dr. Achilli speaks, as mentioned in that BLACK BOOK, is no longer used;
but that it is mentioned there, and might be used again is more than
credible to myself, after having seen that the "sacred congregation" has
fixed a rate of fees for the ordering, witnessing, and administration of
TORTURE. There was indeed, a talk of abolishing torture at Rome; but
we have reason to believe that the congregation will not drop the
mordacchia, inasmuch, as, instead of notifying any such reformation to
the courts of Europe, this congregation has kept silence. For although a
continuation of the bullary has just been published at Rome, containing
several decrees of this congregation, there is not one that announces
a fulfilment of this illusory promise,--a promise imagined by a
correspondent to French newspapers, but never given by the inquisitors
themselves. And as there is no proof that they have yet abstained from
torture, there is a large amount of circumstantial evidence that they
have delighted themselves in death. When public burnings
became inexpedient--as at Goa--did they not make provision for private
executions? For a third time at least the Roman prisons--I am not speaking of those
of the provinces--were broken open, in 1849, after the desertion of Pius
IX., and two prisoners were found there, an aged bishop and a nun. Many persons in Rome reported the event; but instead of copying what is
already before the public, I translate a letter addressed to me by P.
Alessandro Gavazzi, late chaplain-general of the Roman army, in reply
to a few questions which I had put to him. All who have heard his
statements may judge whether his account of facts be not marked with
every note of accuracy. They will believe that his power of oratory DOES
NOT betray him into random declamation. Under date of March 20th, 1852,
he writes thus:

"MY DEAR SIR,--In answering your questions concerning the palace of
Inquisition at Rome, I should say that I can give only a few superficial
and imperfect notes. So short was the time that it remained open to the
public, So great the crowd of persons that pressed to catch a sight of
it, and so intense the horror inspired by that accursed place, that I
could not obtain a more exact and particular impression. "I found no instruments of torture, [Footnote: "The gag, the
thumb-screw, and many other instruments of severe torture could be
easily destroyed and others as easily procured. The non-appearance of
instruments is not enough to sustain the current belief that the use of
them is discontinued. So long as there is a secret prison, and while
all the existing standards of inquisitorial practice make torture
an ordinary expedient for extorting information, not even a bull,
prohibiting torture, would be sufficient to convince the world that
it has been discontinued. The practice of falsehood is enjoined on
inquisitors. How, then, could we believe a bull, or decree, if it were
put forth to-morrow, to release them from suspicion, or to screen them
from obloquy? It would not be entitled to belief."--Rev. for they were destroyed at the time of the first French invasion,
and because such instruments were not used afterwards by the modern
Inquisition. I did, however, find, in one of the prisons of the second
court, a furnace, and the remains of a woman's dress. I shall never be
able to believe that that furnace was placed there for the use of the
living, it not being in such a place, or of such a kind, as to be of
service to them. Everything, on the contrary, combines to persuade me
that it was made use of for horrible deaths, and to consume the remains
of the victims of inquisitorial executions. Another object of horror I
found between the great hall of judgment and the luxurious apartment of
the chief jailer (primo custode), the Dominican friar who presides over
this diabolical establishment. This was a deep trap or shaft opening
into the vaults under the Inquisition. As soon as the so-called criminal
had confessed his offence; the second keeper, who is always a Dominican
friar, sent him to the father commissary to receive a relaxation
[Footnote: "In Spain, RELAXATION is delivery to death. In the
established style of the Inquisition it has the same meaning. But in the
common language of Rome it means RELEASE. In the lips of the inquisitor,
therefore, if he used the word, it has one meaning, and another to the
ear of the prisoner."--Rev. With the
hope of pardon, the confessed culprit would go towards the apartment of
the holy inquisitor; but in the act of setting foot at its entrance,
the trap opened, and the world of the living heard no more of him. I
examined some of the earth found in the pit below this trap; it was a
compost of common earth, rottenness, ashes, and human hair, fetid to the
smell, and horrible to the sight and to the thought of the beholder. "But where popular fury reached its highest pitch was in the vaults of
St. Pius V. I am anxious that you should note well that this pope was
canonized by the Roman church especially for his zeal against heretics. I will now describe to you the manner how, and the place where, those
vicars of Jesus Christ handled the living members of Jesus Christ, and
show you how they proceeded for their healing. You descend into the
vaults by very narrow stairs. A narrow corridor leads you to the
several cells, which, for smallness and stench, are a hundred times more
horrible than the dens of lions and tigers in the Colosseum. Wandering
in this labyrinth of most fearful prisons, that may be called 'graves
for the living,' I came to a cell full of skeletons without skulls,
buried in lime, and the skulls, detached from the bodies, had been
collected in a hamper by the first visitors. and why were they buried in that place and in that manner? I have heard
some popish priests trying to defend the Inquisition from the charge of
having condemned its victims to a secret death, say that the palace of
the Inquisition was built on a burial-ground, belonging anciently to a
hospital for pilgrims, and that the skeletons found were none other
than those of pilgrims who had died in that hospital. But everything
contradicts this papistical defence. Suppose that there had been a
cemetery there, it could not have had subterranean galleries and
cells, laid out with so great regularity; and even if there had been
such--against all probability--the remains of bodies would have been
removed on laying the foundation of the palace, to leave the space free
for the subterranean part of the Inquisition. Besides, it is contrary to
the use of common tombs to bury the dead by carrying them through a door
at the side; for the mouth of the sepulchre is always at the top. And
again, it has never been the custom in Italy to bury the dead singly in
quick lime; but, in time of plague, the dead bodies have been usually
laid in a grave until it was sufficiently full, and then quick lime has
been laid over them, to prevent pestilential exhalations, by hastening
the decomposition of the infected corpses. This custom was continued,
some years ago, in the cemeteries of Naples, and especially in the daily
burial of the poor. Therefore, the skeletons found in the Inquisition
of Rome could not belong to persons who had died a natural death in
a hospital; nor could any one, under such a supposition, explain the
mystery of all the bodies being buried in lime except the head. It
remains, then, beyond a doubt, that that subterranean vault contained
the victims of one of the many secret martyrdoms of the butcherly
tribunal. The following is the most probable opinion, if it be not
rather the history of a fact:

"The condemned were immersed in a bath of slaked lime, gradually filled
up to their necks. The lime by little and little enclosed the sufferers,
or walled them up alive. As the lime
rose higher and higher, the respiration became more and more painful,
because more difficult. So that what with the suffocation of the smoke,
and the anguish of the compressed breathing, they died in a manner most
horrible and desperate. Some time after their death the heads would
naturally separate from the bodies, and roll away into the hollows made
by the shrinking of the lime. Any other explanation of the feet that may
be attempted will be found improbable and unnatural. You may make what
use you please of these notes of mine, since I can warrant their
truth. I wish that writers, speaking of this infamous tribunal of the
Inquisition, would derive their information from pure history, unmingled
with romance; for so great and so many the historical atrocities of the
Inquisition, that they would more than suffice to arouse the detestation
of a thousand worlds. I know that the popish impostor-priests go about
saying that the Inquisition was never an ecclesiastical tribunal, but
a laic. But you will have shown the contrary in your work, and may also
add, in order quite to unmask these lying preachers, that the palace
of the Inquisition at Rome is under the shadow of the palace of the
Vatican; that the keepers are to this day, Dominican friars; and that
the prefect of the Inquisition at Rome is the Pope in person. "I have the honor to be your affectionate Servant,

"ALESSANDRA GAVAZZI." "The Roman parliament decreed the erection of a pillar opposite the
palace of the Inquisition, to perpetuate the memory of the destruction
of that nest of abominations; but before that or any other monument
could be raised, the French army besieged and took the city, restored
the Pope, and with him the tribunal of the faith. Achilli thrown into one of its old prisons, on the 29th of July 1849,
but the violence of the people having made the building less adequate
to the purpose of safe keeping, he was transferred to the castle of
St. Angelo, which had often been employed for the custody of similar
delinquents, and there he lay in close confinement until the 9th of
January, 1850, when the French authorities, yielding to influential
representations from this country assisted him to escape in disguise as
a soldier, thus removing an occasion of scandal, but carefully leaving
the authority of the congregation of cardinals undisputed. Indeed
they first obtained the verbal sanction of the commissary, who saw it
expedient to let his victim go, and hush an outcry. "Yet some have the hardihood to affirm that there is no longer any
Inquisition; and as the Inquisitors were instructed to suppress the
truth, to deny their knowledge of cases actually passing through their
hands, and to fabricate falsehoods for the sake of preserving the
SECRET, because the secret was absolutely necessary to the preservation
of their office, so do the Inquisitors in partibus falsify and illude
without the least scruple of conscience, in order to put the people of
this country off their guard. "That the Inquisition really exists, is placed beyond a doubt by its
daily action as a visible institution at Rome. But if any one should
fancy that it was abolished after the release of Dr. Achilli, let him
hear a sentence contradictory, from a bull of the Pope himself, Pius IX,
a document that was dated at Rome, August 22, 1851, where the pontiff,
condemning the works of Professor Nuytz, of Turin, says, "after having
taken the advice of the doctors in theology and canon law, AFTER HAVING
COLLECTED THE SUFFRAGES OF OUR VENERABLE BROTHERS THE CARDINALS OF THE
CONGREGATION OF THE SUPREME AND UNIVERSAL INQUISITION." And so recently
as March, 1852, by letters of the Secretariate of State, he appointed
four cardinals to be "members of the Sacred Congregation of the Holy
Roman and Universal Inquisition;" giving incontrovertible evidence that
provision is made for attending to communications of Inquisitors in
partibus from all parts of the world. As the old cardinals die off,
their vacant seats are filled by others. The 'immortal legion' is
punctually recruited. "After all, have we in Great Britain, Ireland and the colonies, and our
brethren of the foreign mission stations, any reason to apprehend harm
to, ourselves from the Inquisition as it is? In reply to this question,
let it be observed;

"1. That there are Inquisitors in partibus is not to be denied. That
letters of these Inquisitors are laid before the Roman Inquisition is
equally certain. Even in the time of Leo XII, when the church of
Rome was far less active in the British empire than it is now, some
particular case was always decided on Thursday, when the Pope, in his
character of universal Inquisitor, presided in the congregation. It
cannot be thought that now, in the height of its exultation, daring and
aggression, this congregation has fewer emissaries, or that they are
less active, or less communicative than they were at that time. We
also see that the number is constantly replenished. The cardinals Della
Genga-Sermattei; De Azevedo; Fornari; and Lucciardi have just been added
to it. Besides a cardinal in England, and a delegate in Ireland, there is
both in England and Ireland, a body of bishops, 'natural Inquisitors,'
as they are always acknowledged, and have often claimed to be; and these
natural Inquisitors are all sworn to keep the secret--the soul of the
Inquisition. Since, then, there are Inquisitors in partibus, appointed
to supply the lack of an avowed and stationary Inquisition, and since
the bishops are the very persons whom the court of Rome can best
command, as pledged for such a service, it is reasonable to suppose they
act in that capacity. Some of the proceedings of these bishops confirm the assurance that
there is now an Inquisition in activity in England. * * * The vigilance
exercised over families, also the intermeddling of priests with
education, both in families and schools, and with the innumerable
relations of civil society, can only be traced back to the Inquisitors
in partibus, whose peculiar duty, whether by help of confessors or
familiars, is to worm out every secret of affairs, private or public,
and to organize and conduct measures of repression or of punishment. Where the secular arm cannot be borrowed, and where offenders lie beyond
the reach of excommunication, irregular methods must be resorted to,
not rejecting any as too crafty or too violent. Discontented mobs, or
individual zealots are to be found or bought. What part the Inquisitors
in partibus play in Irish assassinations, or in the general mass of
murderous assaults that is perpetrated in the lower haunts of crime,
it is impossible to say. Under cover of confessional and Inquisitorial
secrets, spreads a broad field of action--a region of mystery--only
visible to the eye of God, and to those'most reverend and most eminent'
guardians of the papacy, who sit thrice every week, in the Minerva
and Vatican, and there manage the hidden springs of Inquisition on the
heretics, schismatics, and rebels, no less than on 'the faithful'
of realms. Who can calculate the extent of their power over those
'religious houses,' where so many of the inmates are but neophytes,
unfitted by British education for the intellectual and moral abnegation,
the surrender of mind and conscience, which monastic discipline
exacts? Yet they must be coerced into submission, and kept under penal
discipline. Who can tell how many of their own clergy are withdrawn
to Rome, and there delated, imprisoned, and left to perish, if not
'relaxed' to death, in punishment of heretical opinions or liberal
practices? We have heard of laymen, too, taken to Rome by force, or
decoyed thither under false pretences there to be punished by the
universal Inquisition; and whatever of incredibility may appear in some
tales of Inquisitorial abduction, the general fact that such abductions
have taken place, seems to be incontrovertible. And now that the
Inquisitors in partibus are distributed over Christendom, and that they
provide the Roman Inquisition with daily work from year's end to year's
end, is among the things most certain,--even the most careless of
Englishmen must acknowledge that we have all reason to apprehend much
evil from the Inquisition as it is. And no Christian can be aware of
this fact, without feeling himself more than ever bound to uphold
the cause of christianity, both at home and abroad, as the only
counteractive of so dire a curse, and the only remedy of so vast an
evil." E. A. Lawrence, writing of "Romanism at Rome," gives us the
following vivid description of the present state of the Roman Church. "Next is seen at Rome the PROPAGANDA, the great missionary heart of the
whole masterly system. Noiselessly, by the multiform orders of monks and
nuns, as through so many veins and arteries, it sends out and receives
back its vital fluid. In its halls, the whole world is distinctly
mapped out, and the chief points of influence minutely marked. A kind of
telegraphic communication is established with the remotest stations in
South Africa and Siberia, and with almost every nook in our own land,
to which the myrmidons of Papal power look with the most of fear. It
is through means of this moral galvanic battery, set up in the Vatican,
that the Church of Rome has gained its power of UBIQUITY--has so well
nigh made itself OMNIPOTENT, as well as omnipresent. "It is no mean or puny antagonist that strides across the path of a
free, spiritual and advancing Protestantism. And yet, with a simple
shepherd's sling, and the smooth stones gathered from Siloa's brook, God
will give it the victory. "Once more let us look, and we shall find at Rome, still working in its
dark, malignant efficiency, the INQUISITION. Men are still made to pass
through fires of this Moloch. This is the grand defensive expedient of
the Papacy, and is the chief tribunal of the States. Its processes are
all as secret as the grave. Its cells are full of dead men's bones. They
call it the Asylum for the poor--a retreat for doubting and distressed
pilgrims, where they may have experience of the parental kindness of
their father the Pope, and their mother the church. Achilli had a trial of this beneficient discipline, when thrown
into the deep dungeon of St. And how many other poor victims of
this diabolical institution are at this moment pining in agony, heaven
knows. "In America, we talk about Rome as having ceased to persecute. She holds to the principle as tenaciously as ever. Of the evil spirit of Protestantism she says, "This
kind goeth not out, but by fire." Hence she must hold both the principle and the power of persecution, of
compelling men to believe, or, if they doubt, of putting them to death
for their own good. Take from her this power and she bites the dust." It may perchance be said that the remarks of the Rev. William Rule,
quoted above, refer exclusively to the existing state of things is
England, Ireland, and the colonies. But who will dare to say, after a
careful investigation of the subject, that they do not apply with equal
force to these United States? Has America nothing to fear from the inquisitors--from the Jesuits? Is
it true that the "Inquisition still exists in Rome--that its code is
unchanged--that its emissaries are sent over all the world--that every
nuncio and bishop is an Inquisitor," and is it improbable that, even
now, torture rooms like those described in the foregoing story, may be
found in Roman Catholic establishments in this country? Yes, even here,
in Protestant, enlightened America! Have WE then nothing to fear from
Romanism? But a few days since a gentleman of learning and intelligence
when speaking of this subject, exclaimed, "What have we to do with the
Jesuits? The idea that we have aught
to fear from Romanism, is simply ridiculous!" In reply to this, allow
me to quote the language of the Rev. Manuel J. Gonsalves, leader of the
Madeira Exiles. "The time will come when the American people will arise as one man, and
not only abolish the confessional, but will follow the example of many
of the European nations, who had no peace, or rest, till they banished
the Jesuits. These are the men, who bask in the sunbeams of popery, to
whom the pope has entrusted the vast interests of the king of Rome, in
this great Republic. Nine tenths of the Romish priests, now working hard
for their Master the pope, in this country, are full blooded Jesuits. The man of sin who is the head of the mystery of iniquity--through
the advice of the popish bishops now in this country, has selected
the Jesuitical order of priests, to carry on his great and gigantic
operations in the United States of America. Those Jesuits who
distinguish themselves the most in the destruction of Protestant Bible
religion, and who gain the largest number of protestant scholars for
popish schools and seminaries; who win most American converts to their
sect are offered great rewards in the shape of high offices in the
church. John Hughes, the Jesuit Bishop of the New York Romanists, was
rewarded by Pope Pius 9th, with an Archbishop's mitre, for his great,
zeal and success, in removing God's Holy Bible from thirty-eight public
schools in New York, and for procuring a papal school committee, to
examine every book in the hands of American children in the public
schools, that every passage of truth, in those books of history
unpalatable to the pope might be blotted out." Has America then nothing
to do with Romanism? But another gentleman exclaims, "What if Romanism be on the increase in
the United States! Is not their religion as dear to them, as ours is
to us?" M. J. Gonsalves would reply as follows. "The
American people have been deceived, in believing THAT POPERY WAS A
RELIGION, not a very good one to be sure, but some kind of one. We might as well call the Archbishop of the
fallen angels, and his crew, a religious body of intelligent beings,
because they believe in an Almighty God, and tremble, as to call the man
of sin and his Jesuits, a body of religious saints. The tree is known
by its fruit, such as 'love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness,
goodness, meekness, faith, temperance, brotherly kindness;' and where
the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, Christian liberty, giving
to God and man their due unasked. Now we ask, what kind of fruit does
the tree of Popery bear, in any country, that it should claim homage,
and respect, as a good religion?" Such is the language of one who knew so well what popery was, that he
fled from it as from a hell upon earth. In his further remarks upon the horrors of convent life in the United
States, he fully confirms the statements in the foregoing narrative. He
says, "It is time that American gentlemen, who are so much occupied
in business, should think of the dangers of the confessional, and the
miseries endured by innocent, duped, American, imprisoned females in
this free country; and remember that these American ladies who have been
duped and enticed by Jesuitical intrigue and craft, into their female
convents, have no means of deliverance; they cannot write a letter to a
friend without the consent and inspection of the Mother Abbess, who
is always and invariably a female tyrant, a creature in the pay of the
Bishop, and dependent upon the Bishop for her despotic office of power. The poor, unfortunate, imprisoned American female has no means of
redress in her power. She cannot communicate her story of wrong and
suffering to any living being beyond the walls of her prison. She may
have a father, a mother, a dear brother, or a sister, who, if they knew
one-sixteenth part of her wrongs and sufferings, would fly at once to
see her and sympathize with her in her anguish. But the Jesuit confessor
attached to the prison is ever on the alert. Those ladies who appear the
most unhappy, and unreconciled to their prison, are compelled to attend
the confessional every day; and thus the artful Jesuit, by a thousand
cross questions, is made to understand perfectly the state of their
minds. The Lady Porter, or door-keeper and jailor, is always a creature
of the priest's, and a great favorite with the Mother Abbess. Should any
friends call to see an unhappy nun who is utterly unreconciled to her
fate, the Lady Porter is instructed to inform those relatives that the
dear nun they want to see so much, is so perfectly happy, and given up
to heavenly meditations, that she cannot be persuaded to see an earthly
relative. At the same time the Mother Abbess dismisses the relatives
with a very sorrowful countenance, and regrets very much, in appearance,
their disappointment. But the unhappy nun is never informed that her
friends or relatives have called to inquire after her welfare. How
amazing, that government should allow such prisons in the name of
religion!" CONVENT OF THE CAPUCHINS IN SANTIAGO

In a late number of "The American and Foreign Christian Union," we find
the following account of conventual life from a report of a Missionary
in Chile, South America. "Now, my brother, let me give you an account related to me by a most
worthy English family, most of the members of which have grown up in the
country, confirmed also by common report, of the Convent of Capuchins,
in Santiago. "The number of inmates is limited to thirty-two young ladies. The
admittance fee is $2000. When the nun enters she is dressed like a
bride, in the most costly material that wealth can command. There,
beside the altar of consecration, she devotes herself in the most
solemn, manner to a life of celibacy and mortification of the flesh
and spirit, with the deluded hope that her works will merit a brighter
mansion in the realms above. "The forms of consecration being completed, she begins to cast off
her rich veil, costly vestments, all her splendid diamonds and
brilliants--which, in many instances, have cost, perhaps, from ten to
fifteen, or even twenty thousand dollars. Then her beautiful locks are
submitted to the tonsure; and to signify her deadness forever to the
world, she is clothed in a dress of coarse grey cloth, called serge, in
which she is to pass the miserable remnant of her days. The dark sombre
walls of her prison she can sever pass, and its iron-bound doors are
shut forever upon their new, youthful, and sensitive occupant. Rarely,
if ever, is she permitted to speak, and NEVER, NEVER, to see her friends
or The loved ones of home--to enjoy the embraces of a fond mother, or
devoted father, or the smiles of fraternal or sisterly affection. If
ever allowed to speak at all, it is through iron bars where she cannot
be seen, and in the presence of the abbess, to see that no complaint
escapes her lips. However much her bosom may swell with anxiety at the
sound of voices which were once music to her soul, and she may long to
pour out her cries and tears to those who once soothed every sorrow of
her heart; yet not a murmur must be uttered. The soul must suffer
its own sorrows solitary and alone, with none to sympathize, or grant
relief, and none to listen to its moans but the cold gloomy walls of her
tomb. No, no, not even the Gospel of Jesus Christ, that great alleviator
of all the sorrows of the heart, is allowed an entrance there. Besides being condemned to a meagre, insufficient
and unwholesome diet which they themselves must cook, the nuns are
not allowed to speak much with each other, except to say, 'Que morir
tenemos, 'we are to die,' or 'we must die,' and to reply, 'Ya los
sabemos,' 'we know it,' or 'already we know it'

"They pass most of their time in small lonely cells, where they sleep in
a narrow place dug out in the ground, in the shape of a coffin, without
bed of any kind, except a piece of coarse serge spread down; and their
daily dress is their only covering. 'Tired
nature's sweet restorer, balmy sleep, no more with his downy pinions
lights on his unsullied with a tear:' FOR EVERY HOUR OF THE TWENTY-FOUR
they are aroused by the bell to perform their 'Ave Maria's,' count their
rosaries, and such other blind devotions as may be imposed. Thus they
drag out a miserable existence, and when death calls the spirit to its
last account, the other nuns dig the grave with their own hands, within
the walls of the convent, and so perform the obsequies of their departed
sister. "Thus, I have briefly given you not fiction! but a faithful narrative
of facts in regard to conventual life, and an establishment marked by
almost every form of sin, and yet making pretence of 'perfecting the
saints,' by the free and gentle influences of the gospel of Christ. What is done with the rich vestments and jewels? Where do the priests get all their brilliants to perform high mass
and adorn their processions? Where does all the hair of the saints come from, which is sold in
lockets for high prices as sure preventives of evil? Whose grave has been plundered to obtain RELICS to sell to the
ignorant. Where does the Romish Church obtain her SURPLUS RIGHTEOUSNESS TO
SELL TO THE needy, and not give it like our blessed Lord, 'without money
and without price?' Who is responsible for the FANATICISM that induces a young female
to incarcerate herself? Where is the authority in reason, in revelation, for such a life? "A young lady lately cast herself from the tower, and was dashed in
pieces, being led to do it, doubtless, in desperation. The convents of
this city, of the same order, require the same entrance fee, $2000. Of
course, none but the comparatively rich can avail themselves of this
perfection of godliness. "Who will say that this mode of life has not been invented in order to
cut short life as rapidly as possible, that the $2000, with all the rich
diamonds upon initiation, may be repeated as frequently as possible? how true it is, that Romanism is the same merciless, cruel,
diabolical organisation, wherever it can fully develop itself, in
all lands. How truly is it denominated by the pen of inspiration the
'MYSTERY OF INIQUITY,' especially that part of it relating to these
secret institutions, and the whole order of the Jesuits." The editor of the "Christian Union", in his remarks on the above, says,
"Already the fair face of our country is disfigured by the existence
here and there of conventual establishments. At present they do not
show the hideous features which they, at least in some cases, assume in
countries where papal influence and authority are supreme. The genius of
our government and institutions necessarily exerts a restraining power,
which holds them from excesses to which, otherwise, they might run. But
they constitute a part of a system which is strongly at variance with
the interests of humanity, and merely wait the occurrence of favorable
circumstances to visit upon our land all the horrors which they have
inflicted elsewhere. "How many conventual establishments there are now in the nation, few
Protestants, it is believed, know. And how many young females, guilty of
no crime against society, and condemned by no law of the land, are shut
up in their walls and doomed to a life which they did not anticipate
when entering them, a life which is more dreadful to them than death,
very few of the millions of our citizens conceive. The majority of our
people have slept over the whole subject, and the indifference thus
manifested has emboldened the priests to posh forward the extension
of the system, and the workmen are now busy in various places in
the construction of additional establishments. But such facts as are
revealed in this article, from the pen of our missionary, in connection
with things that are occurring around us, show that no time should be
lost in examining this whole subject of convents and monasteries, and in
legislating rightly about them." Again, when speaking of papal convents in the United States, the same
talented writer observes, "The time has fully come when Protestants
should lay aside their apathy and too long-cherished indifference in
respect to the movements of Rome in this land. It is time for them to
call to mind the testimony of their fathers, their bitter experiences
from the papal See, and to take effective measures to protect the
inheritance bequeathed to them, that they may hand it down to their
children free from corruption, as pure and as valuable as when they
received it. They should remember that Rome claims never to change, that
what she was in Europe when in the zenith of her power, she will be here
when fairly installed, and has ability to enforce her commands. "Her numbers now on our soil, her nearly two thousand priests moving
about everywhere, her colleges and printing-presses, her schools and
convents, and enormous amounts of property held by her bishops, have
served as an occasion to draw out something of her spirit, and to show
that she is ARROGANT AND ABUSIVE TO THE EXTENT OF HER POWER. "Scarcely a newspaper issues from her press, but is loaded with abuse of
Protestants and of their religion, and at every available point assaults
are made upon their institutions and laws; and Rome and her institutions
and interests are crowded into notice, and special privileges are loudly
clamored for. "All Protestants, therefore, of every name, and of every religious and
political creed, we repeat it, who do not desire to ignore the past, and
to renounce all care or concern for the future, as to their children and
children's children, should lose no time in informing themselves of
the state of things around them in regard to the papacy and its
institutions. They should without delay devote their efforts and
influence to the protection of the country against those Popish
establishments and their usages which have been set up among us without
the authority of law, and under whose crushing weight some of the
nations of Europe have staggered and reeled for centuries, and have now
but little of their former power and glory remaining, and under which
Mexico, just upon our borders, has sunk manifestly beyond the power of
recovery. "Let each individual seek to awaken an interest in this matter in
the mind of his neighbor. And if there be papal establishments in
the neighborhood under the names of'schools,''retreats','religions
communities,' or any other designation, which are at variance with, or
are not conformed to, the laws of the commonwealth in which they are
situated, let memorials be prepared and signed by the citizens, and
forwarded immediately to the legislature, praying that they may be
subjected to examination, and required to conform to the laws by which
all Protestant institutions of a public nature are governed. "Let us exclude from our national territory all irresponsible
institutions. Let us seek to maintain a government of law, and insist
upon the equality of all classes before it." In closing these extracts, we beg leave to express ourselves in the
words of the Rev. Sunderland, of Washington city, in a sermon
delivered before the American and Foreign Christian Union, at its
anniversary in May, 1856. "But new it is asked, 'Why all this tirade against Roman Catholics?' It is not against the unhappy millions that are
ground down under the iron heel of that enormous despotism. They are of
the common humanity, our brethren and kinsmen, according to the flesh. They need the same light instruction and salvation that we need. Like
ourselves they need the one God, the one mediator between God and man,
the man Christ Jesus; and from the heart we love and pity them. We would
grant them all the privileges which we claim to ourselves. We can have
no animosity towards them as men and candidates with ourselves for the
coming judgment. But it is the system under which they are born, and
live, and die, I repeat, which we denounce, and when we shall cease to
oppose it, then let our right hand forget her cunning, and our tongue
cleave to the roof of our mouth. What is it but a dark and terrible
power on earth before which so many horrible memories start up? Why,
sir, look at it! We drag the bones of the grim behemoth out to view, for
we would not have the world forget his ugliness nor the terror he has
inspired. 'A tirade against Romanism,' is it? O sir, we remember
the persecutions of Justinian; we remember the days of the Spanish
Inquisition; we remember the reign of 'the Bloody Mary;' we remember
the revocation of the Edict of Nantes; we remember St. Bartholomew;
we remember the murdered Covenanters, Huguenots, and Piedmontese; we
remember the noble martyrs dying for the testimony of the faith along
the ancient Rhine; we remember the later wrath which pursued the
islanders of Madeira, till some of them sought refuge upon these
shores; we remember the Madiai, and we know how the beast ever seeks to
propagate his power, by force where he can, by deception where he must. And when we remember these things, we must protest against the further
vigor and prosperity of this grand Babylon of all. Take it, then, tirade
and all, for so ye must, ye ministers of Rome, sodden with the fumes of
that great deep of abominations! The voice of the Protestant shall never
be hushed; the spirit of Reformation shall never sleep. O, lands of
Farel and of Calvin, of Zwingle and of Luther! O countries where the
trumpet first sounded, marshalling the people to this fearful contest! We have heard the blast rolling still louder down the path of three
hundred years, and in our solid muster-march we come, the children
of the tenth generation. We come a growing phalanx, not with carnal
weapons, but with the armor of the gospel, and wielding the sword of
truth on the right hand and on the left, we say that ANTICHRIST MUST
FALL. Hear it, ye witnesses, and mark the word; by the majesty of the
coming kingdom of Jesus, and by the eternal purpose of Jehovah, THIS
ANTICHRIST MUST FALL." In the first of these accidents the
  bridge gave way under an excursion train, in honor of the opening
  of the road, and its chief engineer was among the killed. The train
  fell some thirty feet, and 22 persons lost their lives while over 50
  suffered serious injuries. At Brainerd the train,--a "mixed" one,--went down nearly 80 feet
  into the river. The locomotive and several cars had passed the span
  which fell, in safety, but were pulled back and went down on top
  of the train. There were but few passengers in it, of whom three
  were killed. In falling the caboose car at the rear of the train,
  in which most of the passengers were, struck on a pier and broke in
  two, leaving several passengers in it. In the case of the Gasconade,
  the disaster was due to the weakness of the bridge, which fell under
  the weight of the train. There is some question as to the Brainerd
  accident, whether it was occasioned by weakness of the bridge or the
  derailment upon it of a freight car. Naturally the popular inference was at once drawn that this was
a mere repetition of the Ashtabula experience,--that the fearful
earlier lesson had been thrown away on a corporation either
unwilling or not caring to learn. The newspapers far and wide
resounded with ill considered denunciation, and the demand was loud
for legislation of the crudest conceivable character, especially
a law prohibiting the passage over any bridge of two locomotives
attached to one passenger train. The fact, however, seems to be
that, except in its superficial details, the Tariffville disaster
had no features in common with that at Ashtabula; as nearly as
can be ascertained it was due neither to the weakness nor to the
overloading of the bridge. Though the evidence subsequently given
is not absolutely conclusive on this point, the probabilities
would seem to be that, while on the bridge, the second locomotive
was derailed in some unexplained way and consequently fell on
the stringers which yielded under the sudden blow. The popular
impression, therefore, as to the bearing which the first of these
two strikingly similar accidents had upon the last tended only to
bring about results worse than useless. The bridge fell, not under
the steady weight of two locomotives, but under the sudden shock
incident to the derailment of one. The remedy, therefore, lay in the
direction of so planking or otherwise guarding the floors of similar
bridges that in case of derailment the locomotives or cars should
not fall on the stringers or greatly diverge from the rails so as
to endanger the trusses. On the other hand the suggestion of a law
prohibiting the passage over bridges of more than one locomotive
with any passenger train, while in itself little better than a legal
recognition of bad bridge building, also served to divert public
attention from the true lesson of the disaster. Another newspaper
precaution, very favorably considered at the time, was the putting
of one locomotive, where two had to be used, at the rear end of the
train as a pusher, instead of both in front. This expedient might
indeed obviate one cause of danger, but it would do so only by
substituting for it another which has been the fruitful source of
some of the worst railroad disasters on record. [10]

  [10] "The objectionable and dangerous practice also employed on some
  railways of assisting trains up inclines by means of pilot engines
  in the rear instead of in front, has led to several accidents in
  the past year and should be discontinued." --_General Report to the
  Board of Trade upon the Accidents on the Railways of Great Britain
  in 1878, p. Long, varied and terrible as the record of bridge disasters has
become, there are, nevertheless, certain very simple and inexpensive
precautions against them, which, altogether too frequently,
corporations do not and will not take. At Ashtabula the bridge
gave way. There was no derailment as there seems to have been
at Tariffville. The sustaining power of a bridge is, of course,
a question comparatively difficult of ascertainment. A fatal
weakness in this respect may be discernable only to the eye of a
trained expert. Derailment, however, either upon a bridge, or when
approaching it, is in the vast majority of cases a danger perfectly
easy to guard against. The precautions are simple and they are not
expensive, yet, taking the railroads of the United States as a
whole, it may well be questioned whether the bridges at which they
have been taken do not constitute the exception rather than the
rule. Not only is the average railroad superintendent accustomed
to doing his work and running his road under a constant pressure to
make both ends meet, which, as he well knows, causes his own daily
bread to depend upon the economies he can effect; but, while he
finds it hard work at best to provide for the multifarious outlays,
long immunity from disaster breeds a species of recklessness even
in the most cautious:--and yet the single mishap in a thousand
must surely fall to the lot of some one. Many years ago the
terrible results which must soon or late be expected wherever the
consequences of a derailment on the approaches to a bridge are not
securely guarded against, were illustrated by a disaster on the
Great Western railroad of Canada, which combined many of the worst
horrors of both the Norwalk and the New Hamburg tragedies; more
recently the almost forgotten lesson was enforced again on the
Vermont & Massachusetts road, upon the bridge over the Miller River,
at Athol. The accident last referred to occurred on the 16th of
June, 1870, but, though forcible enough as a reminder, it was tame
indeed in comparison with the Des Jardines Canal disaster, which
is still remembered though it happened so long ago as the 17th of
March, 1857. The Great Western railroad of Canada crossed the canal by a bridge
at an elevation of about sixty feet. At the time of the accident
there were some eighteen feet of water in the canal, though, as
is usual in Canada at that season, it was covered by ice some two
feet in thickness. On the afternoon of the 17th of March as the
local accommodation train from Hamilton was nearing the bridge,
its locomotive, though it was then moving at a very slow rate of
speed, was in some way thrown from the track and onto the timbers
of the bridge. These it cut through, and then falling heavily on
the string-pieces it parted them, and instantly pitched headlong
down upon the frozen surface of the canal below, dragging after it
the tender, baggage car and two passenger cars, which composed the
whole train. There was nothing whatever to break the fall of sixty
feet; and even then two feet of ice only intervened between the
ruins of the train and the bottom of the canal eighteen feet below. Two feet of solid ice will afford no contemptible resistance to a
falling body; the locomotive and tender crushed heavily through
it and instantly sank out of sight. In falling the baggage car
struck a corner of the tender and was thus thrown some ten yards
to one side, and was followed by the first passenger car, which,
turning a somersault as it went, fell on its roof and was crushed to
fragments, but only partially broke through the ice, upon which the
next car fell endwise, and rested in that position. That every human
being in the first car was either crushed or drowned seems most
natural; the only cause for astonishment is found in the fact that
any one should have survived such a catastrophe,--a tumble of sixty
feet on ice as solid as a rock! Yet of four persons in the baggage
car three went down with it, and not one of them was more than
slightly injured. The engineer and fireman, and the occupants of the
second passenger car, were less fortunate. The former were found
crushed under the locomotive at the bottom of the canal; while of
the latter ten were killed, and not one escaped severe injury. Very
rarely indeed in the history of railroad accidents have so large a
portion of those on the train lost their lives as in this case, for
out of ninety persons sixty perished, and in the number was included
every woman and child among the passengers, with a single exception. There were two circumstances about this disaster worthy of especial
notice. In the first place, as well as can now be ascertained in
the absence of any trustworthy record of an investigation into
causes, the accident was easily preventable. It appears to have
been immediately caused by the derailment of a locomotive, however
occasioned, just as it was entering on a swing draw-bridge. Thrown
from the tracks, there was nothing in the flooring to prevent the
derailed locomotive from deflecting from its course until it toppled
over the ends of the ties, nor were the ties and the flooring
apparently sufficiently strong to sustain it even while it held to
its course. Under such circumstances the derailment of a locomotive
upon any bridge can mean only destruction; it meant it then,
it means it now; and yet our country is to-day full of bridges
constructed in an exactly similar way. To make accidents from this
cause, if not impossible at least highly improbable, it is only
necessary to make the ties and flooring of all bridges between the
tracks and for three feet on either side of them sufficiently strong
to sustain the whole weight of a train off the track and in motion,
while a third rail, or strong truss of wood, securely fastened,
should be laid down midway between the rails throughout the entire
length of the bridge and its approaches. With this arrangement, as
the flanges of the wheels are on the inside, it must follow that in
case of derailment and a divergence to one side or the other of the
bridge, the inner side of the flange will come against the central
rail or truss just so soon as the divergence amounts to half the
space between the rails, which in the ordinary gauge is two feet and
four inches. The wheels must then glide along this guard, holding
the train from any further divergence from its course, until it
can be checked. Meanwhile, as the ties and flooring extend for the
space of three feet outside of the track, a sufficient support is
furnished by them for the other wheels. A legislative enactment
compelling the construction of all bridges in this way, coupled with
additional provisions for interlocking of draws with their signals
in cases of bridges across navigable waters, would be open to
objection that laws against dangers of accident by rail have almost
invariably proved ineffective when they were not absurd, but in
itself, if enforced, it might not improbably render disasters like
those at Norwalk and Des Jardines terrors of the past. CAR-COUPLINGS IN DERAILMENTS. Wholly apart from the derailment, which was the real occasion of
the Des Jardines disaster, there was one other cause which largely
contributed to its fatality, if indeed that fatality was not in
greatest part immediately due to it. The question as to what is the best method of coupling together
the several individual vehicles which make up every railroad
train has always been much discussed among railroad mechanics. The decided weight of opinion has been in favor of the strongest
and closest couplings, so that under no circumstances should the
train separate into parts. Taking all forms of railroad accident
together, this conclusion is probably sound. It is, however, at
best only a balancing of disadvantages,--a mere question as to
which practice involves the least amount of danger. Yet a very
terrible demonstration that there are two sides to this as to most
other questions was furnished at Des Jardines. It was the custom
on the Great Western road not only to couple the cars together in
the method then in general use, but also, as is often done now, to
connect them by heavy chains on each side of the centre coupling. Accordingly when the locomotive broke through the Des Jardines
bridge, it dragged the rest of the train hopelessly after it. This
certainly would not have happened had the modern self-coupler been
in use, and probably would not have happened had the cars been
connected only by the ordinary link and pins; for the train was
going very slowly, and the signal for brakes was given in ample time
to apply them vigorously before the last cars came to the opening,
into which they were finally dragged by the dead weight before them
and not hurried by their own momentum. On the other hand, we have not far to go in search of scarcely less
fatal disasters illustrating with equal force the other side of the
proposition, in the terrible consequences which have ensued from the
separation of cars in cases of derailment. Take, for instance, the
memorable accident of June 17, 1858, near Port Jervis, on the Erie
railway. As the express train from New York was running at a speed of about
thirty miles an hour over a perfectly straight piece of track
between Otisville and Port Jervis, shortly after dark on the evening
of that day, it encountered a broken rail. The train was made up
of a locomotive, two baggage cars and five passenger cars, all of
which except the last passed safely over the fractured rail. The
last car was apparently derailed, and drew the car before it off the
track. These two cars were then dragged along, swaying fearfully
from side to side, for a distance of some four hundred feet, when
the couplings at last snapped and they went over the embankment,
which was there some thirty feet in height. As they rushed down the
<DW72> the last car turned fairly over, resting finally on its roof,
while one of its heavy iron trucks broke through and fell upon the
passengers beneath, killing and maiming them. The other car, more
fortunate, rested at last upon its side on a pile of stones at the
foot of the embankment. Six persons were killed and fifty severely
injured; all of the former in the last car. In this case, had the couplings held, the derailed cars would
not have gone over the embankment and but slight injuries would
have been sustained. Modern improvements have, however, created
safeguards sufficient to prevent the recurrence of other accidents
under the same conditions as that at Port Jervis. The difficulty lay
in the inability to stop a train, though moving at only moderate
speed, within a reasonable time. The wretched inefficiency of the
old hand-brake in a sudden emergency received one more illustration. The train seems to have run nearly half a mile after the accident
took place before it could be stopped, although the engineer had
instant notice of it and reversed his locomotive. The couplings did
not snap until a distance had been traversed in which the modern
train-brake would have reduced the speed to a point at which they
would have been subjected to no dangerous strain. The accident ten years later at Carr's Rock, sixteen miles west of
Port Jervis, on the same road, was again very similar to the one
just described: and yet in this case the parting of the couplings
alone prevented the rear of the train from dragging its head to
destruction. Both disasters were occasioned by broken rails; but,
while the first occurred on a tangent, the last was at a point where
the road skirted the hills, by a sharp curve, upon the outer side of
which was a steep declivity of some eighty feet, jagged with rock
and bowlders. It befell the night express on the 14th of April,
1876. The train was a long one, consisting of the locomotive, three
baggage and express, and seven passenger cars, and it encountered
the broken rail while rounding the curve at a high rate of speed. Again all except the last car, passed over the fracture in safety;
this was snapped, as it were, off the track and over the embankment. At first it was dragged along, but only for a short distance; the
intense strain then broke the coupling between the four rear cars
and the head of the train, and, the last of the four being already
over the embankment, the others almost instantly toppled over after
it and rolled down the ravine. A passenger on this portion of the
train, described the car he was in "as going over and over, until
the outer roof was torn off, the sides fell out, and the inner roof
was crushed in." Twenty-four persons were killed and eighty injured;
but in this instance, as in that at Des Jardines, the only occasion
for surprise was that there were any survivors. Accidents arising from the parting of defective couplings have of
course not been uncommon, and they constitute one of the greatest
dangers incident to heavy gradients; in surmounting inclines freight
trains will, it is found, break in two, and their hinder parts come
thundering down the grade, as was seen at Abergele. The American
passenger trains, in which each car is provided with brakes, are
much less liable than the English, the speed of which is regulated
by brake-vans, to accidents of this description. Indeed, it may be
questioned whether in America any serious disaster has occurred from
the fact that a portion of a passenger train on a road operated by
steam got beyond control in descending an incline. There have been,
however, terrible catastrophes from this cause in England, and that
on the Lancashire & Yorkshire road near Helmshere, a station some
fourteen miles north of Manchester, deserves a prominent place in
the record of railroad accidents. It occurred in the early hours of the morning of the 4th of
September, 1860. There had been a great _fte_ at the Bellevue
Gardens in Manchester on the 3d, upon the conclusion of which some
twenty-five hundred persons crowded at once upon the return trains. Of these there were, on the Lancashire & Yorkshire road, three; the
first consisting of fourteen, the second of thirty-one, and the last
of twenty-four carriages: and they were started, with intervals of
ten minutes between them, at about eleven o'clock at night. The
first train finished its journey in safety. The Helmshere station is at the top of a steep incline. This the second train, drawn by two locomotives, surmounted, and
then stopped for the delivery of passengers. While these were
leaving the carriages, a snap as of fractured iron was heard, and
the guards, looking back, saw the whole rear portion of the train,
consisting of seventeen carriages and a brake-van, detached from
the rest of it and quietly slipping down the incline. The detached
portion was moving so slowly that one of the guards succeeded in
catching the van and applying the brakes; it was, however, already
too late. The velocity was greater than the brake-power could
overcome, and the seventeen carriages kept descending more and
more rapidly. Meanwhile the third train had reached the foot of
the incline and begun to ascend it, when its engineer, on rounding
a curve, caught sight of the descending carriages. He immediately
reversed his engine, but before he could bring his train to a stand
they were upon him. Fortunately the van-brakes of the detached
carriages, though insufficient to stop them, yet did reduce their
speed; the collision nevertheless was terrific. The force of the
blow, so far as the advancing train was concerned, expended itself
on the locomotive, which was demolished, while the passengers
escaped with a fright. With them there was nothing to break the blow, and the two hindmost
carriages were crushed to fragments and their passengers scattered
over the line. It was shortly after midnight, and the excursionists
clambered out of the trains and rushed frantically about, impeding
every effort to clear away the _dbris_ and rescue the injured,
whose shrieks and cries were incessant. The bodies of ten persons,
one of whom had died of suffocation, were ultimately taken out from
the wreck, and twenty-two others sustained fractures of limbs. At Des Jardines the couplings were too strong; at Port Jervis and
at Helmshere they were not strong enough; at Carr's Rock they gave
way not a moment too soon. "There are objections to a plenum and
there are objections to a vacuum," as Dr. Johnson remarked, "but a
plenum or a vacuum it must be." There are no arguments, however,
in favor of putting railroad stations or sidings upon an inclined
plane, and then not providing what the English call "catch-points"
or "scotches" to prevent such disasters as those at Abergele or
Helmshere. In these two instances alone the want of them cost
over fifty lives. In railroad mechanics there are after all some
principles susceptible of demonstration. That vehicles, as well as
water, will run down hill may be classed among them. That these
principles should still be ignored is hardly less singular than it
is surprising. THE REVERE CATASTROPHE. The terrible disaster which occurred in front of the little
station-building at Revere, six miles from Boston on the Eastern
railroad of Massachusetts, in August 1871, was, properly speaking,
not an accident at all; it was essentially a catastrophe--the
legitimate and almost inevitable final outcome of an antiquated and
insufficient system. As such it should long remain a subject for
prayerful meditation to all those who may at any time be entrusted
with the immediate operating of railroads. It was terribly dramatic,
but it was also frightfully instructive; and while the lesson was by
no means lost, it yet admits of further and advantageous study. For,
like most other men whose lives are devoted to a special calling,
the managers of railroads are apt to be very much wedded to their
own methods, and attention has already more than once been called to
the fact that, when any new emergency necessitates a new appliance,
they not infrequently, as Captain Tyler well put it in his report
to the Board of Trade for the year 1870, "display more ingenuity in
finding objections than in overcoming them." [Illustration: map]

The Eastern railroad of Massachusetts connects Boston with Portland,
in the state of Maine, by a line which is located close along the
sea-shore. Between Boston and Lynn, a distance of eleven miles, the
main road is in large part built across the salt marshes, but there
is a branch which leaves it at Everett, a small station some miles
out of Boston, and thence, running deviously through a succession
of towns on the higher ground, connects with the main track again
at Lynn; thus making what is known in England as a loop-road. At
the time of the Revere accident this branch was equipped with
but a single track, and was operated wholly by schedule without
any reliance on the telegraph; and, indeed, there were not even
telegraphic offices at a number of the stations upon it. Revere,
the name of the station where the accident took place, was on the
main line about five miles from Boston and two miles from Everett,
where the Saugus branch, as the loop-road was called, began. The
accompanying diagram shows the relative position of the several
points and of the main and branch lines, a thorough appreciation of
which is essential to a correct understanding of the disaster. The travel over the Eastern railroad is of a somewhat exceptional
nature, varying in a more than ordinary degree with the different
seasons of the year. During the winter months the corporation had,
in 1871, to provide for a regular passenger movement of about
seventy-five thousand a week, but in the summer what is known
as the excursion and pleasure travel not infrequently increased
the number to one hundred and ten thousand, and even more. As a
natural consequence, during certain weeks of each summer, and more
especially towards the close of August, it was no unusual thing for
the corporation to find itself taxed beyond its utmost resources. It
is emergencies of this description, periodically occurring on every
railroad, which always subject to the final test the organization
and discipline of companies and the capacity of superintendents. A
railroad in quiet times is like a ship in steady weather; almost
anybody can manage the one or sail the other. It is the sudden
stress which reveals the undeveloped strength or the hidden
weakness; and the truly instructive feature in the Revere accident
lay in the amount of hidden weakness everywhere which was brought to
light under that sudden stress. During the week ending with that
Saturday evening upon which the disaster occurred the rolling stock
of the road had been heavily taxed, not only to accommodate the
usual tide of summer travel, then at its full flood, but also those
attending a military muster and two large camp-meetings upon its
line. The number of passengers going over it had accordingly risen
from about one hundred and ten thousand, the full summer average,
to over one hundred and forty thousand; while instead of the one
hundred and fifty-two trains a day provided for in the running
schedule, there were no less than one hundred and ninety-two. It
had never been the custom with those managing the road to place any
reliance upon the telegraph in directing the train movement, and no
use whatever appears to have been made of it towards straightening
out the numerous hitches inevitable from so sudden an increase in
that movement. If an engine broke down, or a train got off the
track, there had accordingly throughout that week been nothing
done, except patient and general waiting, until things got in
motion again; each conductor or station-master had to look out for
himself, under the running regulations of the road, and need expect
no assistance from headquarters. This, too, in spite of the fact
that, including the Saugus branch, no less than ninety-three of the
entire one hundred and fifteen miles of road operated by the company
were supplied only with a single track. The whole train movement,
both of the main line and of the branches, intricate in the extreme
as it was, thus depended solely on a schedule arrangement and the
watchful intelligence of individual employs. Not unnaturally,
therefore, as the week drew to a close the confusion became so
great that the trains reached and left the Boston station with an
almost total disregard of the schedule; while towards the evening
of Saturday the employs of the road at that station directed their
efforts almost exclusively to dispatching trains as fast as cars
could be procured, thus trying to keep it as clear as possible of
the throng of impatient travellers which continually blocked it up. Taken altogether the situation illustrated in a very striking manner
that singular reliance of the corporation on the individuality
and intelligence of its employs, which in another connection is
referred to as one of the most striking characteristics of American
railroad management, without a full appreciation of which it is
impossible to understand its using or failing to use certain
appliances. According to the regular schedule four trains should have left the
Boston station in succession during the hour and a half between 6.30
and eight o'clock P.M. : a Saugus branch train for Lynn at 6.30; a
second Saugus branch train at seven; an accommodation train, which
ran eighteen miles over the main line, at 7.15; and finally the
express train through to Portland, also over the main line, at
eight o'clock. The collision at Revere was between these last two
trains, the express overtaking and running into the rear of the
accommodation train; but it was indirectly caused by the delays
and irregularity in movement of the two branch trains. It will be
noticed that, according to the schedule, both of the branch trains
should have preceded the accommodation train; in the prevailing
confusion, however, the first of the two branch trains did not leave
the station until about seven o'clock, thirty minutes behind its
time, and it was followed forty minutes later, not by the second
branch train, but by the accommodation train, which in its turn was
twenty-five minutes late. Thirteen minutes afterwards the second
Saugus branch train, which should have preceded, followed it, being
nearly an hour out of time. Then at last came the Portland express,
which got away practically on time, at a few minutes after eight
o'clock. All of these four trains went out over the same track as
far as the junction at Everett, but at that point the first and
third of the four were to go off on the branch, while the second and
fourth kept on over the main line. Between these last two trains
the running schedule of the road allowed an ample time-interval of
forty-five minutes, which, however, on this occasion was reduced,
through the delay in starting, to some fifteen or twenty minutes. No causes of further delay, therefore, arising, the simple case
was presented of a slow accommodation train being sent out to run
eighteen miles in advance of a fast express train, with an interval
of twenty minutes between them. Unfortunately, however, the accommodation train was speedily
subjected to another and very serious delay. It has been mentioned
that the Saugus branch was a single track road, and the rules of
the company were explicit that no outward train was to pass onto
the branch at Everett until any inward train then due there should
have arrived and passed off it. There was no siding at the junction,
upon which an outward branch train could be temporarily placed to
wait for the inward train, thus leaving the main track clear; and
accordingly, under a strict construction of the rules, any outward
branch train while awaiting the arrival at Everett of an inward
branch train was to be kept standing on the main track, completely
blocking it. The outward branch trains, it subsequently appeared,
were often delayed at the junction, but no practical difficulty had
arisen from this cause, as the employ in charge of the signals
and switches there, exercising his common sense, had been in the
custom of moving any delayed train temporarily out of the way onto
the branch or the other main track, under protection of a flag,
and thus relieving the block. The need of a siding to permit the
passage of trains at this point had not been felt, simply because
the employ in charge there had used the branch or other main track
as a siding. On the day of the accident this employ happened to be
sick, and absent from his post. His substitute either had no common
sense or did not feel called upon to use it, if its use involved
any increase of responsibility. Accordingly, when a block took
place, the simple letter of the rule was followed;--and it is almost
needless to add that a block did take place on the afternoon of
August 26th. The first of the branch trains, it will be remembered, had left
Boston at about seven o'clock, instead of at 6.30, its schedule
time. On arriving at Everett this train should have met and passed
an inward branch train, which was timed to leave Lynn at six
o'clock, but which, owing to some accident to its locomotive, and
partaking of the general confusion of the day, on this particular
afternoon did not leave the Lynn station until 7.30 o'clock, or one
hour and a half after its schedule time, and one half-hour after
the other train had left Boston. Accordingly, when the Boston train
reached the junction its conductor found himself confronted by the
rule forbidding him to enter upon the branch until the Lynn train
then due should have passed off it, and so he quietly waited on the
outward track of the main line, blocking it completely to traffic. He had not waited long before a special locomotive, on its way from
Boston to Salem, came up and stopped behind him. This was presently
followed by the accommodation train. Then the next branch train came
along, and finally the Portland express. At such a time, and at that
period of railroad development, there was something ludicrous about
the spectacle. Here was a road utterly unable to accommodate its
passengers with cars, while a succession of trains were standing
idle for hours, because a locomotive had broken down ten miles off. The telegraph was there, but the company was not in the custom of
putting any reliance upon it. A simple message to the branch trains
to meet and pass at any point other than that fixed in the schedule
would have solved the whole difficulty; but, no!--there were the
rules, and all the rolling stock of the road might gather at Everett
in solemn procession, but, until the locomotive at Lynn could be
repaired, the law of the Medes and Persians was plain; and in this
case it read that the telegraph was a new-fangled and unreliable
auxiliary. And so the lengthening procession stood there long enough
for the train which caused it to have gone to its destination and
come back dragging the disabled locomotive from Lynn behind it to
again take its place in the block. At last, at about ten minutes after eight o'clock, the long-expected
Lynn train made its appearance, and the first of the branch trains
from Boston immediately went off the main line. The road was now
clear for the accommodation train, which had been standing some
twelve or fifteen minutes in the block, but which from the moment
of again starting was running on the schedule time of the Portland
express. Every minute was vital,
and yet he never thought to look at his watch. He had a vague
impression that he had been delayed some six or eight minutes, when
in reality he had been delayed fifteen; and, though he was running
wholly out of his schedule time, he took not a single precaution, so
persuaded was he that every one knew where he was. The confusion among those in charge of the various engines and
trains was, indeed, general and complete. As the Portland express
was about to leave the Boston station, the superintendent of the
road, knowing by the non-arrival of the branch train from Lynn that
there must be a block at the Everett junction, had directed the
depot-master to caution the engineer to look out for the trains
ahead of him. The order, a merely verbal one, was delivered after
the train had started, the depot-master walking along by the side of
the slowly-moving locomotive, and was either incorrectly transmitted
or not fully understood; the engine-driver supposed it to apply to
the branch train which had started just before him, out of both its
schedule time and schedule place. Presently, at the junction, he was
stopped by the signal man of this train. The course of reasoning he
would then have had to pass through to divine the true situation
of affairs and to guide himself safely under the schedule in the
light of the running rules was complicated indeed, and somewhat as
follows: "The branch train," he should have argued to himself, "is
stopped, and it is stopped because the train which should have left
Lynn at six o'clock has not yet arrived; but, under the rules, that
train should pass off the branch before the 6.30 train could pass
onto it; if, therefore, the 'wild' train before me is delayed not
only the 6.30 but all intermediate trains must likewise be delayed,
and the accommodation train went out this afternoon after the 6.30
train, so it, too, must be in the block ahead of me; unless, indeed,
as is usually the case, the signal-master has got it out of the
block under the protection of a flag." This line of reasoning was,
perhaps, too intricate; at any rate, the engine-driver did not
follow it out, but, when he saw the tail-lights immediately before
him disappear on the branch, he concluded that the main line was
now clear, and dismissed the depot-master's caution from his mind. Meanwhile, as the engine-driver of this train was fully persuaded
that the only other train in his front had gone off on the branch,
the conductor of the accommodation train was equally persuaded that
the head-light immediately behind him in the block at the junction
had been that of the Portland express which consequently should be
aware of his position. Thus when they left Everett the express was fairly chasing the
accommodation train, and overtaking it with terrible rapidity. Even then no collision ought to have been possible. Unfortunately,
however, the road had no system, even the crudest, of interval
signals; and the utter irregularity prevailing in the train
movement seemed to have demoralized the employs along the line,
who, though they noticed the extreme proximity of the two trains
to each other as they passed various points, all sluggishly took
it for granted that those in charge of them were fully aware of
their relative positions and knew what they were about. Thus, as
the two trains approached the Revere station, they were so close
together as to be on the same piece of straight track at the same
time, and a passenger standing at the rear end of the accommodation
train distinctly saw the head-light of the express locomotive. The
night, however, was not a clear one, for an east wind had prevailed
all day, driving a mist in from the sea which lay in banks over
the marshes, lifting at times so that distant objects were quite
visible, and then obscuring them in its heavy folds. Consequently it
did not at all follow, because the powerful reflecting head-light
of the locomotive was visible from the accommodation train, that
the dim tail-lights of the latter were also visible to those on the
locomotive. The tail-lights in use by
the company were ordinary red lanterns without reflecting power. The station house at Revere stood at the end of a tangent, the
track curving directly before it. In any ordinary weather the
tail-lights of a train standing at this station would have been
visible for a very considerable distance down the track in the
direction of Boston, and even on the night of the accident they
were probably visible for a sufficient distance in which to stop
any train approaching at a reasonable rate of speed. Unfortunately
the engineer of the Portland express did not at once see them,
his attention being wholly absorbed in looking for other signals. Certain freight train tracks to points on the shore diverged from
the main line at Revere, and the engine-drivers of all trains
approaching that place were notified by signals at a masthead close
to the station whether the switches were set for the main line or
for these freight tracks. A red lantern at the masthead indicated
that the main line was closed; in the absence of any signal it
was open. In looking for this signal as he approached Revere the
engine-driver of the Portland express was simply attending closely
to his business, for, had the red light been at the masthead, his
train must at once have been stopped. Unfortunately, however, while
peering through the mist at the masthead he overlooked what was
directly before him, until, when at last he brought his eyes down to
the level, to use his own words at the subsequent inquest, "the tail
lights of the accommodation train seemed to spring right up in his
face." When those in charge of the two trains at almost the same moment
became aware of the danger, there was yet an interval of some eight
hundred feet between them. The express train was, however, moving
at a speed of some twenty-five or thirty miles an hour, and was
equipped only with the old-fashioned hand-brake. In response to the
sharply given signal from the whistle these were rapidly set, but
the rails were damp and slippery, so that the wheels failed to catch
upon them, and, when everything was done which could be done, the
eight hundred feet of interval sufficed only to reduce the speed of
the colliding locomotive to about ten miles an hour. In the rear car of the accommodation train there were at the moment
of the accident some sixty-five or seventy human beings, seated
and standing. They were of both sexes and of all ages; for it was
a Saturday evening in August, and many persons had, through the
confusion of the trains, been long delayed in their return from
the city to their homes at the sea-side. The first intimation the
passengers had of the danger impending over them was from the
sudden and lurid illumination of the car by the glare from the
head-light of the approaching locomotive. One of them who survived
the disaster, though grievously injured, described how he was
carelessly watching a young man standing in the aisle, laughing
and gayly chatting with four young girls, who were seated, when he
saw him turn and instantly his face, in the sudden blaze of the
head-light, assumed a look of frozen horror which was the single
thing in the accident indelibly impressed on the survivor's memory;
that look haunted him. The car was crowded to its full capacity, and
the colliding locomotive struck it with such force as to bury itself
two-thirds of its length in it. At the instant of the crash a panic
had seized upon the passengers, and a sort of rush had taken place
to the forward end of the car, into which furniture, fixtures and
human beings were crushed in a shapeless, indistinguishable mass. Meanwhile the blow had swept away the smoke-stack of the locomotive,
and its forward truck had been forced back in some unaccountable way
until it rested between its driving wheels and the tender, leaving
the entire boiler inside of the passenger car and supported on its
rear truck. The valves had been so broken as to admit of the free
escape of the scalding steam, while the coals from the fire-box
were scattered among the _dbris_, and coming in contact with the
fluid from the broken car lamps kindled the whole into a rapid
blaze. Neither was the fire confined to the last car of the train. It has been mentioned that in the block at Everett a locomotive
returning to Salem had found itself stopped just in advance of the
accommodation train. At the suggestion of the engine-driver of that
train this locomotive had there coupled on to it, and consequently
made a part of it at Revere. When the collision took place,
therefore, the four cars of which the accommodation train was made
up were crushed between the weight of the entire colliding train on
one side and that of two locomotives on the other. That they were
not wholly demolished was due simply to the fact that the last car
yielded to the blow, and permitted the locomotive of the express
train fairly to imbed itself in it. As it was, the remaining cars
were jammed and shattered, and, though the passengers in them
escaped, the oil from the broken lamps ignited, and before the
flames could be extinguished the cars were entirely destroyed. This accident resulted in the death of twenty-nine persons, and
in more or less severe injuries to fifty-seven others. No person,
not in the last car of the accommodation train was killed, and
one only was seriously injured. Of those in the last car more
than half lost their lives; many instantly by crushing, others by
inhaling the scalding steam which poured forth from the locomotive
boiler into the wreck, and which, where it did not kill, inflicted
frightful injuries. Indeed, for the severity of injuries and for the
protractedness of agony involved in it, this accident has rarely, if
ever, been exceeded. Crushing, scalding and burning did their work
together. It may with perfect truth be said that the disaster at Revere marked
an epoch in the history of railroad development in New England. At
the moment it called forth the deepest expression of horror and
indignation, which, as usual in such cases, was more noticeable for
its force than for its wisdom. An utter absence of all spirit of
justice is, indeed, a usual characteristic of the more immediate
utterances, both from the press and on the platform, upon occasions
of this character. Writers and orators seem always to forget that,
next to the immediate sufferers and their families, the unfortunate
officials concerned are the greatest losers by railroad accidents. For them, not only reputation but bread is involved. A railroad
employ implicated in the occurrence of an accident lives under a
stigma. And yet, from the tenor of public comment it might fairly be
supposed that these officials are in the custom of plotting to bring
disasters about, and take a fiendish delight in them. Nowhere was
this ever illustrated more perfectly than in Massachusetts during
the last days of August and the early days of September, 1871. Grave
men--men who ought to have known better--indulged in language which
would have been simply ludicrous save for the horror of the event
which occasioned but could not justify it. A public meeting, for
instance, was held at the town of Swampscott on the evening of the
Monday succeeding the catastrophe. The gentleman who presided over
it very discreetly, in his preliminary remarks, urged those who
proposed to join in the discussion to control their feelings. Hardly
had he ceased speaking, however, when Mr. Wendell Phillips was
noticed among the audience, and immediately called to the platform. His remarks were a most singular commentary on the chairman's
injunction to calmness. He began by announcing that the first
requisite to the formation of a healthy public opinion in regard
to railroad accidents, as other things, was absolute frankness of
speech, and he then proceeded as follows:--"So I begin by saying
that to my mind this terrible disaster, which has made the last
thirty-six hours so sad to us all, is a deliberate murder. I think
we should try to get rid in the public mind of any real distinction
between the individual who, in a moment of passion or in a moment of
heedlessness, takes the life of one fellow-man, and the corporation
that in a moment of greed, of little trouble, of little expense, of
little care, of little diligence, takes lives by wholesale. I think
the first requisite of the public mind is to say that there is no
accident in the case, properly speaking. It is a murder; the guilt
of murder rests somewhere." Phillip's definition of the crime of "deliberate murder"
would apparently somewhat unsettle the criminal law as at present
understood, but he was not at all alone in this bathos of
extravagance. Prominent gentlemen seemed to vie with each other
in their display of ignorance. B. F. Butler, for instance,
suggested his view of the disaster and the measure best calculated
to prevent a repetition of it; which last was certainly original,
inasmuch as he urged the immediate raising of the pay of all
engine-men until a sufficiently high order of ability and education
should be brought into the occupation to render impossible the
recurrence of an accident which was primarily caused by the
negligence, not of an engineer, but of a conductor. Another
gentleman described with much feeling his observations during a
recent tour in Europe, and declared that such a catastrophe as that
at Revere would have been impossible there. As a matter of fact
the official reports not only showed that the accident was one of
a class of most frequent occurrence, but also that sixty-one cases
of it had occurred in Great Britain alone during the very year the
gentleman in question was journeying in Europe, and had occasioned
over six hundred cases of death or personal injury. Perhaps, in
order to illustrate how very reckless in statement a responsible
gentleman talking under excitement may become, it is worth while to
quote in his own language Captain Tyler's brief description of one
of those sixty-one accidents which "could not possibly," but yet
did, occur. "As four London & North-Western excursion trains on September
     2, 1870, were returning from a volunteer review at Penrith,
     the fourth came into collision at Penruddock with the third of
     those trains. An hundred and ten passengers and three servants
     of the company were injured. These trains were partly in charge
     of acting guards, some of whom were entirely inexperienced, as
     well in the line as in their duties; and of engine-drivers and
     firemen, of whom one, at all events, was very much the worse for
     liquor. The side-lamps on the hind van of the third train were
     obscured by a horse-box, which was wider than the van. There
     were no special means of protection to meet the exceptional
     contingency of three such trains all stopping on their way from
     the eastward, to cross two others from the westward, at this
     station. And the regulations for telegraphing the trains were
     altogether neglected." The annals of railroad accidents are full of cases of "rear-end
collision," as it is termed. [11] Their frequency may almost be
accepted as a very accurate gauge of the pressure of traffic on
any given system of lines, and because of them the companies are
continually compelled to adopt new and more intricate systems of
operation. At first, on almost all roads, trains follow each other
at such great intervals that no precaution at all, other than flags
and lanterns, are found necessary. Then comes a succeeding period
when an interval of time between following trains is provided for,
through a system of signals which at given points indicate danger
during a certain number of minutes after the passage of every
train. Then, presently, the alarming frequency of rear collisions
demonstrates the inadequacy of this system, and a new one has to be
devised, which, through the aid of electricity, secures between the
trains an interval of space as well as of time. This last is known
as the "block-system," of which so much has of late years been heard. [11] In the nine years 1870-8, besides those which occurred and
  were not deemed of sufficient importance to demand special inquiry,
  86 cases of accidents of this description were investigated by the
  inspecting officers of the English Board of Trade and reported upon
  in detail. In America, 732 cases were reported as occurring during
  the six years 1874-8, and 138 cases in 1878 alone. The block-system is so important a feature in the modern operation
of railroads, and in its present stage of development it illustrates
so strikingly the difference between the European and the American
methods, that more particular reference will have presently to be
made to it. [12] For the present it is enough to say that rear-end
collisions occur notwithstanding all the precautions implied in a
thoroughly perfected "block-system." There was such a case on the
Metropolitan road, in the very heart of London, on the 29th of
August, 1873. A train was stalled there,
and an unfortunate signal officer in a moment of flurry gave "line
clear" and sent another train directly into it. A much more impressive disaster, both in its dramatic features
and as illustrating the inadequacy of every precaution depending
on human agency to avert accident under certain conditions, was
afforded in the case of a collision which occurred on the London
& Brighton Railway on August 25, 1861; ten years almost to a day
before that at Revere. Like the Eastern railroad, the London
& Brighton enjoyed an enormous passenger traffic, which became
peculiarly heavy during the vacation season towards the close of
August; and it was to the presence of the excursion trains made
necessary to accomodate this traffic that the catastrophes were
in both cases due. In the case of the London & Brighton road it
occurred on a Sunday. An excursion train from Portsmouth on that
day was to leave Brighton at five minutes after eight A. M., and
was to be followed by a regular Sunday excursion train at 8.15 or
ten minutes later, and that again, after the lapse of a quarter of
an hour, by a regular parliamentary train at 8.30. These trains
were certainly timed to run sufficiently near to each other; but,
owing to existing pressure of traffic on the line, they started
almost simultaneously. The Portsmouth excursion, which consisted of
sixteen carriages, was much behind its time, and did not leave the
Brighton station until 8.28; when, after a lapse of three minutes,
it was followed by the regular excursion train at 8.31, and that
again by the parliamentary train at 8.35. Three passenger trains had
thus left the station on one track in seven minutes! The London and
Brighton Railway traverses the chalky downs, for which that portion
of England is noted, through numerous tunnels, the first of which
after leaving Brighton is known as the Patcham Tunnel, about five
hundred yards in length, while two and a half miles farther on is
the Croydon Tunnel, rather more than a mile and a quarter in length. The line between these tunnels was so crooked and obscured that the
managers had adopted extraordinary precautions against accident. At
each end of the Croydon Tunnel a signal-man was stationed, with a
telegraphic apparatus, a clock and a telegraph bell in his station. The rule was absolute that when any train entered the tunnel the
signal-man at the point of entry was to telegraph "train in," and
no other train could follow until the return signal of "train out"
came from the other side. In face of such a regulation it was
difficult to see how any collision in the tunnel was possible. When
the Portsmouth excursion train arrived, it at once entered the
tunnel and the fact was properly signaled to the opposite outlet. Before the return signal that this train was out was received, the
regular excursion train came in sight. It should have been stopped
by a self-acting signal which was placed about a quarter of a mile
from the mouth of the tunnel, and which each passing locomotive set
at "danger," where it remained until shifted to "safety," by the
signal-man, on receipt of the message, "train out." Through some
unexplained cause, the Portsmouth excursion train had failed to act
on this signal, which consequently still indicated safety when the
Brighton excursion train came up. Accordingly the engine-driver
at once passed it, and went on to the tunnel. As he did so, the
signal-man, perceiving some mistake and knowing that he had not yet
got his return signal that the preceding train was out, tried to
stop him by waving his red flag. It was too late, however, and the
train passed in. A moment later the parliamentary train also came
in sight, and stopped at the signal of danger. Now ensued a most
singular misapprehension between the signal-men, resulting in a
terrible disaster. The second train had run into the tunnel and was
supposed by the signal-man to be on its way to the other end of it,
when he received the return message that the first train was out. To this he instantly responded by again telegraphing "train in,"
referring now to the second train. This dispatch the signal-man
at the opposite end conceived to be a repetition of the message
referring to the first train, and he accordingly again replied that
the train was out. This reply, however, the other operator mistook
as referring to the second train, and accordingly he signaled
"safety," and the third train at once got under way and passed into
the tunnel. Unfortunately the engineer of the second train had
seen the red flag waved by the signal-man, and, in obedience to
it, stopped his locomotive as soon as possible in the tunnel and
began to back out of it. In doing so, he drove his train into the
locomotive of the third train advancing into it. The tunnel was
twenty-four feet in height. The engine of the parliamentary train
struck the rear carriage of the excursion train and mounted upon
its fragments, and then on those of the carriage in front of it,
until its smoke-stack came in contact with the roof of the tunnel. The collision had
taken place so far within the tunnel as to be beyond the reach of
daylight, and the wreck of the trains had quite blocked up the arch,
while the steam and smoke from the engines poured forth with loud
sound and in heavy volumes, filling the empty space with stifling
and scalding vapors. When at last assistance came and the trains
could be separated, twenty-three corpses were taken from the ruins,
while one hundred and seventy-six other persons had sustained more
or less severe injuries. A not less extraordinary accident of the same description,
unaccompanied, however, by an equal loss of life, occured on the
Great Northern Railway upon the 10th of June, 1866. In this case
the tube of a locomotive of a freight train burst at about the
centre of the Welwyn Tunnel, some five miles north of Hatfield,
bringing the train to a stand-still. The guard in charge of the
rear of the train failed from some cause to go back and give the
signal for an obstruction, and speedily another freight train from
the Midland road entered and dashed into the rear of the train
already there. Apparently those in charge of these two trains were
in such consternation that they did not think to provide against a
further disaster; at any rate, before measures to that end had been
taken, an additional freight train, this time belonging to the Great
Northern road, came up and plowed into the ruins which already
blocked the tunnel. One of the trains had contained wagons laden
with casks of oil, which speedily became ignited from contact with
the coals scattered from the fire-boxes, and there then ensued one
of the most extraordinary spectacles ever witnessed on a railroad. The tunnel was filled to the summit of its arch and completely
blocked with the wrecked locomotives and wagons. These had ignited,
and the whole cavity, more than a half a mile in length, was
converted into one huge furnace, belching forth smoke and flame with
a loud roaring sound through its several air shafts. So fierce was
the fire that no attempt was made to subdue it, and eighteen hours
elapsed before any steps could be taken towards clearing the track. Strange to say, in this disaster the lives of but two persons were
lost. Rear-end collisions have been less frequent in this country than
in England, for the simple reason that the volume of traffic has
pressed less heavily on the capacity of the lines. Yet here, also,
they have been by no means unknown. In 1865 two occurred, both of
which were accompanied with a considerable loss of life; though,
coming as they did during the exciting scenes which marked the
close of the war of the Rebellion, they attracted much less public
notice than they otherwise would. The first of these took place in
New Jersey on the 7th of March, 1865, just three days after the
second inauguration of President Lincoln. As the express train
from Washington to New York over the Camden & Amboy road was
passing through Bristol, about thirty miles from Philadelphia, at
half-past-two o'clock in the morning, it dashed into the rear of
the twelve o'clock "owl train," from Kensington to New York, which
had been delayed by meeting an oil train on the track before it. The case appears to have been one of very culpable negligence, for,
though the owl train was some two hours late, those in charge of it
seem to have been so deeply engrossed in what was going on before
them that they wholly neglected to guard their rear. The express
train accordingly, approaching around a curve, plunged at a high
rate of speed into the last car, shattering it to pieces; the engine
is even said to have passed completely through that car and to have
imbedded itself in the one before it. It so happened that most of
the sufferers by this accident, numbering about fifty, were soldiers
on their way home from the army upon furlough. The second of the two disasters referred to, occurred on the 16th of
August, 1865, upon the Housatonic road of Connecticut. A new engine
was out upon an experimental trip, and in rounding a curve it ran
into the rear of a passenger train, which, having encountered a
disabled freight train, had coupled on to it and was then backing
down with it to a siding in order to get by. In this case the
impetus was so great that the colliding locomotive utterly destroyed
the rear car of the passenger train and penetrated some distance
into the car preceding it, where its boiler burst. Fortunately
the train was by no means full of passengers; but, even as it was,
eleven persons were killed and some seventeen badly injured. The great peculiarity of the Revere accident, and that which gave
a permanent interest to it, lay in the revelation it afforded of
the degree in which a system had outgrown its appliances. The railroads of New England had
long been living on their early reputation, and now, when a sudden
test was applied, it was found that they were years behind the time. In August, 1871, the Eastern railroad was run as if it were a line
of stage-coaches in the days before the telegraph. Not in one point
alone, but in everything, it broke down under the test. The disaster
was due not to any single cause but to a combination of causes
implicating not only the machinery and appliances in use by the
company, but its discipline and efficiency from the highest official
down to the meanest subordinate. In the first place the capacity of
the road was taxed to the utmost; it was vital, almost, that every
wheel should be kept in motion. Yet, under that very exigency, the
wheels stopped almost as a matter of necessity. How could it be
otherwise?--Here was a crowded line, more than half of which was
equipped with but a single track, in operating which no reliance was
placed upon the telegraph. With trains running out of their schedule
time and out of their schedule place, engineers and conductors were
left to grope their way along as best they could in the light of
rules, the essence of which was that when in doubt they were to
stand stock still. Then, in the absence of the telegraph, a block
occurred almost at the mouth of the terminal station; and there the
trains stood for hours in stupid obedience to a stupid rule, because
the one man who, with a simple regard to the dictates of common
sense, was habitually accustomed to violate it happened to be sick. Trains commonly left a station out of time and out of place; and
the engineer of an express train was sent out to run a gauntlet the
whole length of the road with a simple verbal injunction to look
out for some one before him. Then, at last, when this express train
through all this chaos got to chasing an accommodation train, much
as a hound might course a hare, there was not a pretence of a signal
to indicate the time which had elapsed between the passage of the
two, and employs, lanterns in hand, gaped on in bewilderment at the
awful race, concluding that they could not at any rate do anything
to help matters, but on the whole they were inclined to think that
those most immediately concerned must know what they were about. Finally, even when the disaster was imminent, when deficiency in
organization and discipline had done its worst, its consequences
might yet have been averted through the use of better appliances;
had the one train been equipped with the Westinghouse brake,
already largely in use in other sections of the country, it might
and would have been stopped; or had the other train been provided
with reflecting tail-lights in place of the dim hand-lanterns which
glimmered on its rear platform, it could hardly have failed to make
its proximity known. Any one of a dozen things, every one of which
should have been but was not, ought to have averted the disaster. Obviously its immediate cause was not far to seek. It lay in the
carelessness of a conductor who failed to consult his watch, and
never knew until the crash came that his train was leisurely moving
along on the time of another. Nevertheless, what can be said in
extenuation of a system under which, at this late day, a railroad is
operated on the principle that each employ under all circumstances
can and will take care of himself and of those whose lives and limbs
are entrusted to his care? There is, however, another and far more attractive side to the
picture. The lives sacrificed at Revere were not lost in vain. Seven
complete railroad years passed by between that and the Wollaston
Heights accident of 1878. During that time not less than two hundred
and thirty millions of persons were carried by rail within the
limits of Massachusetts. Of this vast number while only 50, or
about one in each four and a half millions, sustained any injury
from causes beyond their own power to control, the killed were just
two. This certainly was a record with which no community could well
find fault; and it was due more than anything else to the great
disaster of August 26, 1871. More than once, and on more than one
road, accidents occurred which, but for the improved appliances
introduced in consequence of the experience at Revere, could hardly
have failed of fatal results. Not that these appliances were in
all cases very cheerfully or very eagerly accepted. Neither the
Miller platform nor the Westinghouse brake won its way into general
use unchallenged. Indeed, the earnestness and even the indignation
with which presidents and superintendents then protested that their
car construction was better and stronger than Miller's; that their
antiquated handbrakes were the most improved brakes,--better, much
better, than the Westinghouse; that their crude old semaphores and
targets afforded a protection to trains which no block-system would
ever equal,--all this certainly was comical enough, even in the
very shadow of the great tragedy. Men of a certain type always have
protested and will always continue to protest that they have nothing
to learn; yet, under the heavy burden of responsibility, learn
they still do. On this point the figures
of the Massachusetts annual returns between the year 1871 and the
year 1878 speak volumes. At the time of the Revere disaster, with
one single honorable exception,--that of the Boston & Providence
road,--both the atmospheric train-brake and the Miller platform, the
two greatest modern improvements in American car construction, were
practically unrecognized on the railroads of Massachusetts. Even a
year later, but 93 locomotives and 415 cars had been equipped even
with the train-brake. In September, 1873, the number had, however,
risen to 194 locomotives and 709 cars; and another twelve months
carried these numbers up to 313 locomotives and 997 cars. Finally
in 1877 the state commissioners in their report for that year spoke
of the train-brake as having been then generally adopted, and at
the same time called attention to the very noticeable fact "that
the only railroad accident resulting in the death of a passenger
from causes beyond his control within the state during a period of
two years and eight months, was caused by the failure of a company
to adopt this improvement on all its passenger rolling-stock." The adoption of Miller's method of car construction had meanwhile
been hardly less rapid. Almost unknown at the time of the Revere
catastrophe in September, 1871, in October, 1873, when returns on
the subject were first called for by the state commissioners,
eleven companies had already adopted it on 778 cars out of a total
number of 1548 reported. In 1878 it had been adopted by twenty-two
companies, and applied to 1685 cars out of a total of 1792. In other
words it had been brought into general use. THE AUTOMATIC ELECTRIC BLOCK SYSTEM. A realizing sense of the necessity of ultimately adopting some
system of protection against the danger of rear-end collisions was,
above all else, brought directly home to American railroad managers
through the Revere disaster. In discussing and comparing the
appliances used in the practical operation of railroads in different
countries, there is one element, however, which can never be left
out of the account. The intelligence, quickness of perception
and capacity for taking care of themselves--that combination of
qualities which, taken together, constitute individuality and
adaptability to circumstance--vary greatly among the railroad
employs of different countries. The American locomotive engineer,
as he is called, is especially gifted in this way. He can be relied
on to take care of himself and his train under circumstances which
in other countries would be thought to insure disaster. Volumes
on this point were included in the fact that though at the time
of the Revere disaster many of the American lines, especially in
Massachusetts, were crowded with the trains of a mixed traffic,
the necessity of making any provision against rear-end collisions,
further than by directing those in immediate charge of the trains
to keep a sharp look out and to obey their printed orders, seemed
hardly to have occurred to any one. The English block system was
now and then referred to in a vague, general way; but it was very
questionable whether one in ten of those referring to it knew
anything about it or had ever seen it in operation, much less
investigated it. A characteristic illustration of this was afforded
in the course of those official investigations which followed the
Revere disaster, and have already more than once been alluded to. Prior to that disaster the railroads of Massachusetts had, as a
rule, enjoyed a rather exceptional freedom from accidents, and
there was every reason to suppose that their regulations were as
exact and their system as good as those in use in other parts of
the country. Yet it then appeared that in the rules of very few of
the Massachusetts roads had any provision, even of the simplest
character, been made as to the effect of telegraphic orders, or
the course to be pursued by employs in charge of trains on their
receipt. The appliances for securing intervals between following
trains were marked by a quaint simplicity. They were, indeed,
"singularly primitive," as the railroad commissioners on a
subsequent occasion described them, when it appeared that on one of
the principal roads of the state the interval between two closely
following trains was signalled to the engineer of the second train
by a station-master's holding up to him as he passed a number of
fingers corresponding to the number of minutes since the first
train had gone by. For the rest the examination revealed, as the
nearest approach to a block system, a queer collection of dials,
sand-glasses, green flags,  lanterns and hand-targets. The
climax in the course of that investigation was, however, reached
when some reference, involving a description of it, was made to the
English block. This was met by a protest on the part of one veteran
superintendent, who announced that it might work well under certain
circumstances, but for himself he could not be responsible for the
operation of a road running the number of trains he had charge of in
reliance on any such system. The subject, in fact, was one of which
he knew absolutely nothing;--not even that, through the block system
and through it alone, fourteen trains were habitually and safely
moved under circumstances where he moved one. This occurred in 1871,
and though eight years have since elapsed information in regard
to the block system is not yet very widely disseminated inside of
railroad circles, much less outside of them. It is none the less
a necessity of the future. It has got to be understood, and, in
some form, it has got to be adopted; for even in America there are
limits to the reliance which, when the lives and limbs of many are
at stake, can be placed on the "sharp look out" of any class of men,
no matter how intelligent they may be. The block system is of English origin, and it scarcely needs
to be said that it was adopted by the railroad corporations of
that country only when they were driven to it by the exigencies
of their traffic. But for that system, indeed, the most costly
portion of the tracks of the English roads must of necessity have
been duplicated years ago, as their traffic had fairly outgrown
those appliances of safety which have even to this time been found
sufficient in America. There were points, for instance, where two
hundred and seventy regular trains of one line alone passed daily. On the London & North-Western there are more than sixty through
down trains, taking no account of local trains, each day passing
over the same line of tracks, among which are express trains which
stop nowhere, way trains which stop everywhere, express-freight,
way-freight, mineral trains and parcel trains. On the Midland road
there are nearly twice as many similar trains on each track. On the
Metropolitan railway the average interval is three and one-third
minutes between trains. In one case points were mentioned where
270 regular trains of one line alone passed a given junction
during each twenty-four hours,--where 470 trains passed a single
station, the regular interval between them being but five-eighths
of a mile,--where 132 trains entered and left a single station
during three hours of each evening every day, being one train in
eighty-two seconds. In 1870 there daily reached or left the six
stations of the Boston roads some 385 trains; while no less than
650 trains a day were in the same year received and despatched from
a single one of the London stations. On one single exceptional
occasion 1,111 trains, carrying 145,000 persons, were reported as
entering and leaving this station in the space of eighteen hours,
being rather more than a train a minute. Indeed it may well be
questioned whether the world anywhere else furnishes an illustration
so apt and dramatic of the great mechanical achievements of recent
times as that to be seen during the busy hours of any week-day from
the signal and interlocking galleries which span the tracks as
they enter the Charing Cross or Cannon street stations in London. Below and in front of the galleries the trains glide to and fro,
coming suddenly into sight from beyond the bridges and as suddenly
disappearing,--winding swiftly in and out, and at times four of them
running side by side on as many tracks but in both directions,--the
whole making up a swiftly shifting maze of complex movement under
the influence of which a head unaccustomed to the sight grows
actually giddy. Yet it is all done so quietly and smoothly, with
such an absence of haste and nervousness on the part of the stolid
operators in charge, that it is not easy to decide which most to
wonder at, the almost inconceivable magnitude and despatch of the
train-movement or the perfection of the appliances which make it
possible. No man concerned in the larger management of railroads,
who has not passed a morning in those London galleries, knows what
it is to handle a great city's traffic. Perfect as it is in its way, however, it may well be questioned
whether the block system as developed in England is likely to
be generally adopted on American railroads. Upon one or two of
them, and notably on the New Jersey Central and a division of the
Pennsylvania, it has already been in use for a number of years. From an American point of view, however, it is open to a number
of objections. That in itself it is very perfect and has been
successfully elaborated so as to provide for almost every possible
contingency is proved by the results daily accomplished by means of
it. [13] The English lines are made to do an incredible amount of
work with comparative few accidents. The block system is, however,
none the less a very clumsy and complicated one, necessitating the
constant employment of a large number of skilled operators. Here
is the great defect in it from the American point of view. In this
country labor is scarce and capital costly. The effort is always
towards the perfecting of labor-saving machines. Hitherto the
pressure of traffic on the lines has not been greater than could
be fairly controlled by simpler appliances, and the expense of the
English system is so heavy that its adoption, except partially,
would not have been warranted. As Barry says in his treatise on the
subject, "one can 'buy gold too dear'; for if every possible known
precaution is to be taken, regardless of cost, it may not pay to
work a railway at all." [13] An excellent popular description of this system will be found
  in Barry's _Railway Appliances, Chapter V_. It is tolerably safe, therefore, to predict that the American
block system of the future will be essentially different from the
present English system. The basis--electricity--will of course be
the same; but, while the operator is everywhere in the English
block, his place will be supplied to the utmost possible degree by
automatic action in the American. It is in this direction that the
whole movement since the Revere disaster has been going on, and
the advance has been very great. From peculiarities of condition
also the American block must be made to cover a multitude of weak
points in the operation of roads, and give timely notice of dangers
against which the English block provides only to a limited degree,
and always through the presence of yet other employs. For instance,
as will presently be seen, many more accidents and, in Europe even,
far greater loss of life is caused by locomotives coming in contact
with vehicles at points where highways cross railroad tracks at a
level therewith than by rear-end collisions; meanwhile throughout
America, even in the most crowded suburban neighborhoods, these
crossings are the rule, whereas in Europe they are the exception. The English block affords protection against this danger by giving
electric notice to gatemen; but gatemen are always supposed. So
also as respects the movements of passengers in and about stations
in crossing tracks as they come to or leave the trains, or prepare
to take their places in them. The rule in Europe is that passenger
crossings at local stations are provided over or under the tracks;
in America, however, almost nowhere is any provision at all made,
but passengers, men, women and children, are left to scramble across
tracks as best they can in the face of passing trains. They are
expected to take care of themselves, and the success with which they
do it is most astonishing. Having been brought up to this self-care
all their lives, they do not, as would naturally be supposed, become
confused and stumble under the wheels of locomotives; and the
statistics seem to show that no more accidents from this cause occur
in America than in Europe. Nevertheless some provision is manifestly
desirable to notify employs as well as passengers that trains are
approaching, especially where way-stations are situated on curves. Again, it is well known that, next to collisions, the greatest
source of danger to railroad trains is due to broken tracks. It
is, of course, apparent that tracks may at any time be broken by
accident, as by earth-slides, derailment or the fracture of rails. This danger has to be otherwise provided for; the block has nothing
to do with it further than to prevent a train delayed by any such
break from being run into by any following train. The broken track
which the perfect block should give notice of is that where the
break is a necessary incident to the regular operation of the road. It is these breaks which, both in America and elsewhere, are the
fruitful source of the great majority of railroad accidents, and
draw-bridges and switches, or facing points as they are termed in
the English reports, are most prominent among them. Wherever there
is a switch, the chances are that in the course of time there will
be an accident. Four matters connected with train movement have now been specified,
in regard to which some provision is either necessary or highly
desirable: these are rear collisions, tracks broken at draw-bridges
or at switches, highway grade crossings, and the notification of
agents and passengers at stations. The effort in America, somewhat
in advance of that crowded condition of the lines which makes the
adoption of something a measure of present necessity, has been
directed towards the invention of an automatic system which at
one and the same time should cover all the dangers and provide
for all the needs which have been referred to, eliminating the
risks incident to human forgetfulness, drowsiness and weakness of
nerves. Can reliable automatic provision thus be made?--The English
authorities are of opinion that it cannot. They insist that "if
automatic arrangements be adopted, however suitable they may be to
the duties which they have to perform, they should in all cases be
used as additions to, and not as substitutions for, safety machinery
worked by competent signal-men. The signal-man should be bound to
exercise his observation, care and judgment, and to act thereon; and
the machine, as far as possible, be such that if he attempts to go
wrong it shall check him." It certainly cannot be said that the American electrician has as
yet demonstrated the incorrectness of this conclusion, but he has
undoubtedly made a good deal of progress in that direction. Of the
various automatic blocks which have now been experimented with or
brought into practice, the Hall Electric and the Union Safety Signal
Company systems have been developed to a very marked degree of
perfection. They depend for their working on diametrically opposite
principles: the Hall signals being worked by means of an electric
circuit caused by the action of wheels moving on the rails, and
conveyed through the usual medium of wires; while, under the other
system, the wires being wholly dispensed with, a continuous electric
circuit is kept up by means of the rails, which are connected
for the purpose, and the signals are then acted upon through the
breaking of this normal circuit by the movement of locomotives and
cars. So far as the signals are concerned, there is no essential
difference between the two systems, except that Hall supplies the
necessary motive force by the direct action of electricity, while in
the other case dependence is placed upon suspended weights. Of the
two the Hall system is the oldest and most thoroughly elaborated,
having been compelled to pass through that long and useful tentative
process common to all inventions, during which they are regarded
as of doubtful utility and are gradually developed through a
succession of partial failures. So far as Hall's system is concerned
this period may now fairly be regarded as over, for it is in
established use on a number of the more crowded roads of the North,
and especially of New England, while the imperfections necessarily
incident to the development of an appliance at once so delicate and
so complicated, have for certain purposes been clearly overcome. Its signal arrangements, for instance, to protect draw-bridges,
stations and grade-crossings are wholly distinct from its block
system, through which it provides against dangers from collision and
broken tracks. So far as draw-bridges are concerned, the protection
it affords is perfect. Not only is its interlocking apparatus so
designed that the opening of the draw blocks all approach to it,
but the signals are also reciprocal; and if through carelessness or
automatic derangement any train passes the block, the draw-tender is
notified at once of the fact in ample time to stop it. In the case of a highway crossing at a level, the electric bell
under Hall's system is placed at the crossing, giving notice of
the approaching train from the moment it is within half a mile
until it passes; so that, where this appliance is in use, accidents
can happen only through the gross carelessness of those using the
highway. When the electric bell is silent there is no train within
half a mile and the crossing is safe; it is not safe while the bell
is ringing. As it now stands the law usually provides that the
prescribed signals, either bell or whistle, shall be given from the
locomotive as it approaches the highway, and at a fixed distance
from it. The signal, therefore, is given at a distance of several
hundred yards, more or less, from the point of danger. The electric
system improves on this by placing the signal directly at the point
of danger,--the traveller approaches the bell, instead of the bell
approaching the traveller. At any point of crossing which is really
dangerous,--that is at any crossing where trees or cuttings or
buildings mask the railroad from the highway,--this distinction is
vital. In the one case notice of the unseen danger must be given
and cannot be unobserved; in the other case whether it is really
given or not may depend on the condition of the atmosphere or the
direction of the wind. Usually, however, in New England the level crossings of the more
crowded thoroughfares, perhaps one in ten of the whole number, are
protected by gates or flag-men. Under similar circumstances in
Great Britain there is an electric connection between a bell in the
cabin of the gate-keeper and the nearest signal boxes of the block
system on each side of the crossing, so that due notice is given of
the approach of trains from either direction. In this country it has
heretofore been the custom to warn gate-keepers by the locomotive
whistle, to the intense annoyance of all persons dwelling near the
crossing, or to make them depend for notice on their own eyes. Under
the Hall system, however, the gate-keeper is automatically signalled
to be on the look out, if he is attending to his duty; or, if he is
neglecting it, the electric bell in some degree supplies his place,
without releasing the corporation from its liability. In America
the heavy fogs of England are almost unknown, and the brilliant
head lights, heavy bells and shrill high whistles in use on the
locomotives would at night, it might be supposed, give ample notice
to the most careless of an approaching train. Continually recurring
experience shows, however, that this is not the case. Under these
circumstances the electric bell at the crossing becomes not only a
matter of justice almost to the employ who is stationed there, but
a watchman over him. This, however, like the other forms of signals which have been
referred to, is, in the electric system, a mere adjunct of its chief
use, which is the block,--they are all as it were things thrown
into the bargain. As contradistinguished from the English block,
which insures only an unoccupied track, the automatic blocks seek to
insure an unbroken track as well,--that is not only is each segment
into which a road is divided, protected as respects following trains
by, in the case of Hall's system, double signals watching over each
other, the one at safety, the other at danger,--both having to
combine to open the block,--but every switch or facing point, the
throwing of which may break the main track, is also protected. The
Union Signal Company's system it is claimed goes still further than
this and indicates any break in the track, though due to accidental
fracture or displacement of rails. Without attempting this the Hall
system has one other important feature in common with the English
block, and a very important feature, that of enabling station agents
in case of sudden emergency to control the train movement within
half a mile or more of their stations on either side. Within the
given distance they can stop trains either leaving or approaching. The inability to do this has been the cause of some of the most
disastrous collisions on record, and notably those at Revere and at
Thorpe. The one essential thing, however, in every perfect block system,
whether automatic or worked by operators, is that in case of
accident or derangement or doubt, the signal should rest at danger. This the Hall system now fully provides for, and in case even of
the wilful displacement of a switch, an occurrence by no means
without precedent in railroad experience, the danger signal could
not but be displayed, even though the electric connection had been
tampered with. Accidents due to wilfullness, however, can hardly
be provided for except by police precautions. Train wrecking is
not to be taken into account as a danger incident to the ordinary
operation of a railroad. Carelessness or momentary inadvertence,
or, most dangerous of all, that recklessness--that unnecessary
assumption of risk somewhere or at some time, which is almost
inseparable from a long immunity from disaster--these are the
great sources of peril most carefully to be guarded against. The
complicated and unceasing train movement depends upon many thousand
employs, all of whom make mistakes or assume risks sometimes;--and
did they not do so they would be either more or less than men. Being, however, neither angels nor machines, but ordinary mortals
whose services are bought for money at the average market rate of
wages, it would certainly seem no small point gained if an automatic
machine could be placed on guard over those whom it is the great
effort of railroad discipline to reduce to automatons. Could this
result be attained, the unintentional throwing of a lever or the
carelessness which leaves it thrown, would simply block the track
instead of leaving it broken. An example of this, and at the same
time a most forcible illustration of the possible cost of a small
economy in the application of a safeguard, was furnished in the
case of the Wollaston disaster. At the time of that disaster, the
Old Colony railroad had for several years been partially equipped
on the portion of its track near Boston, upon which the accident
occurred, with Hall's system. It had worked smoothly and easily, was
well understood by the employs, and the company was sufficiently
satisfied with it to have even then made arrangements for its
extension. Unfortunately, with a too careful eye to the expenditure
involved, the line had been but partially equipped; points where
little danger was apprehended had not been protected. Among these
was the "Foundry switch," so called, near Wollaston. Had this switch
been connected with the system and covered by a signal-target, the
mere act of throwing it would have automatically blocked the track,
and only when it was re-set would the track have been opened. The
switch was not connected, the train hands were recklessly careless,
and so a trifling economy cost in one unguarded moment some fifty
persons life and limb, and the corporation more than $300,000. One objection to the automatic block is generally based upon the
delicacy and complicated character of the machinery on which its
action necessarily depends; and this objection is especially urged
against those other portions of the Hall system, covering draws
and level crossings, which have been particularly described. It
is argued that it is always liable to get out of order from a
great multiplicity of causes, some of which are very difficult to
guard against, and that it is sure to get out of order during any
electric disturbance; but it is during storms that accidents are
most likely to occur, and especially is this the case at highway
grade-crossings. It is comparatively easy to avoid accidents so long
as the skies are clear and the elements quiet; but it is exactly
when this is not the case and when it becomes necessary to use every
precaution, that electricity as a safeguard fails or runs mad, and,
by participating in the general confusion, proves itself worse
than nothing. Then it will be found that those in charge of trains
and tracks, who have been educated into a reliance upon it under
ordinary circumstances, will from force of habit, if nothing else,
go on relying upon it, and disaster will surely follow. This line of reasoning is plausible, but none the less open to
one serious objection; it is sustained neither by statistics nor
by practical experience. Moreover it is not new, for, slightly
varied in phraseology, it has been persistently urged against the
introduction of every new railroad appliance, and, indeed, was first
and most persistently of all urged against the introduction of
railroads themselves. Pretty and ingenious in theory, practically it
is not feasible!--for more than half a century this formula has been
heard. That the automatic electric signal system is complicated,
and in many of its parts of most delicate construction, is
undeniable. In point of fact the whole
railroad organization from beginning to end--from machine-shop to
train-movement--is at once so vast and complicated, so delicate
in that action which goes on with such velocity and power, that
it is small cause for wonder that in the beginning all plain,
sensible, practical men scouted it as the fanciful creation of
visionaries. They were wholly justified in so doing; and to-day
any sane man would of course pronounce the combined safety and
rapidity of ordinary railroad movement an utter impossibility, did
he not see it going on before his eyes. So it is with each new
appliance. It is ever suggested that at last the final result has
already been reached. It is but a few years, as will presently be
seen, since the Westinghouse brake encountered the old "pretty and
ingenious" formula. Going yet a step further, and taking the case
of electricity itself, the bold conception of operating an entire
line of single track road wholly as respects one half of its train
movement by telegraph, and without the use of any time table at
all, would once have been condemned as mad. Yet to-day half of the
vast freight movement of this continent is carried on in absolute
reliance on the telegraph. Nevertheless it is still not uncommon
to hear among the class of men who rise to the height of their
capacity in themselves being automaton superintendents that they do
not believe in deviating from their time tables and printed rules;
that, acting under them, the men know or ought to know exactly what
to do, and any interference by a train despatcher only relieves them
of responsibility, and is more likely to lead to accidents than if
they were left alone to grope their own way out. Another and very similar argument frequently urged against the
electric, in common with all other block systems by the large class
who prefer to exercise their ingenuity in finding objections rather
than in overcoming difficulties, is that they breed dependence and
carelessness in employs;--that engine-drivers accustomed to rely
on the signals, rely on them implicitly, and get into habits of
recklessness which lead inevitably to accidents, for which they
then contend the signals, and not they themselves, are responsible. This argument is, indeed, hardly less familiar than the "pretty and
ingenious" formula just referred to. It has, however, been met and
disposed of by Captain Tyler in his annual reports to the Board of
Trade in a way which can hardly be improved upon:--

     It is a favorite argument with those who oppose the introduction
     of some of these improvements, or who make excuses for the want
     of them, that their servants are apt to become more careless
     from the use of them, in consequence of the extra security which
     they are believed to afford; and it is desirable to consider
     seriously how much of truth there is in this assertion. * * *
     Allowing to the utmost for these tendencies to confide too
     much in additional means of safety, the risk is proved by
     experience to be very much greater without them than with them;
     and, in fact, the negligence and mistakes of servants are found
     to occur most frequently, and generally with the most serious
     results, not when the men are over-confident in their appliances
     or apparatus, but when, in the absence of them, they are
     habituated to risk in the conduct of the traffic. In the daily
     practice of railway working station-masters, porters, signalmen,
     engine-drivers or guards are frequently placed in difficulties
     which they have to surmount as best they can. The more they are
     accustomed to incur risk in order to perform their duties, the
     less they think of it, and the more difficult it is to enforce
     discipline and obedience to regulations. The personal risk which
     is encountered by certain classes of railway servants is coming
     to be more precisely ascertained. It is very considerable;
     and it is difficult to prevent men who are in constant danger
     themselves from doing things which may be a source of danger to
     others, or to compel them to obey regulations for which they do
     not see altogether the necessity, and which impede them in their
     work. This difficulty increases with the want of necessary means
     and appliances; and is diminished when, with proper means and
     appliances, stricter discipline becomes possible, safer modes
     of working become habitual, and a higher margin of safety is
     constantly preserved. [14]

  [14] Reports; 1872, page 23, and 1873, page 39. In Great Britain the ingenious theory that superior appliances
or greater personal comfort in some indefinable way lead to
carelessness in employs was carried to such an extent that only
within the last few years has any protection against wind, rain and
sunshine been furnished on locomotives for the engine-drivers and
stokers. The old stage-coach driver faced the elements, and why
should not his successor on the locomotive do the same?--If made too
comfortable, he would become careless and go to sleep!--This was the
line of argument advanced, and the tortures to which the wretched
men were subjected in consequence of it led to their fortifying
nature by drink. They had to be regularly inspected and examined
before mounting the foot-board, to see that they were sober. It took
years in Great Britain for intelligent railroad managers to learn
that the more protected and comfortable a man is the better he will
attend to his duty. And even when the old argument, refuted by long
experience, was at last abandoned as respected the locomotive cab,
it, with perfect freshness and confidence in its own novelty and
force, promptly showed its brutal visage in opposition to the next
new safeguard. For the reasons which Captain Tyler has so forcibly put in the
extracts which have just been quoted, the argument against the block
system from the increased carelessness of employs, supposed to be
induced by it, is entitled to no weight. Neither is the argument
from the delicacy and complication of the automatic, electric signal
system entitled to any more, when urged against that. Not only has
it been too often refuted under similar conditions by practical
results, but in this case it is based on certain assumptions of
fact which are wholly opposed to experience. The record does not
show that there is any peculiar liability to railroad accidents
during periods of storm; perhaps because those in charge of train
movements or persons crossing tracks are under such circumstances
more especially on the look out for danger. On the contrary the
full average of accidents of the worst description appear to
have occurred under the most ordinary conditions of weather, and
usually in the most unanticipated way. This is peculiarly true of
accidents at highway grade crossings. These commonly occur when the
conditions are such as to cause the highway travelers to suppose
that, if any danger existed, they could not but be aware of it. In the next place, the question in regard to automatic electric
signals is exactly what it was in regard to the Westinghouse brake,
with its air-pump, its valves and connecting tubes;--it is the
purely practical question,--Does the thing work?--The burden of
proof is properly on the inventor. In the case of the electric signals they have for years been
in limited but constant use, and while thus in use they have been
undergoing steady improvement. Though now brought to a considerable
degree of comparative perfection they are, of course, still in
their earlier stage of development. In use, however, they have not
been found open to the practical objections urged against them. At
first much too complicated and expensive, requiring more machinery
than could by any reasonable exertions be kept in order and more
care than they were worth, they have now been simplified until a
single battery properly located can do all the necessary work for
a road of indefinite length. As a system they are effective and do
not lead to accidents; nor are they any more subject than telegraph
wires to derangement from atmospheric causes. When any disturbance
does take place, until it can be overcome it amounts simply to a
general signal for operating the road with extreme caution. But with
railroads, as everywhere else in life, it is the normal condition of
affairs for which provision must be made, while the dangers incident
to exceptional circumstances must be met by exceptional precautions. As long as things are in their normal state, that is, probably,
during nineteen days out of twenty, the electric signals have now
through several years of constant trial proved themselves a reliable
safeguard. It can hardly admit of doubt that in the near future they
will be both further perfected and generally adopted. In their management of switches, especially at points of railroad
convergence where a heavy traffic is concentrated and the passage
of trains or movement of cars and locomotives is unceasing,
the English are immeasurably in advance of the Americans; and,
indeed, of all other people. In fact, in this respect the American
managers have shown themselves slow to learn, and have evinced an
indisposition to adopt labor-saving appliances which, considering
their usual quickness of discernment in that regard, is at first
sight inexplicable. Having always been accustomed to the old and
simple methods, just so long as they can through those methods
handle their traffic with a bearable degree of inconvenience and
expense, they will continue to do so. That their present method is
most extravagant, just as extravagant as it would be to rent two
houses or to run two steam engines where one, if properly used,
could be made to suffice, admits of demonstration;--but the waste is
not on the surface, and the necessity for economy is not imperative. The difference of conditions and the difference in results may be
made very obvious by a comparison. Take, for instance, London and
Boston--the Cannon street station in the one and the Beach street
station in the other. The concentration of traffic at London is so
great that it becomes necessary to utilize every foot of ground
devoted to railroad purposes to the utmost possible extent. Not
only must it be packed with tracks, but those tracks must never be
idle. The incessant train movement at Cannon street has already
been referred to as probably the most extraordinary and confusing
spectacle in the whole wide circle of railroad wonders. The result
is that in some way, at this one station and under this single roof,
more trains must daily be made to enter and leave than enter and
leave, not only the Beach street station, but all the eight railroad
stations in Boston combined. [15]

  [15] "It has been estimated that an average of 50,000 persons were,
  in 1869, daily brought into Boston and carried from it, on three
  hundred and eighty-five trains, while the South Eastern railway of
  London received and despatched in 1870, on an average, six hundred
  and fifty trains a day, between 6 A.M. carrying from
  35,000 to 40,000 persons, and this too without the occurrence of a
  single train accident during the year. On one single exceptional
  day eleven hundred and eleven trains, carrying 145,000 persons, are
  said to have entered and left this station in the space of eighteen
  hours." --_Third Annual Report, [1872] of Massachusetts Railroad
  Commissioners, p. 141._

  The passenger movement over the roads terminating in Boston was
  probably as heavy on June 17, 1875, as during any twenty-four hours
  in their history. It was returned at 280,000 persons carried in
  641 trains. About twice the passenger movement of the "exceptional
  day" referred to, carried in something more than half the number of
  trains, entering and leaving eight stations instead of one. During eighteen successive hours trains have been made to enter and
leave this station at the rate of more than one in each minute. It
contains four platforms and seven tracks, the longest of which is
720 feet. As compared with the largest station in Boston (the Boston
& Providence), it has the same number of platforms and an aggregate
of 1,500 (three-fifths) more feet of track under cover; it daily
accommodates about nine times as many trains and four times as many
passengers. Of it Barry, in his treatise on Railway Appliances (p. 197), says: "The platform area at this station is probably minimised
but, the station accommodates efficiently a very large mixed traffic
of long and short journey trains, amounting at times to as many as
400 trains in and 400 trains out in a working day. [16]"

  [16] The Grand Central Depot on 42d Street in New York City, has
  nearly twice the amount of track room under cover of the Cannon
  street station. The daily train movement of the latter would be
  precisely paralleled in New York, though not equalled in amount, if
  the 42d street station were at Trinity church, and, in addition to
  the trains which now enter and leave it, all the city trains of the
  Elevated road were also provided for there. The American system is, therefore, one of great waste; for, being
conducted in the way it is--that is with stations and tracks
utilized to but a fractional part of their utmost capacity--it
requires a large number of stations and tracks and the services of
many employs. Indeed it is safe to say that, judged by the London
standard, not more than two of the eight stations in Boston are at
this time utilized to above a quarter part of their full working
capacity; and the same is probably true of all other American
cities. Both employs and the travelling public are accustomed to a
slow movement and abundance of room; land is comparatively cheap,
and the pressure of concentration has only just begun to make itself
felt. Accordingly any person, who cares to pass an hour during the
busy time of day in front of an American city station, cannot but
be struck, while watching the constant movement, with the primitive
way in which it is conducted. Here are a multiplicity of tracks all
connected with each other, and cars and locomotives are being passed
from one to another from morning to night. A constant shifting
of switches is going on, and the little shunting engines never
stand still. The switches, however, as a rule, are unprovided with
signals, except of the crudest description; they have no connection
with each other, and during thirty years no change has been made
in the method in which they are worked. When one of them has to be
shifted, a man goes to it and shifts it. To facilitate the process,
the monitor shunting engines are provided with a foot-board in front
and behind, just above the track, upon which the yard hands jump,
and are carried about from switch to switch, thus saving the time
they would occupy if they had to walk. A simpler arrangement could
not be imagined; anyone could devise it. The only wonder is that
even a considerable traffic can be conducted safely in reliance upon
it. Turning from Beach to Cannon street, it is apparent that the
train movement which has there to be accommodated would fall into
inextricable confusion if it was attempted to manage it in the way
which has been described. The number of trains is so great and
the movement so rapid and intricate, that not even a regiment of
employs stationed here and there at the signals and switches could
keep things in motion. From time to time they would block, and then
the whole vast machine would be brought to a standstill until order
could be re-established. The difficulty is overcome in a very simple
way, by means of an equally simple apparatus. The control over
the numerous switches and corresponding signals, instead of being
divided up among many men stationed at many points, is concentrated
in the hands of two men occupying a single gallery, which is
elevated across the tracks in front of the station and commanding
the approaches to it, much as the pilot-house of an American steamer
commands a view of the course before it. From this gallery, by means
of what is known as the interlocking system, every switch and signal
in the yard below is moved; and to such a point of perfection has
the apparatus been carried, that any disaster from the misplacement
of a switch or the display of a wrong signal is rendered impossible. Of this Cannon street apparatus Barry says, "there are here nearly
seventy point and signal levers concentrated in one signal house;
the number of combinations which would be possible if all the
signal and point levers were not interlocked can be expressed only
by millions. Of these only 808 combinations are safe, and by the
interlocking apparatus these 808 combinations are rendered possible,
and all the others impossible. "[17]

  [17] _Railway Appliances_, p. It is not proposed to enter at any length into the mechanical
details of this appliance, which, however, must be considered as one
of the three or four great inventions which have marked epochs in
the history of railroad traffic. [18] As, however, it is but little
known in America, and will inevitably within the next few years find
here the widest field for its increased use, a slight sketch of its
gradual development and of its leading mechanical features may not
be out of place. Prior to the year 1846 the switches and signals
on the English roads were worked in the same way that they are now
commonly worked in this country. As a train drew near to a junction,
for instance, the switchman stationed there made the proper track
connection and then displayed the signal which indicated what tracks
were opened and what closed, and which line had the right of way;
and the engine-drivers acted accordingly. As the number of trains
increased and the movement at the junctions became more complicated,
the danger of the wrong switches being thrown or the wrong signals
displayed, increased also. Mistakes from time to time would happen,
even when only the most careful and experienced men were employed;
and mistakes in these matters led to serious consequences. It,
therefore, became the practice, instead of having the switch or
signal lever at the point where the switch or signal itself was, as
is still almost universally the case in this country, to connect
them by rods or wires with their levers, which were concentrated
at some convenient point for working, and placed under the control
of one man instead of several. So far as it went this change was
an improvement, but no provision yet existed against the danger of
mistake in throwing switches and displaying signals. The blunder of
first making one combination of tracks and then showing the signal
for another was less liable to happen after the concentration of
the levers under one hand than before, but it still might happen at
any time, and certainly would happen at some time. If all danger of
accident from human fallibility was ever to be eliminated a far more
complicated mechanical apparatus must be devised. In response to
this need the system of interlocking was gradually developed, though
not until about the year 1856 was it brought to any considerable
degree of perfection. The whole object of this system is to
render it impossible for a switchman, whether because he is weary
or agitated or actually malicious or only inexperienced, to give
contrary signals, or to break his line in one way and to give the
signal for its being broken in another way. To bring this about the
levers are concentrated in a cabin or gallery, and placed side by
side in a frame, their lower ends connecting with the switch-points
and signals by means of rods and wires. Beneath this frame are one
or more long bars, extending its entire length under it and parallel
with it. These are called locking bars; for, being moved to the
right or left by the action of the levers they hold these levers in
certain designated positions, nor do they permit them to occupy any
other. In this way what is termed the interlocking is effected. The
apparatus, though complicated, is simplicity itself compared with
a clock or a locomotive. The complication, also, such as it is,
arises from the fact that each situation is a problem by itself, and
as such has to be studied out and provided for separately. This,
however, is a difficulty affecting the manufacturer rather than the
operator. To the latter the apparatus presents no difficulty which
a fairly intelligent mechanic cannot easily master; while for the
former the highly complicated nature of the problem may, perhaps,
best be inferred from the example given by Mr. Barry, the simplest
that can offer, that of an ordinary junction where a double-track
branch-road connects with its double-track main line. There would
in this case be of necessity two switch levers and four signal
levers, which would admit of sixty-four possible combinations. "The
signal might be arranged in any of sixteen ways, and the points
might occupy any of four positions, irrespective of the position
of the signals. Of the sixty-four combinations thus possible
only thirteen are safe, and the rest are such as might lure an
engine-driver into danger." [18] A sufficiently popular description of this apparatus also,
  illustrated by cuts, will be found in Barry's excellent little
  treatise on _Railway Appliances_, already referred to, published by
  Longmans & Co. as one of their series of text-books of science. Originally the locking bar was worked through the direct action of
certain locks, as they were called, between which the levers when
moved played to and fro. These locks were mere bars or plates of
iron, some with inclined sides, and others with sides indented or
notched. At one end they were secured on a pivot to a fixed bar
opposite to and parallel with the movable locking bar, while their
other ends were made fast to the locking bar; whence it necessarily
followed that, as certain of the levers were pushed to and fro
between them, the action of these levers on the inclined sides of
the locks could by a skilful combination be made to throw other
levers into the notches and indentations of other locks, thus
securing them in certain positions, and making it impossible for
them to be in any other positions. The apparatus which has been described, though a great improvement
on anything which had preceded it, was still but a clumsy affair,
and naturally the friction of the levers on the locks was so great
that they soon became worn, and when worn they could not be relied
upon to move the switch-points with the necessary accuracy. The new
appliance of safety had, therefore, as is often the case, introduced
a new and very considerable danger of its own. The signals and
switches, it was true, could no longer disagree, but the points
themselves were sometimes not properly set, or, owing to the great
exertion required to work it, the interlocking gear was strained. This difficulty resulted in the next and last improvement, which
was a genuine triumph of mechanical ingenuity. To insure the proper
length of stroke being made in moving the lever--that is to make
it certain in each case that the switch points were brought into
exactly the proper position--two notches were provided in the slot,
or quadrant, as it is called, in which the lever moved, and, when
it was thrown squarely home, and not until then, a spring catch
caught in one or other of these notches. This spring was worked by
a clasp at the handle of the lever, and the whole was called the
spring catch-rod. By a singularly ingenious contrivance, the process
of interlocking was transferred from the action of the levers and
the keys to these spring catch-rods, which were made to work upon
each other, and thus to become the medium through which the whole
process is effected. The result of this improvement was that, as
the switchman cannot move any lever until the spring-catch rod is
fastened, except for a particular movement, he cannot, do what he
will, even begin any other movement than that one, as the levers
cannot be started. On the other hand, it may be said that, by means
of this improvement, the mere "intention of the signal-man to move
any lever, expressed by his grasping the lever and so raising the
spring catch-rod, independently of his putting his intention in
force, actuates all the necessary locking. [19]"

  [19] In regard to the interlocking system as then in use in England,
  Captain Tyler in his report as head of the railway inspecting
  department of the Board of Trade, used the following language in
  his report on the accidents during 1870. "When the apparatus is
  properly constructed and efficiently maintained, the signalman
  cannot make a mistake in the working of his points and signals which
  shall lead to accident or collision, except only by first lowering
  his signal and switching his train forward, then putting up his
  signal again as it approaches, and altering the points as the driver
  comes up to, or while he is passing over them. Such a mistake was
  actually made in one of the cases above quoted. It is, of course,
  impossible to provide completely for cases of this description; but
  the locking apparatus, as now applied, is already of enormous value
  in preventing accidents; and it will have a still greater effect
  on the general safety of railway travelling as it becomes more
  extensively applied on the older lines. Without it, a signalman in
  constantly working points and signals is almost certain sooner or
  later to make a mistake, and to cause an accident of a more or less
  serious character; and it is inexcusable in any railway company to
  allow its mail or express trains to run at high speed through facing
  points which are not interlocked efficiently with the signals, by
  which alone the engine-drivers in approaching them can be guided. There is however, very much yet to be effected in different parts of
  the country in this respect. And it is worth while to record here,
  in illustration of the difficulties that are sometimes met with by
  the inspecting officers, that the Midland Railway Company formally
  protested in June, 1866, against being compelled to apply such
  apparatus before receiving sanction for the opening of new lines
  of railway. They stated that in complying with the requirements in
  this respect of the Board of Trade, they '_were acting in direct
  opposition to their own convictions, and they must, so far as lay in
  their power, decline the responsibility of the locking system_.'" To still further perfect the appliance a simple mechanism has
  since 1870 been attached to the rod actuating the switch-bolt,
  which prevents the signal-man from shifting the switch under a
  passing train in the manner suggested by Captain Tyler in the above
  extract. In fact it is no exaggeration to say that the interlocking
  system has now been so studied, and every possible contingency so
  thoroughly provided for, that in using it accidents can only occur
  through a wilful intention to bring them about. In spite of any theoretical or fanciful objections which may be
urged against it, this appliance will be found an indispensable
adjunct to any really heavy junction or terminal train movement. For
the elevated railroads of New York, for instance, its early adoption
proved a necessity. As for questions of temperature, climate,
etc., as affecting the long connecting rods and wires which are an
essential part of the system, objections based upon them are purely
imaginary. Difficulties from this source were long since met and
overcome by very simple compensating arrangements, and in practice
occasion no inconvenience. That rods may break, and that wires are
at all times liable to get out of gear, every one knows; and yet
this fact is urged as a novel objection to each new mechanical
improvement. That a broken or disordered apparatus will always
occasion a serious disturbance to any heavy train movement, may also
be admitted. The fact none the less remains that in practice, and
daily subjected through long periods of time to incomparably the
heaviest train movement known to railroad experience, the rods of
the interlocking apparatus do not break, nor do its wires get out
of gear; while by means of it, and of it alone, this train movement
goes unceasingly on never knowing any serious disturbance. [20]

  [20] "As an instance of the possibility of preventing the mistakes
  so often made by signal men with conflicting signals or with facing
  points I have shown the traffic for a single day, and at certain
  hours of that day, at the Cannon Street station of the South Eastern
  Railway, already referred to as one of the _no-accident_ lines of
  the year. The traffic of that station, with trains continually
  crossing one another, by daylight and in darkness, in fog or in
  sunshine, amounts to more than 130 trains in three hours in the
  morning, and a similar number in the evening; and, altogether, to
  652 trains, conveying more than 35,000 passengers in the day as
  a winter, or 40,000 passengers a day as a summer average. It is
  probably not too much to say, that without the signal and point
  arrangements which have there been supplied, and the system of
  interlocking which has there been so carefully carried out, the
  signalmen could not carry on their duties _for one hour without
  accident_." _Captain Tyler's report on accidents for 1870, p. 35._

It is not, however, alone in connection with terminal stations and
junctions that the interlocking apparatus is of value. It is also
the scientific substitute for the law or regulation compelling
trains to stop as a measure of precaution when they approach
grade-crossings or draw-bridges. It is difficult indeed to pass from
the consideration of this fine result of science and to speak with
patience of the existing American substitute for it. If the former
is a feature in the block system, the latter is a signal example of
the block-head system. As a device to avoid danger it is a standing
disgrace to American ingenuity; and, fortunately, as stopping is
compatible only with a very light traffic, so soon as the passage
of trains becomes incessant a substitute for it has got to be
devised. In this country, as in England, that substitute will be
found in the interlocking apparatus. By means of it the draw-bridge,
for instance, can be so connected with the danger signals--which
may, if desired, be gates closing across the railroad tracks--that
the one cannot be opened except by closing the other. This is the
method adopted in Great Britain not only at draws in bridges, but
frequently also in the case of gates at level road crossings. It
has already been noticed that in Great Britain accidents at draws
in bridges seem to be unknown. Certainly not one has been reported
during the last nine years. The security afforded in this case
by interlocking would, indeed, seem to be absolute; as, if the
apparatus is out of order, either the gates or the bridge would be
closed, and could not be opened until it was repaired. So also as
respects the grade-crossing of one railroad by another. Bringing
all trains to a complete stop when approaching these crossings
is a precaution quite generally observed in America, either as a
matter of statute law or running regulation; and yet during the six
years 1873-8 no less than 104 collisions were reported at these
crossings. In Great Britain during the nine years 1870-8 but nine
cases of accidents of this description were reported, and in both
the years 1877 and 1878 under the head of "Accidents or Collisions
on Level Crossings of Railways," the chief inspector of the Board
of Trade tersely stated that,--"No accident was inquired into under
this head. [21]" The interlocking system there affords the most
perfect protection which can be devised against a most dangerous
practice in railroad construction to which Americans are almost
recklessly addicted. It is, also, matter of daily experience that
the interlocking system does afford a perfect practical safeguard
in this case. Every junction of a branch with a double track
road involves a grade-crossing, and a grade-crossing of the most
dangerous character. On the Metropolitan Elevated railroad of New
York, at 53d street, there is one of these junctions, where, all
day long, trains are crossing at grade at the rate of some twenty
miles an hour. These trains never stop, except when signalled so
to do. The interlocking apparatus, however, makes it impossible
that one track should be open except when the other is closed. An
accident, therefore, can happen only through the wilful carelessness
of the engineer in charge of a train;--and in the face of wilful
carelessness laws are of no more avail than signals. If a man in
control of a locomotive wishes to bring on a collision he can always
do it. Unless he wishes to, however, the interlocking apparatus
not only can prevent him from so doing, but as a matter of fact
always does. The same rule which holds good at junctions would hold
good at level crossings. There is no essential difference between
the two. By means of the interlocking apparatus the crossing can
be so blocked at any desired distance from it in such a way that
when one track is open the other must be closed;--unless, indeed,
the apparatus is out of order, and then both would be closed. The precaution in this case, also, is absolute. Unlike the rule
as to stopping, it does not depend on the caution or judgment of
individuals;--there are the signals and the obstructions, and
if they are not displayed on one road they are on the other. So
superior is this apparatus in every respect--as regards safety as
well as convenience--to the precaution of coming to a stop, that, as
an inducement to introduce an almost perfect scientific appliance,
it would be very desirable that states like Massachusetts and
Connecticut compelling the stop, should except from the operation
of the law all draw-bridges or grade-crossings at which suitable
interlocking apparatus is provided. Surely it is not unreasonable
that in this case science should have a chance to assert itself. [21] "As affecting the safe working of railways, the level crossing
  of one railway by another is a matter of very serious import. Even when signalled on the most approved principles, they are a
  source of danger, and, if possible, should always be avoided. At
  junctions of branch or other railways the practice has been adopted
  by some companies in special cases, to carry the off line under or
  over the main line by a bridge. This course should generally be
  adopted in the case of railways on which the traffic is large, and
  more expressly where express and fast trains are run." _Report on
  Accidents on Railways of the United Kingdom during 1877, p. 35._

In any event, however, the general introduction of the interlocking
apparatus into the American railroad system may be regarded as a
mere question of the value of land and concentration of traffic. So long as every road terminating in our larger cities indulges,
at whatever unnecessary cost to its stockholders, in independent
station buildings far removed from business centres, the train
movement can most economically be conducted as it now is. The
expense of the interlocking apparatus is avoided by the very simple
process of incurring the many fold heavier expense of several
station buildings and vast disconnected station grounds. If,
however, in the city of Boston, for instance, the time should come
when the financial and engineering audacity of the great English
companies shall be imitated,--when some leading railroad company
shall fix its central passenger station on Tremont street opposite
the head of Court street, just as in London the South Eastern
established itself on Cannon street, and then this company carrying
its road from Pemberton Square by a tunnel under Beacon Hill and the
State-house should at the crossing of the Charles radiate out so as
to afford all other roads an access for their trains to the same
terminal point, thus concentrating there the whole daily movement of
that busy population which makes of Boston its daily counting-room
and market-place,--then, when this is attempted, the time will have
come for utilizing to its utmost capacity every available inch of
space to render possible the incessant passage of trains. Then also
will it at last be realized that it is far cheaper to use a costly
and intricate apparatus which enables two companies to be run into
one convenient station, than it is to build a separate station, even
at an inconvenient point, to accommodate each company. In March, 1825, there appeared in the pages of the _Quarterly
Review_ an article in which the writer discussed that railway
system, the first vague anticipation of which was then just
beginning to make the world restless. He did this, too, in a very
intelligent and progressive spirit, but unfortunately secured for
his article a permanence of interest he little expected by the
use of one striking illustration. He was peculiarly anxious to
draw a distinct line of demarcation between his own very rational
anticipations and the visionary dreams of those enthusiasts who
were boring the world to death over the impossibilities which they
claimed that the new invention was to work. Among these he referred
to the proposition that passengers would be "whirled at the rate
of eighteen or twenty miles an hour by means of a high pressure
engine," and then contemptuously added,--"We should as soon expect
the people of Woolwich to suffer themselves to be fired off upon one
of Congreve's _ricochet_ rockets, as trust themselves to the mercy
of such a machine, going at such a rate; their property perhaps they
may trust." Under the circumstances, the criticism was a perfectly reasonable
one. The danger involved in going at such a rate of speed and the
impossibility of stopping in time to avoid a sudden danger, would
naturally suggest themselves to any one as insuperable objections
to the new system for any practical use. Some means of preserving
a sudden and powerful control over a movement of such unheard of
rapidity would almost as a matter of course be looked upon as a
condition precedent. Yet it is a most noticeable fact in the history
of railroad development that the improvement in appliances for
controlling speed by no means kept pace with the increased rate of
speed attained. Indeed, so far as the possibility of rapid motion
is concerned, there is no reason to suppose that the _Rocket_
could not have held its own very respectably by the side of a
passenger locomotive of the present day. It will be remembered
that on the occasion of the Manchester & Liverpool opening, Mr. Huskisson after receiving his fatal injury was carried seventeen
miles in twenty-five minutes. Since then the details of locomotive
construction have been simplified and improved upon, but no great
change has been or probably will be effected in the matter of
velocity;--as respects that the maximum was practically reached
at once. Yet down to the year 1870 the brake system remained very
much what it was in 1830. Improvements in detail were effected,
but the essential principles were the same. In case of any sudden
emergency, the men in charge of the locomotive had no direct control
over the vehicles in the train; they communicated with them by the
whistle, and when the signal was heard the brakes were applied as
soon as might be. When a train is moving at the rate of forty miles
an hour, by no means a great speed for it while in full motion, it
passes over fifty-eight feet each second;--at sixty miles an hour it
passes over eighty-eight feet. Under these circumstances, supposing
an engine driver to become suddenly aware of an obstruction on the
track, as was the case at Revere, or of something wrong in the train
behind him, as at Shipton, he had first himself to signal danger,
and to this signal the brakemen throughout the train had to respond. Each operation required time, and every second of time represented
many feet of space. It was small matter for surprise, therefore,
that when in 1875 they experimented scientifically in England, it
was ascertained that a train of a locomotive and thirteen cars
moving at a speed of forty-five miles an hour could not be brought
to a stand in less than one minute, or before it had traversed a
distance of half a mile. The same result it will be remembered was
arrived at by practical experience in America, where both at Angola
and at Port Jervis,[22] it was found impossible to stop the trains
in less than half-a-mile, though in each case two derailed cars were
dragging and plunging along at the end of them. [22] _Ante_, pp. The need of a continuous train-brake, operated from the locomotive
and under the immediate control of the engine-driver, had been
emphasized through years by the almost regular recurrence of
accidents of the most appalling character. In answer to this need
almost innumerable appliances had been patented and experimented
with both in Europe and in America. Prior to 1869, however,
these had been almost exclusively what are known as emergency
brakes;--that is, although the trains were equipped with them and
they were operated from the locomotives, they were not relied upon
for ordinary use, but were held in reserve, as it were, against
special exigencies. The Hudson River railroad train at the Hamburg
accident was thus equipped. Practically, appliances which in the
operation of railroads are reserved for emergencies are usually
found of little value when the emergency occurs. Accordingly no
continuous brake had, prior to the development of Westinghouse's
invention, worked its way into general use. Patent brakes had
become a proverb as well as a terror among railroad mechanics,
and they had ceased to believe that any really desirable thing of
the sort would ever be perfected. Westinghouse, therefore, had a
most unbelieving audience to encounter, and his invention had to
fight hard for all the favor it won; nor did his experience with
master mechanics differ, probably, much from Miller's. His first
patents were taken out in 1869, and he early secured the powerful
aid of the Pennsylvania road for his invention. The Pullman Car
Company, also, always anxious to avail themselves of every appliance
of safety as well as of comfort, speedily saw the merits of the
new brake and adopted it; but, as they merely furnished cars and
had nothing to do with the locomotives that pulled them, their
support was not so effective as that of the great railroad company. Naturally enough, also, great hesitation was felt in adopting so
complicated an appliance. It added yet another whole apparatus to
a thing which was already overburdened with machinery. There was,
also, something in the delicacy and precision of the parts of this
new contrivance,--in its air-pump and reservoirs and long connecting
tubes with their numerous valves,--which was peculiarly distasteful
to the average practical railroad mechanic. It was true that the
idea of transmitting power by means of compressed air was by no
means new,--that thousands of drills were being daily driven by
it wherever tunnelling was going on or miners were at work,--yet
the application of this familiar power to the wheels of a railroad
train seemed no less novel than it was bold. It was, in the first
place, evident that the new apparatus would not stand the banging
and hammering to which the old-fashioned hand-brake might safely
be subjected; not indeed without deranging that simple appliance,
but without incurring any very heavy bill for repairs in so doing. Accordingly the new brake was at first carelessly examined and
patronizingly pushed aside as a pretty toy,--nice in theory no
doubt, but wholly unfitted for rough, every-day use. As it was
tersely expressed during a discussion before the Society of Arts
in London, as recently as May, 1877,--"It was no use bringing out
a brake which could not be managed by ordinary officials,--which
was so wonderfully clever that those who had to use it could not
understand it." A line of argument by the way, which, as has been
already pointed out, may with far greater force be applied to the
locomotive itself; and, indeed, unquestionably was so applied
about half a century ago by men of the same calibre who apply it
now, to the intense weariness and discouragement no doubt of the
late George Stephenson. Whether sound or otherwise, however, few
more effective arguments against an appliance can be advanced; and
against the Westinghouse brake it was advanced so effectively,
that even as late as 1871, although largely in use on western
roads, it had found its way into Massachusetts only as an ingenious
device of doubtful merit. It was in August, 1871, that the Revere
disaster occurred, and the Revere disaster, as has been seen,
would unquestionably have been averted had the colliding train
been provided with proper brake power. This at last called serious
attention there to the new appliance. Even then, however, the mere
suggestion of something better being in existence than the venerable
hand-brakes in familiar use did not pass without a vigorous protest;
and at the meeting of railroad officials, which has already been
referred to as having been called by the state commissioners
after the accident, one prominent gentleman, when asked if the
road under his charge was equipped with the most approved brake,
indignantly replied that it was,--that it was equipped with the
good, old-fashioned hand-brake;--and he then proceeded to vehemently
stake his professional reputation on the absolute superiority of
that ancient but somewhat crude appliance over anything else of the
sort in existence. Nevertheless, on this occasion also, the great
dynamic force which is ever latent in first-class railroad accidents
again asserted itself. Even the most opinionated of professional
railroad men, emphatically as he might in public deny it, quietly
yielded as soon as might be. In a surprisingly short time after the
exhibition of ignorance which has been referred to, the railroads in
Massachusetts, as it has already been shown, were all equipped with
train-brakes. [23]

  [23] Page 157. In its present improved shape it is safe to say that in all those
requisites which the highest authorities known on the subject have
laid down as essential to a model train brake, the Westinghouse
stands easily first among the many inventions of the kind. It is
now a much more perfect appliance than it was in 1871, for it was
then simply atmospheric and continuous in its action, whereas it
has since been made automatic and self-regulating. So far as its
fundamental principle is concerned, that is too generally understood
to call for explanation. By means of an air-pump, attached to the
boiler of the locomotive and controlled by the engine-driver, an
atmospheric force is brought to bear, through tubes running under
the cars, upon the break blocks, pressing them against the wheels. The hand of the engine-driver is in fact on every wheel in the
train. This application of power, though unquestionably ingenious
and, like all good things, most simple and obvious when once
pointed out, was originally open to one great objection, which was
persistently and with great force urged against it. The parts of the
apparatus were all delicate, and some injury or derangement of them
was always possible, and sometimes inevitable. The chief advantage
claimed for the brake was, however, that complete dependence could
be placed upon it in the regular movement of trains. It was obvious,
therefore, that if such dependence was placed upon it and any
derangement did occur, the first intimation those in charge of the
train would have that something was wrong might well come in the
shape of a failure of the brake to act, and a subsequent disaster. Both in Massachusetts and in Connecticut, at the crossing of one
railroad by another at the same level in the former state and in the
approach to draws in bridges in the latter, a number of cases of
this failure of the original Westinghouse non-automatic brake to act
did in point of fact occur. Fortunately they, none of them, resulted
in disaster. This, however, was mere good luck, as was illustrated
in the case of the accident of November 11, 1876, at the Communipaw
Ferry on the New Jersey Central. The train was there equipped with
the ordinary train brake. It reached Jersey City on time shortly
after 4 P.M., but, instead of slacking up, it ran directly through
the station and freight offices, carrying away the walls and
supports, and the locomotive then plunged into the river beyond. The baggage and smoking car followed but fortunately lodged on the
locomotive, thus blocking the remainder of the train. Fortunately no
one was killed, and no passengers were seriously injured. Again, on the Metropolitan Elevated railroad in New York city, on
the evening of June 23, 1879, one of the trains was delayed for a
few moments at the Franklin street station. Meanwhile the next train
came along, and, though the engine-driver of this following train
saw the danger signals and endeavored to stop in time, he found his
brake out of order, and a collision ensued resulting in the injury
of one employ and the severe shattering of a passenger coach and
locomotive. It was only a piece of good fortune that the first
of these accidents did not result in a repetition of the Norwalk
disaster and the second in that of Revere. It so chanced that it was the Smith vacuum brake which failed to
work at Communipaw, and the Eames vacuum which failed to work at
Franklin street. It might just
as well have been the original Westinghouse. The difficulty lay, not
in the maker's name, but in the imperfect action of the brake; and
such significant intimations are not to be disregarded. The chances
are naturally large that the failure of the continuous brake to act
will not at once occur under just those circumstances which will
entail a serious disaster and heavy loss of life; that, however, if
such intimations as these are disregarded, it will sooner or later
so occur does not admit of doubt. But the possibility that upon some given occasion it might fail to
work was not the only defect in the original Westinghouse; it might
well be in perfect order and in full action even, and then suddenly,
as the result of derailment or separation of parts, the apparatus
might be broken, and at once the shoes would drop from the wheels,
and the vehicles of the disabled train would either press forward,
or, on an incline, stop and run backwards until their unchecked
momentum was exhausted. This appears to have been the case at
Wollaston, and contributed some of its most disastrous features to
that accident. To obviate these defects Westinghouse in 1872 invented what he
termed a triple valve attachment, by means of which, if the
thing can be so expressed, his brake was made to always stand at
danger. That is, in case of any derangement of its parts, it was
automatically applied and the train stopped. The action of the brake
was thus made to give notice of anything wrong anywhere in the
train. A noticeable case of this occurred on the Midland railway in
England, when on the November 22, 1876, as the Scotch express was
approaching the Heeley station, at a speed of some sixty miles an
hour, the hind-guard felt the automatic brake suddenly self-applied. The forward truck of a Pullman car in the middle of the train had
left the rails; the front part of the train broke the couplings
and went on, while the rear carriages, acted upon by the automatic
brakes, came to a stand immediately behind the Pullman, which
finally rested on its side across the opposite track. On the other hand, as the Scotch express on the
North Eastern road was approaching Morpeth, on March 25, 1877, at
a speed of some twenty-five miles an hour, the locomotive for some
reason left the track. The train was not equipped with an automatic
brake, and the carriages in it accordingly pressed forward upon
each other until three of them were so utterly destroyed as to be
indistinguishable. Five passengers lost their lives; the remains of
one of whom, together with the wheels of a carriage, were afterwards
taken out from the tank of the tender, into which they had been
driven by the force of the shock. The theoretical objection to the automatic brake is obvious. In
case of any derangement of its machinery it applies itself, and,
should these derangements be of frequent occurrence, the consequent
stoppage of trains would prove a great annoyance, if not a source
of serious danger. This objection is not sustained by practical
experience. The triple valve, so called, is the only complicated
portion of the automatic brake, and this valve is well protected
and not liable to get out of order. [24] Should it become deranged
it will stop the working of the brake on that car alone to which it
belongs; and it will become deranged so as to set the brake only
from causes which would render the non-automatic brake inoperative. When anything of this sort occurs, it stops the train until the
defect is remedied. The returns made to the English Board of
Trade enable us to know just how frequently in actual and regular
service these stoppages occur, and what they amount to. Take, for
instance, the North Eastern and the Caledonian railways. During the last six months of 1878 the first
ran 138,000 train miles with it, in the course of which there
were eight delays or stoppages of some three to five minutes each
occasioned by the action of the triple-valve; being in round numbers
one occasion of delay in 17,000 miles of train movement. On the
Caledonian railway, during the same period, four brake failures, due
to the action of the triple-valve, were reported in runs aggregating
over 62,000 miles, being about one failure to 15,000 miles. These
failures moreover occasioned delays of only a few minutes each, and,
where the cause of the difficulty was not so immediately apparent
that it could at once be remedied, the brake-tubes of the vehicle
on which the difficulty occurred were disconnected, and the trains
went on. [25] One of these stoppages, however, resulted in a serious
accident. As a train on the Caledonian road was approaching the
Wemyss Bay junction on December 14th, in a dense fog, the engine
driver, seeing the signals at danger, undertook to apply his brake
slightly, when it went full on, stopping the train between the
distant and home signals, as they are called in the English block
system. After the danger signal was lowered, but before the brake
could be released, the signal-man allowed a following train to enter
upon the same block section, and a collision followed in which some
thirteen passengers were slightly injured. This accident, however,
as the inspecting officer of the Board of Trade very properly found,
was due not at all to the automatic brake, but to "carelessness
on the part of the signal-man, who disregarded the rules for the
working of the block telegraph instruments," and to the driver
of the colliding train, who "disobeyed the company's running
regulations." It gives an American, however, a realizing sense of
one of the difficulties under which those crowded British lines are
operated, to read that in this case the fog was "so thick that the
tail-lamp was not visible from an approaching train for more than a
few yards." [24] Speaking of the modifications introduced into his brake by
  Westinghouse since 1874, Mr. Thomas E. Harrison, civil engineer
  of the North Eastern Railway Company in a communication to the
  directors of that company of April 24, 1879, recommending the
  adoption by it of the Westinghouse, and subsequently ordered to
  be printed for the use of Parliament, thus referred to the triple
  valve: "As the most important [of these modifications] I will
  particularly draw your attention to the "triple-valve" which has
  been made a regular bugbear by the opponents of the system, and has
  been called complicated, delicate, and liable to get out of order,
  etc. * * * It is, in fact, as simple a piece of mechanism as well
  can be imagined, certain in its action, of durable materials, easily
  accessible to an ordinary workman for examination or cleaning, and
  there is nothing about it that can justify the term complication; on
  the contrary, it is a model of ingenuity and simplicity." [25] During the six months ending June 30, 1879, some 300 stops due
  to some derangement of the apparatus of the Westinghouse brake were
  reported by ten companies in runs aggregating about two million
  miles. Being one stop to 6,600 miles run. Very many of these stops
  were obviously due to the want of familiarity of the employs with
  an apparatus new to them, but as a rule the delays occasioned did
  not exceed a very few minutes; of 82 stoppages, for instance,
  reported on the London, Brighton & South Coast road, the two longest
  were ten minutes each and the remainder averaged some three or four
  minutes. After the application of the triple valve had made it automatic,
there remained but one further improvement necessary to render
the Westinghouse a well-nigh perfect brake. A superabundance of
self-acting power had been secured, but no provision was yet made
for graduating the use of that power so that it should be applied
in the exact degree, neither more nor less, which would soonest
stop the train. This for two reasons is mechanically a matter of
no little importance. As is well known a too severe application of
brakes, no matter of what kind they are, causes the wheels to stand
still and slide upon the rails. This is not only very injurious to
rolling stock, the wheels of which are flattened at the points which
slide, but, as has long been practically well-known to those whose
business it is to run locomotives, when once the wheels begin to
slide the retarding power of the brakes is seriously diminished. In order, therefore, to secure the maximum of retarding power, the
pressure of the brake-blocks on the revolving wheels should be very
great when first applied, and just sufficient not to slide them; and
should then be diminished, _pari passu_ with the momentum of the
train, until it wholly stops. Familiar as all this has long been
to engine-drivers and practical railroad mechanics, yet it has not
been conceded in the results of many scientific inquiries. In the
report of one of the Royal Commissions on Accidents, for instance,
it was asserted that the momentum of a train was retarded more by
the action of sliding than of slowly revolving wheels; and again,
as recently as in May, 1877, in a scientific discussion in London
at one of the meetings of the Society of Arts, a gentleman, with
the letters C. E. appended to his name, ventured the surprising
assertion that "no brake could do more than skid the wheels of
a train, and all continuous brakes professed to do this, and he
believed did so about equally well." Now, what it is here asserted
no brake can do is exactly what the perfect brake will be made to
do,--and what Westinghouse's latest improvement, it is claimed,
enables his brake to do. It much more than "skids the wheels," by
measuring out exactly that degree of power necessary to hold the
wheels just short of the skidding point, and in this way always
exerts the maximum retarding force. This is brought about by means
of a contrivance which allows the air to leak out of the brake
cylinders so as to exactly proportion the pressure of the blocks
on the wheels to the speed with which the latter are revolving. In other, and more scientific, language the force with which the
brake-blocks are pressed upon the wheels is made to adjust itself
automatically as the "coefficient of dynamic friction augments with
the reduction of train speed." It hardly needs to be said that in
this way the power of the brake is enormously increased. In America the superiority of the Westinghouse over any other
description of train-brake has long been established through that
large preponderance of use which in such matters constitutes the
final and irreversible verdict. [26] In Europe, however, and
especially in Great Britain, ever since the Shipton-on-Cherwell
accident in 1874, the battle of the brakes, as it may not
inappropriately be called, has waxed hotter and hotter; and not only
has this battle been extremely interesting in a scientific way, but
it has been highly characteristic, and at times enlivened by touches
of human nature which were exceedingly amusing. [26] In Massachusetts, for instance, where no official pressure
  in favor of any particular brake was brought to bear, out of 473
  locomotives equipped with train-brakes 361 have the Westinghouse,
  which is also applied to 1,363 out of 1,669 cars. Of these, however,
  79 locomotives and 358 cars are equipped with both the atmospheric
  and the vacuum brakes. The English battle of the brakes may be said to have fairly opened
with the official report from Captain Tyler on the Shipton accident,
in reference to which he expressed the opinion, which has already
been quoted in describing the accident, that "if the train had
been fitted with continuous brakes throughout its whole length
there is no reason why it should not have been brought to rest
without any casuality." The Royal Commission on railroad accidents
then took the matter up and called for a series of scientifically
conducted experiments. These took place under the supervision of
two engineers appointed by the Commission, who were aided by a
detail of officers and men from the royal engineers. Eight brakes
competed, and a train, consisting of a locomotive and thirteen
cars, was specially prepared for each. With these trains some
seventy runs were made, and their results recorded and tabulated;
the experiments were continued through six consecutive working
days. Of the brakes experimented with three were American in their
origin,--Westinghouse's automatic and vacuum, and Smith's vacuum. The remainder were English, and were steam, hydraulic, and air
brakes; among them also was one simple emergency brake. The result
of the trials was a very decided victory for the Westinghouse
automatic, and upon its performances the Commission based its
conclusion that trains ought to be so equipped that in cases of
emergency they could be brought to rest, when travelling on level
ground at 50 miles an hour, within a distance of 275 yards; with
an allowance of distance in cases of speed greater or less than
50 miles nearly proportioned to its square. These allowances they
tabulated as follows:--

  At 60 miles per hour, stopping distance within 400 yards.
  " 55        "            "           "        340   "
  "  50        "            "           "        275   "
  "  45        "            "           "        220   "
  "  40        "            "           "        180   "
  "  35        "            "           "        135   "
  "  30        "            "           "        100   "

To appreciate the enormous advance in what may be called stopping
power which these experiments revealed, it should be added that
the first series of experiments made at Newark were with trains
equipped only with the hand-brake. The average speed in these
experiments was 47 miles, and with the train-brake, according to the
foregoing tabulation, the stop should have been made in about 250
yards; in reality it was made in a little less than five times that
distance, or 1120 yards; in other words the experiments showed that
the improved appliances had more than quadrupled the control over
trains. It has already been noticed that in the cases of the Angola
and the Port Jervis disasters, as well as in that at Shipton, the
trains ran some 2,700 feet before they could be stopped. Under the
English tabulations above given, in the results of which certain
recent improvements do not enter, a train running into the 42d
Street Station in New York, at a speed of forty-five miles an hour
when under the entrance arches, would be stopped before it reached
the buffers at the end of the covered tracks. The Royal Commission experiments were followed in May and June,
1877, by yet others set on foot by the North Eastern Railway
Company for the purpose of making a competitive test of the
Westinghouse automatic and the Smith's vacuum brakes. At this trial
also the average stop at a speed of 50 miles an hour was effected
in 15 seconds, and within a distance of 650 feet. Other series
of experiments with similar results were, about the same time,
conducted under the auspices of the Belgian and German governments,
of which elaborate official reports were made. The result was that
at last, under date of August 30, 1877, the Board of Trade issued
a circular to the railway companies in which it called attention to
the fact that, notwithstanding all the discussion which had taken
place and the elaborate official trials which the government had set
on foot, there had "apparently been no attempt on the part of the
various companies to take the first step of agreeing upon what are
the requirements which, in their opinion, are essential to a good
continuous brake." In other words, the Board found that, instead of
becoming better, matters were rapidly becoming worse. Each company
was equipping its rolling stock with that appliance in which its
officers happened to be interested as owners or inventors, and when
carriages thus equipped passed from the tracks of one road onto
those of another the result was a return to the old hand-brake
system in a condition of impaired efficiency. The Board accordingly
now proceeded to narrow down the field of selection by specifying
the following as what it considered the essentials of a good
continuous brake:--

     _a._ "The brakes to be efficient in stopping trains,
     instantaneous in their actions, and capable of being applied
     without difficulty by engine-drivers or guards. _b._ "In case of accident, to be instantaneously self-acting. _c._ "The brakes to be put on and taken off (with facility) on
     the engine and on every vehicle of a train. _d._ "The brakes to be regularly used in daily working. _e._ "The materials employed to be of a durable character, so as
     to be easily maintained and kept in order." These requirements pointed about as directly as they could to the
Westinghouse, to the exclusion of all competing brakes. Not more
than one other complied with them in all respects, and many made
no pretence of complying at all. Then followed what may be termed
the battle royal of the brakes, which as yet shows no signs of
drawing to a close. As the avowed object of the Board of Trade was
to introduce, one brake, to the necessary exclusion of all others,
throughout the railroad system of Great Britain, the magnitude of
the prize was not easy to over-estimate. The weight of scientific
and official authority was decidedly in favor of the Westinghouse
automatic, but among the railroad men the Smith vacuum found
the largest number of adherents. It failed to meet three of the
requirements of the Board of Trade, in that it was neither automatic
nor instantaneous in its action, while the materials employed in
it were not of a durable character. It was, on the other hand, a
brake of unquestioned excellence, while it commended itself to the
judgment of the average railroad official by its simplicity, and to
that of the average railroad director by its apparent cheapness. Any
one could understand it, and its first cost was temptingly small. The real struggle in Great Britain, therefore, has been, and now
is, between these two brakes; and the fact that both of them are
American has been made to enter largely into it, and in a way also
which at times lent to the discussion an element of broad humor. For instance, the energetic agent of the Smith vacuum, feeling
himself aggrieved by some statement which appeared in the _Times_,
responded thereto in a circular, in the composition of which he
certainly evinced more zeal than either judgment or literary skill. This circular and its author were then referred to by the editors
of _Engineering_, a London scientific journal, in the following
slightly _de haut en bas_ style:--

     "It is not a little remarkable, and it is a fact not harmonious
     with the feelings of English engineers, that the two brakes
     recommending themselves for adoption are of American origin. * * * Now we cannot wonder, considering what our past experience
     has been in many of our dealings with Americans, that this
     feeling of distrust and prejudice exists. It is not merely
     sentimental, it is founded on many and untoward and costly
     experiences of the past, and the fear of similar experiences in
     the future. And when we see the representative of one of these
     systems adopting the traditional policy of his country, and
     meeting criticism with abuse--abuse of men pre-eminent in the
     profession, and journals which he apparently forgets are neither
     American nor venal--we do not wonder that our railway engineers
     feel a repugnance to commit themselves." The superiority of the British over the American controversialist,
as respects courtesy and restraint in language, being thus
satisfactorily established, it only remained to illustrate it. This, however, had already been done in the previous May; for at
that time it chanced that Captain Tyler, having retired from his
position at the head of the railway inspectors department of the
Board of Trade, was considering an offer which Mr. Westinghouse had
made him to associate himself with the company owning the brakes
known by that name. Before accepting this offer, Captain Tyler
took advantage of a meeting of the Society of Arts to publicly
give notice that he was considering it. This he did in a really
admirable paper on the whole subject of continuous brakes, at the
close of which a general discussion was invited and took place, and
in the course of it the innate superiority of the British over any
other kind of controversialist, so far at least as courtesy and a
delicate refraining from imputations is concerned, received pointed
illustration. Houghton, C. E., took
occasion to refer to the paper he had read as "an elaborate puff
to the Westinghouse brake, with which he [Tyler] was, as he told,
connected, or about to be." Steele proceeded to say
that:--

     "On receiving the invitation to be present at the meeting, he
     had been somewhat afraid that Captain Tyler was going to lose
     his fine character for impartiality by throwing in his lot with
     the brake-tinkers, but it came out that not only was he going to
     do that, but actually going to be a partner in a concern. * * *
     The speaker then proceeded to discuss the Westinghouse brake,
     which he called the Westinghouse and Tyler brake, designating
     it as a jack-in-the-box, a rattle trap, to please and decoy,
     and not an invention at all. No engineer had a hand in its
     manufacture. It was the discovery of some Philadelphia barber
     or some such thing. This was
     a brake which had all sorts of pretensions. It had not worked
     well, but whenever there was any row about its not working
     well, they got the papers to praise it up, and that was how the
     papers were under the thumb, and would not speak of any other. * * * He thought it would not do for railway companies to take
     a bad brake, and Captain Tyler and Mr. Westinghouse be able
     to make their fortunes by floating a limited company for its
     introduction. They had heard of Emma mines and Lisbon tramways,
     and such like, and he felt it would not be well to stand by and
     allow this to be done." All of which was not only to the point, but finely calculated to
show the American inventors and agents who were present the nice and
mutually respectful manner in which such discussions were carried on
by all Englishmen. Though the avowed adhesion of Sir Henry Tyler to the Westinghouse
was a most important move in the war of the brakes, it did not
prove a decisive one. The complete control of the field was too
valuable a property to be yielded in deference to that, or any other
name without a struggle; and, so to speak, there were altogether
too many ins and outs to the conflict. Back door influences had
everywhere to be encountered. The North Western, for instance, is
the most important of the railway companies of the United Kingdom. The locomotive superintendent of that company was the part inventor
and proprietor of an emergency brake which had been extensively
adopted by it on its rolling stock, but which wholly failed to meet
the requirements laid down in its circular by the Board of Trade. Immediately after issuing that circular the Board of Trade called
the attention of the company to this fact in connection with an
accident which had recently occurred, and in very emphatic language
pointed out that the brakes in question could not "in any reasonable
sense of the word be called continuous brakes," and that it was
clear that the circular requirements were "not complied with by the
brake-system of the London & North Western Railway Company;" in case
that company persisted in the use of that brake, the secretary of
the Board went on to say, "in the event of a casualty occurring,
which an efficient system of brakes might have prevented, a heavy
personal responsibility will rest upon those who are answerable for
such neglect." This was certainly language tolerably direct in its
import. As such it was calculated to cause those to whom it was
addressed to pause in their action. The company, however, treated it
with a superb disregard, all the more contemptuous because veiled
in language of deferential civility. They then quietly went on
applying their locomotive superintendent's emergency brake to their
equipment, until on the 30th of June, 1879, they returned no less
than 2,052 carriages fitted with it; that being by far the largest
number returned by any one company in the United Kingdom. A more direct challenge to the Board of Trade and to Parliament
could not easily have been devised. To appreciate how direct it
was, it is necessary to bear in mind that in its circular of August
30, 1877, in which the requirements of a satisfactory train-brake
were laid down, the Board of Trade threw out to the companies
the very significant hint, that they "would do well to reflect
that if a doubt should arise that from a conflict of interest or
opinion, or from any other cause, they [the companies] are not
exerting themselves, it is obvious that they will call down upon
themselves an interference which the Board of Trade, no less than
the companies, desire to avoid." In his general report on the
accidents of the year 1877, the successor of Captain Tyler expressed
the opinion that "sufficient information and experience would now
appear to be available, and the time is approaching when the railway
companies may fairly be expected to come to a decision as to which
of the systems of continuous brakes is best calculated to fulfil the
requisite conditions, and is most worthy of general adoption." At
the close of another year, however, the official returns seemed to
indicate that, while but a sixth part of the passenger locomotives
and a fifth part of the carriages in use on the railroads of the
United Kingdom were yet equipped with continuous brakes at all, a
concurrence of opinion in favor of any one system was more remote
than ever. During the six months ending December 31, 1878, but 127
additional locomotives out of about 4000, and 1,200 additional
carriages out of some 32,000 were equipped; of which 70 locomotives
and 530 carriages had been equipped with the Smith vacuum, which in
three most important respects failed to comply with the Board of
Trade requirements. Under these circumstances the Board of Trade
was obviously called upon either to withdraw from the position it
had taken, or to invite that "interference" in its support to which
in its circular of August, 1877 it had so portentously referred. It
decided to do the latter, and in March, 1879 the government gave an
intimation in the House of Lords that early Parliamentary action was
contemplated. As it is expressed, the railway companies are to "be
relieved of their indecision." In Great Britain, therefore, the long battle of the brakes would
seem to be drawing to its close. The final struggle, however,
will be a spirited one, and one which Americans will watch with
considerable interest,--for it is in fact a struggle between two
American brakes, the Westinghouse and the Smith vacuum. Of the
907 locomotives hitherto equipped with the continuous brakes no
less than 819 are equipped with one or the other of these American
patents, besides over 4,464 of the 9,919 passenger carriages. The
remaining 3,857 locomotives and 30,000 carriages are the prize of
victory. As the score now stands the vacuum brake is in almost
exactly twice the use of its more scientific rival. The weight
of authority and experience, and the requirements of the Board of
Trade, are, however, on the opposite side. As deduced from the European scientific tests and the official
returns, the balance of advantages would seem to be as follows:--In
favor of the vacuum are its superficial simplicity, and possible
economy in first cost:--In favor of the Westinghouse automatic are
its superior quickness in application, the greater rapidity in
its stopping power, the more durable nature of its materials, the
smaller cost in renewal, its less liability to derangement, and
above all its self-acting adjustment. The last is the point upon
which the final issue of the struggle must probably turn. The use
of any train-brake which is not automatic in its action, as has
already been pointed out, involves in the long run disaster,--and
ultimate serious disaster. The mere fact that the brake is generally
so reliable,--that ninety-nine times out of the hundred it works
perfectly,--simply makes disaster certain by the fatal confidence
it inspires. Ninety-nine times in a hundred the brake proves
reliable;--nine times in the remaining ten of the thousand, in which
it fails, a lucky chance averts disaster;--but the thousandth time
will assuredly come, as it did at Communipaw and on the New York
Elevated railway, and, much the worst of all yet, at Wollaston. Soon or late the use of non-automatic continuous brakes will most
assuredly, if they are not sooner abandoned, be put an end to
by the occurrence of some not-to-be forgotten catastrophe of the
first magnitude, distinctly traceable to that cause. Meanwhile that
automatic brakes are complicated and sometimes cause inconvenience
in their operation is most indisputable. This is an objection, also,
to which they are open in common with most of the riper results of
human ingenuity;--but, though sun-dials are charmingly simple, we do
not, therefore, discard chronometers in their favor; neither do we
insist on cutting our harvests with the scythe, because every man
who may be called upon to drive a mowing machine may not know how
to put one together. But what Sir Henry Tyler has said in respect
to this oldest and most fallacious, as well as most wearisome, of
objections covers the whole ground and cannot be improved upon. After referring to the fact that simplicity in construction and
simplicity in working were two different things, and that, almost
invariably, a certain degree of complication in construction is
necessary to secure simplicity in working,--after pointing this out
he went on to add that,--

     "Simplicity as regards the application of railway brakes is
     not obtained by the system now more commonly employed of
     brake-handles to be turned by different men in different
     parts of the train; but is obtained when, by more complicated
     construction an engine-driver is able easily in an instant to
     apply ample brake-power at pleasure with more or less force
     to every wheel of his train; is obtained when, every time an
     engine-driver starts, or attempts to start his train, the brake
     itself informs him if it is out of order; and is still more
     obtained when, on the occasion of an accident and the separation
     of a coupling, the brakes will unfailingly apply themselves on
     every wheel of the train without the action of the engine-driver
     or guards, [brakemen], and before even they have time to realize
     the necessity for it. This is true simplicity in such a case,
     and that system of continuous brakes which best accomplishes
     such results in the shortest space of time is so far preferable
     to all others." THE RAILROAD JOURNEY RESULTING IN DEATH. One day in May, 1847, as the Queen of Belgium was going from
Verviers to Brussels by rail, the train in which she was journeying
came into collision with another train going in the opposite
direction. There was naturally something of a panic, and, as
royalty was not then accustomed to being knocked about with
railroad equality, some of her suite urged the queen to leave the
train and to finish her journey by carriage. The contemporaneous
court reporter then went on to say, in that language which is
so peculiarly his own,--"But her Majesty, as courageously as
discreetly, declined to set that example of timidity, and she
proceeded to Brussels by the railway." In those days a very
exaggerated idea was universally entertained of the great danger
incident to travel by rail. Even then, however, had her Majesty, who
was doubtless a very sensible woman, happened to be familiar with
the statistics of injuries received by those traveling respectively
by rail and by carriage, she certainly never on any plea of danger
would have been induced to abandon her railroad train in order to
trust herself behind horse-flesh. By pursuing the course urged
upon her, the queen would have multiplied her chances of accident
some sixty fold. Strange as the statement sounds even now, such
would seem to have been the fact. In proportion to the whole number
carried, the accidents to passengers in "the good old days of
stage-coaches" were, as compared to the present time of the railroad
dispensation, about as sixty to one. This result, it is true, cannot
be verified in the experience either of England or of this country,
for neither the English nor we possess any statistics in relation
to the earlier period; but they have such statistics in France,
stretching over the space of more than forty years, and as reliable
as statistics ever are. If these French statistics hold true in New
England,--and considering the character of our roads, conveyances,
and climate, their showing is more likely to be in our favor than
against us,--if they simply hold true, leaving us to assume that
stage-coach traveling was no less safe in Massachusetts than in
France, then it would follow that to make the dangers of the rail
of the present day equal to those of the highway of half a century
back, some eighty passengers should annually be killed and some
eleven hundred injured within the limits of Massachusetts alone. These figures, however, represent rather more than fifty times the
actual average, and from them it would seem to be not unfair to
conclude that, notwithstanding the great increase of population and
the yet greater increase in travel during the last half-century,
there were literally more persons killed and injured each year in
Massachusetts fifty years ago through accidents to stage-coaches
than there are now through accidents to railroad trains. The first impression of nine out of ten persons in no way connected
with the operations of railroads would probably be found to be
the exact opposite to this. A vague but deeply rooted conviction
commonly prevails that the railroad has created a new danger;
that because of it the average human being's hold on life is more
precarious than it was. The first point-blank, bald statement to the
contrary would accordingly strike people in the light not only of a
paradox, but of a somewhat foolish one. Investigation, nevertheless,
bears it out. The fact is that when a railroad accident comes, it is
apt to come in such a way as to leave no doubt whatever in relation
to it. It is heralded like a battle or an earthquake; it fills
columns of the daily press with the largest capitals and the most
harrowing details, and thus it makes a deep and lasting impression
on the minds of many people. When a multitude of persons, traveling
as almost every man now daily travels himself, meet death in such
sudden and such awful shape, the event smites the imagination. People seeing it and thinking of it, and hearing and reading of
it, and of it only, forget of how infrequent occurrence it is. It
was not so in the olden time. Every one rode behind horses,--if not
in public then in private conveyances,--and when disaster came it
involved but few persons and was rarely accompanied by circumstances
which either struck the imagination or attracted any great public
notice. In the first place, the modern newspaper, with its perfect
machinery for sensational exaggeration, did not then exist,--having
itself only recently come in the train of the locomotive;--and, in
the next place, the circle of those included in the consequences of
any disaster was necessarily small. For
weeks and months the vast machinery moves along, doing its work
quickly, swiftly, safely; no one pays any attention to it, while
millions daily make use of it. It is as much a necessity of their
lives as the food they eat and the air they breathe. Suddenly,
somehow, and somewhere,--at Versailles, at Norwalk, at Abergele, at
New Hamburg, or at Revere,--at some hitherto unfamiliar point upon
an insignificant thread of the intricate iron web, an obstruction is
encountered, a jar, as it were, is felt, and instantly, with time
for hardly an ejaculation or a thought, a multitude of human beings
are hurled into eternity. It is no cause for surprise that such an
event makes the community in which it happens catch its breadth;
neither is it unnatural that people should think more of the few who
are killed, of whom they hear so much, than of the myriads who are
carried in safety and of whom they hear nothing. Yet it is well to
bear in mind that there are two sides to that question also, and in
no way could this fact be more forcibly brought to our notice than
by the assertion, borne out by all the statistics we possess, that,
irrespective of the vast increase in the number of those who travel,
a greater number of passengers in stage-coaches were formerly
each year killed or injured by accidents to which they in no way
contributed through their own carelessness, than are now killed
under the same conditions in our railroad cars. In other words, the
introduction of the modern railroad, so far from proportionately
increasing the dangers of traveling, has absolutely diminished them. It is not, after all, the dangers but the safety of the modern
railroad which should excite our special wonder. What is the average length of the railroad journey resulting in
death by accident to a prudent traveler?--What is the average length
of one resulting in some personal injury to him?--These are two
questions which interest every one. Few persons, probably, start
upon any considerable journey, implying days and nights on the
rail, without almost unconsciously taking into some consideration
the risks of accident. Visions of collision, derailment, plunging
through bridges, will rise unbidden. Even the old traveler who
has enjoyed a long immunity is apt at times, with some little
apprehension, to call to mind the musty adage of the pitcher and
the well, and to ask himself how much longer it will be safe for
him to rely on his good luck. A hundred thousand miles, perhaps,
and no accident yet!--Surely, on every doctrine of chances, he
now owes to fate an arm or a leg;--perhaps a life. The statistics
of a long series of years enable us, however, to approximate with
a tolerable degree of precision to an answer to these questions,
and the answer is simply astounding;--so astounding, in fact,
that, before undertaking to give it, the question itself ought to
be stated with all possible precision. It is this:--Taking all
persons who as passengers travel by rail,--and this includes all
dwellers in civilized countries,--what number of journeys of the
average length are safely accomplished, to each one which results
in the death or injury of a passenger from some cause over which he
had no control?--The cases of death or injury must be confined to
passengers, and to those of them only who expose themselves to no
unnecessary risk. When approaching a question of this sort, statisticians are apt to
assume for their answers an appearance of mathematical accuracy. It is needless to say that this is a mere affectation. The best
results which can be arrived at are, after all, mere approximations,
and they also vary greatly year by year. The body of facts from
which conclusions are to be deduced must cover not only a definite
area of space, but also a considerable lapse of time. Even Great
Britain, with its 17,000 miles of track and its hundreds of millions
of annual passenger journeys, shows results which, one year with
another, vary strangely. For instance, during the four years
anterior to 1874, but one passenger was killed, upon an average, to
each 11,000,000 carried; while in 1874 the proportion, under the
influence of a succession of disasters, suddenly doubled, rising to
one in every 5,500,000; and then again in 1877, a year of peculiar
exemption, it fell off to one in every 50,000,000. The percentage of
fatal casualties to the whole number carried was in 1847-9 five fold
what it was in 1878. If such fluctuations reveal themselves in the
statistics of Great Britain, those met with in the narrower field of
a single state in this country might well seem at first glance to
set all computation at defiance. During the ten years, for example,
between 1861 and 1870, about 200,000,000 passengers were returned
as carried on the Massachusetts roads, with 135 cases of injury to
individuals. Then came the year of the Revere disaster, and out of
26,000,000 carried, no less than 115 were killed or injured. Seven
years of comparative immunity then ensued, during which, out of
240,000,000 carried, but two were killed and forty-five injured. In other words, through a period of ten years the casualties were
approximately as one to 1,500,000; then during a single year they
rose to one in 250,000, or a seven-fold increase; and then through
a period of seven years they diminished to one in 3,400,000, a
decrease of about ninety per cent. Taking, however, the very worst of years,--the year of the
Revere disaster, which stands unparalleled in the history of
Massachusetts,--it will yet be found that the answer to the question
as to the length of the average railroad journey resulting in death
or in injury will be expressed, not in thousands nor in hundreds
of thousands of miles, but in millions. During that year some
26,000,000 passenger journeys were made within the limits of the
state, and each journey averaged a distance of about 13 miles. It
would seem, therefore, that, even in that year, the average journey
resulting in death was 11,000,000 miles, while that resulting either
in death or personal injury was not less than 3,300,000. The year 1871, however, represented by no means a fair average. On the contrary, it indicated what may fairly be considered an
excessive degree of danger, exciting nervous apprehensions in the
breasts of those even who were not constitutionally timid. To reach
what may be considered a normal average, therefore, it would be
more proper to include a longer period in the computation. Take,
for instance, the nine years, 1871-79, during which alone has
any effort been made to reach statistical accuracy in respect to
Massachusetts railroad accidents. During those nine years, speaking
in round numbers and making no pretence at anything beyond a
general approximation, some 303,000,000 passenger journeys of 13
miles each have been made on the railroads and within the state. Of these 51 have resulted in death and 308 in injuries to persons
from causes over which they had no control. The average distance,
therefore, traveled by all, before death happened to any one, was
about 80,000,000 miles, and that travelled before any one was either
injured or killed was about 10,800,000. The Revere disaster of 1871, however, as has been seen, brought
about important changes in the methods of operating the railroads
of Massachusetts. Consequently the danger incident to railroad
traveling was materially reduced; and in the next eight years
(1872-9) some 274,000,000 passenger journeys were made within the
limits of the state. The Wollaston disaster of October, 1878, was
included in this period, during which 223 persons were injured and
21 were killed. The average journey for these years resulting in any
injury to a passenger was close upon 15,000,000 miles, while that
resulting in death was 170,000,000. But it may fairly be asked,--What, after all, do these figures
mean?--They are, indeed, so large as to exceed comprehension; for,
after certain comparatively narrow limits are passed the practical
infinite is approached, and the mere adding of a few more ciphers
after a numeral conveys no new idea. On the contrary, the piling up
of figures rather tends to weaken than to strengthen a statement,
for to many it suggests an idea of ridiculous exaggeration. Indeed,
when a few years ago a somewhat similar statement to that just made
was advanced in an official report, a critic undertook to expose
the fallacy of it in the columns of a daily paper by referring to a
case within the writer's own observation in which a family of three
persons had been killed on their very first journey in a railroad
car. It is not, of course, necessary to waste time over such a
criticism as this. Railroad accidents continually take place, and
in consequence of them people are killed and injured, and of these
there may well be some who are then making their first journey by
rail; but in estimating the dangers of railroad traveling the much
larger number who are not killed or injured at all must likewise be
taken into consideration. Any person as he may be reading this page
in a railroad car may be killed or injured through some accident,
even while his eye is glancing over the figures which show how
infinitesimal his danger is; but the chances are none the less as a
million to one that any particular reader will go down to his grave
uninjured by any accident on the rail, unless it be occasioned by
his or her own carelessness. Admitting, therefore, that ill luck or hard fortune must fall to
the lot of certain unascertainable persons, yet the chances of
incurring that ill fortune are so small that they are not materially
increased by any amount of traveling which can be accomplished
within the limits of a human life. So far from exhausting a fair
average immunity from accident by constant traveling, the statistics
of Massachusetts during the last eight years would seem to indicate
that if any given person were born upon a railroad car, and remained
upon it traveling 500 miles a day all his life, he would, with
average good fortune, be somewhat over 80 years of age before he
would be involved in any accident resulting in his death or personal
injury, while he would attain the highly respectable age of 930
years before being killed. Even supposing that the most exceptional
average of the Revere year became usual, a man who was killed by
an accident at 70 years of age should, unless he were fairly to be
accounted unlucky, have accomplished a journey of some 440 miles
every day of his life, Sundays included, from the time of his birth
to that of his death; while even to have brought him within the
fair liability of any injury at all, his daily journey should have
been some 120 miles. Under the conditions of the last eight years
his average daily journey through the three score years and ten to
entitle him to be killed in an accident at the end of them would be
about 600 miles. THE RAILROAD DEATH RATE. In connection with the statistics of railroad casualties it is not
without interest to examine the general vital statistics of some
considerable city, for they show clearly enough what a large degree
of literal truth there was in the half jocose proposition attributed
to John Bright, that the safest place in which a man could put
himself was inside a first-class railroad carriage of a train in
full motion. Take the statistics of Boston, for instance, for the
year 1878. During the four years 1875-8, it will be remembered, a
single passenger only was killed on the railroads of Massachusetts
in consequence of an accident to which he by his own carelessness
in no way contributed. [27] The average number of persons annually
injured, not fatally, during those years was about five. [27] This period did not include the Wollaston disaster, as the
  Massachusetts railroad year closes on the last day of September. The
  Wollaston disaster occurred on the 8th of October, 1878, and was
  accordingly included in the next railroad year. Yet during the year 1878, excluding all cases of mere injury of
which no account was made, no less than 53 persons came to their
deaths in Boston from falling down stairs, and 37 more from falling
out of windows; seven were scalded to death in 1878 alone. In the
year 1874 seventeen were killed by being run over by teams in
the streets, while the pastime of coasting was carried on at a
cost of ten lives more. During the five years 1874-8 there were
more persons murdered in the city of Boston alone than lost their
lives as passengers through the negligence of all the railroad
corporations in the whole state of Massachusetts during the nine
years 1871-8; though in those nine years were included both the
Revere and the Wollaston disasters, the former of which resulted
in the death of 29, and the latter of 21 persons. Neither are the
comparative results here stated in any respect novel or peculiar
to Massachusetts. Years ago it was officially announced in France
that people were less safe in their own houses than while traveling
on the railroads; and, in support of this somewhat startling
proposition, statistics were produced showing fourteen cases of
death of persons remaining at home and there falling over carpets,
or, in the case of females, having their garments catch fire, to ten
deaths on the rail. Even the game of cricket counted eight victims
to the railroad's ten. It will not, of course, be inferred that the cases of death or
injury to passengers from causes beyond their control include
by any means all the casualties involved in the operation of the
railroad system. On the contrary, they include but a very small
portion of them. The experience of the Massachusetts roads during
the seven years between September 30, 1871, and September 30,
1878, may again be cited in reference to this point. During that
time there were but 52 cases of injury to passengers from causes
over which they had no control, but in connection with the entire
working of the railroad system no less than 1,900 cases of injury
were reported, of which 1,008 were fatal; an average of 144 deaths a
year. Of these cases, naturally, a large proportion were employs,
whose occupation not only involves much necessary risk, but whose
familiarity with risk causes them always to incur it even in the
most unnecessary and foolhardy manner. During the seven years 293
of them were killed and 375 were reported as injured. Nor is it
supposed that the list included by any means all the cases of injury
which occurred. About one half of the accidents to employs are
occasioned by their falling from the trains when in motion, usually
from freight trains and in cold weather, and from being crushed
between cars while engaged in coupling them together. From this last
cause alone an average of 27 casualties are annually reported. One
fact, however, will sufficiently illustrate how very difficult it is
to protect this class of men from danger, or rather from themselves. As is well known, on freight trains they are obliged to ride on the
tops of the cars; but these are built so high that their roofs come
dangerously near the bottoms of the highway bridges, which cross
the track sometimes in close proximity to each other. Accordingly
many unfortunate brakemen were killed by being knocked off the
trains as they passed under these bridges. With a view to affording
the utmost possible protection against this form of accident, a
statute was passed by the Massachusetts legislature compelling the
corporations to erect guards at a suitable distance from every
overhead bridge which was less than eighteen feet in the clear
above the track. These guards were so arranged as to swing lightly
across the tops of the cars, giving any one standing upon them a
sharp rap, warning him of the danger he was in. This warning rap,
however, so annoyed the brakemen that the guards were on a number of
the roads systematically destroyed as often as they were put up; so
that at last another law had to be passed, making their destruction
a criminal offense. The brakemen themselves resisted the attempt
to divest their perilous occupation of one of its most insidious
dangers. In this respect, however, brakemen differ in no degree from the
rest of the community. On all hands railroad accidents seem to
be systematically encouraged, and the wonder is that the list of
casualties is not larger. In Massachusetts, for instance, even in
the most crowded portions of the largest cities and towns, not
only do the railroads cross the highways at grade, but whenever new
thoroughfares are laid out the people of the neighborhood almost
invariably insist upon their crossing the railroads at a grade
and not otherwise. Not but that, upon theory and in the abstract,
every one is opposed to grade-crossings; but those most directly
concerned always claim that their particular crossing is exceptional
in character. In vain do corporations protest and public officials
argue; when the concrete case arises all neighborhoods become alike
and strenuously insist on their right to incur everlasting danger
rather than to have the level of their street broken. During the
last seven years to September 30, 1878, 191 persons have been
injured, and 98 of them fatally injured, at these crossings in
Massachusetts, and it is certain as fate that the number is destined
to annually increase. What the result in a remote future will be, it
is not now easy to forecast. One thing only would seem certain: the
time will come when the two classes of traffic thus recklessly made
to cross each other will at many points have to be separated, no
matter at what cost to the community which now challenges the danger
it will then find itself compelled to avoid. The heaviest and most regular cause of death and injury involved
in the operation of the railroad system yet remains to be referred
to; and again it is recklessness which is at the root of it, and
this time recklessness in direct violation of law. The railroad
tracks are everywhere favorite promenades, and apparently even
resting-places, especially for those who are more or less drunk. In Great Britain physical demolition by a railroad train is also a
somewhat favorite method of committing suicide, and that, too, in
the most deliberate and cool-blooded manner. Cases have not been
uncommon in which persons have been seen to coolly lay themselves
down in front of an advancing train, and very neatly effect their
own decapitation by placing their necks across the rail. In England
alone, during the last seven years, there have been no less than 280
cases of death reported under the head of suicides, or an average
of 40 each year, the number in 1878 rising to 60. In America these
cases are not returned in a class by themselves. Under the general
head of accidents to trespassers, however, that is, accidents to
men, women and children, especially the latter, illegally lying,
walking, or playing on the tracks or riding upon the cars,--under
this head are regularly classified more than one third of all
the casualties incident to working the Massachusetts railroads. During the last seven years these have amounted to an aggregate
of 724 cases of injury, no less than 494 of which were fatal. Of
course, very many other cases of this description, which were not
fatal, were never reported. And here again the recklessness of the
public has received further illustration, and this time in a very
unpleasant way. Certain corporations operating roads terminating
in Boston endeavored at one time to diminish this slaughter by
enforcing the laws against walking on railroad tracks. A few
trespassers were arrested and fined, and then the resentment of
those whose wonted privileges were thus interfered with began to
make itself felt. Obstructions were found placed in the way of night
trains. The mere attempt to keep people from risking their lives
by getting in the way of locomotives placed whole trains full of
passengers in imminent jeopardy. Undoubtedly, however, by far the most effective means of keeping
railroad tracks from becoming foot-paths, and thus at once putting
an end to the largest item in the grand total of the expenditure
of life incident to the operation of railroads, is that secured
by the Pennsylvania railroad as an unintentional corollary to its
method of ballasting. That superb organization, every detail of
whose wonderful system is a fit subject for study to all interested
in the operation of railroads, has a roadway peculiar to itself. A principal feature in this is a surface of broken stone ballast,
covering not only the space between the rails, but also the interval
between the tracks as well as the road-bed on the outside of each
track for a distance of some three feet. It resembles nothing so
much as a newly macadamized highway. That, too, is its permanent
condition. To walk on the sharp and uneven edges of this broken
stone is possible, with a sufficient expenditure of patience and
shoe-leather; but certainly no human being would ever walk there
from preference, or if any other path could be found. Not only is
it in itself, as a system of ballasting, looked upon as better than
any other, but it confounds the tramp. Its systematic adoption in
crowded, suburban neighborhoods would, therefore, answer a double
purpose. It would secure to the corporations permanent road-beds
exclusively for their own use, and obviate the necessity of arrests
or futile threats to enforce the penalties of the law against
trespassers. It seems singular that this most obvious and effective
way of putting a stop to what is both a nuisance and a danger has
not yet been resorted to by men familiar with the use of spikes and
broken glass on the tops of fences and walls. Meanwhile, taken even in its largest aggregate, the loss of life
incident to the working of the railroad system is not excessive, nor
is it out of proportion to what might reasonably be expected. It is
to be constantly borne in mind, not only that the railroad performs
a great function in modern life, but that it also and of necessity
performs it in a very dangerous way. A practically irresistible
force crashing through the busy hive of modern civilization at a
wild rate of speed, going hither and thither, across highways and
by-ways and along a path which is in itself a thoroughfare,--such an
agency cannot be expected to work incessantly and yet never to come
in contact with the human frame. Naturally, however, it might be a
very car of Juggernaut. Is it so in fact?--To demonstrate that it
is not, it is but necessary again to recur to the comparison between
the statistics of railroad accidents and those which necessarily
occur in the experience of all considerable cities. Take again those
of Boston and of the railroad system of Massachusetts. These for the
purpose of illustration are as good as any, and in their results
would only be confirmed in the experience of Paris as compared with
the railroad system of France, or in that of London as compared with
the railroad system of Great Britain. During the eight years between
September 30, 1870, and September 30, 1878, the entire railroad
system of Massachusetts was operated at a cost of 1,165 lives, apart
from all cases of injury which did not prove fatal. The returns in
this respect also may be accepted as reasonably accurate, as the
deaths were all returned, though the cases of merely personal injury
probably were not. During the ten
years, 1868-78, 2,587 cases of death from accidental causes, or 259
a year, were recorded as having taken place in the city of Boston. In other words, the annual average of deaths by accident in the city
of Boston alone exceeds that consequent on running all the railroads
of the state by eighty per cent. Unless, therefore, the railroad
system is to be considered as an exception to all other functions of
modern life, and as such is to be expected to do its work without
injury to life or limb, this showing does not constitute a very
heavy indictment against it. AMERICAN AS COMPARED WITH FOREIGN RAILROAD ACCIDENTS. Up to this point, the statistics and experience of Massachusetts
only have been referred to. This is owing to the fact that the
railroad returns of that state are more carefully prepared and
tabulated than are those of any other state, and afford, therefore,
more satisfactory data from which to draw conclusions. The
territorial area from which the statistics are in this case derived
is very limited, and it yet remains to compare the results deduced
from them with those derived from the similar experience of other
communities. This, however, is not an easy thing to do; and, while
it is difficult enough as respects Europe, it is even more difficult
as respects America taken as a whole. This last fact is especially
unfortunate in view of the circumstance that, in regard to railway
accidents, the United States, whether deservedly or not, enjoy a
most undesirable reputation. Foreign authorities have a way of
referring to our "well-known national disregard of human life," with
a sort of complacency, at once patronizing and contemptuous, which
is the reverse of pleasing. Judging by the tone of their comments,
the natural inference would be that railroad disasters of the worst
description were in America matters of such frequent occurrence
as to excite scarcely any remark. As will presently be made very
apparent, this impression, for it is only an impression, can, so
far as the country as a whole is concerned, neither be proved nor
disproved, from the absence of sufficient data from which to argue. As respects Massachusetts, however, and the same statement may
perhaps be made of the whole belt of states north of the Potomac and
the Ohio, there is no basis for it. There is no reason to suppose
that railroad traveling is throughout that region accompanied by any
peculiar or unusual degree of danger. The great difficulty, just referred to, in comparing the results
deduced from equally complete statistics of different countries,
lies in the variety of the arbitrary rules under which the
computations in making them up are effected. As an example in
point, take the railroad returns of Great Britain and those of
Massachusetts. They are in each case prepared with a great deal
of care, and the results deduced from them may fairly be accepted
as approximately correct. As respects accidents, the number of
cases of death and of personal injury are annually reported, and
with tolerable completeness, though in the latter respect there is
probably in both cases room for improvement. The whole comparison
turns, however, on the way in which the entire number of passengers
annually carried is computed. In Great Britain, for instance, in
1878, these were returned, using round numbers only, at 565,000,000,
and in Massachusetts at 34,000,000. By dividing these totals by
the number of cases of death and injury reported as occurring
to passengers from causes beyond their control, we shall arrive
apparently at a fair comparative showing as to the relative safety
of railroad traveling in the two communities. The result for that
particular year would have been that while in Great Britain one
passenger in each 23,500,000 was killed, and one in each 481,600
injured from causes beyond their control, in Massachusetts none
were killed and only one in each 14,000,000 was in any way injured. Unfortunately, however, a closer examination reveals a very great
error in the computation, affecting every comparative result drawn
from it. In the English returns no allowance whatever is made
for the very large number of journeys made by season-ticket or
commutation passengers, while in Massachusetts, on the contrary,
each person of this class enters into the grand total as making two
trips each day, 156 trips on each quarterly ticket, and 626 trips on
each annual. Now in 1878 more than 418,000 holders of season tickets
were returned by the railway companies of Great Britain. How many
of these were quarterly and how many were annual travelers, does not
appear. If they were all annual travelers, no less than 261,000,000
journeys should be added to the 565,000,000 in the returns, in order
to arrive at an equal basis for a comparison between the foreign
and the American roads: this method, however, would be manifestly
inaccurate, so it only remains, in the absence of all reliable data,
and for the purpose of comparison solely, to strike out from the
Massachusetts returns the 8,320,727 season-ticket passages, which at
once reduces by over 3,000,000 the number of journeys to each case
of injury. As season-ticket passengers do travel and are exposed to
danger in the same degree as trip-ticket passengers, no result is
approximately accurate which leaves them out of the computation. At
present, however, the question relates not to the positive danger or
safety of traveling by rail, but to its relative danger in different
communities. Allowance for this discrepancy can, however, be made by adding to
the English official results an additional nineteen per cent., that,
according to the returns of 1877 and 1878, being the proportion
of the season-ticket to other passengers on the roads of Great
Britain. Taking then the Board of Trade returns for the eight
years 1870-7, it will be found that during this period about one
passenger in each 14,500,000 carried in that country has been killed
in railroad accidents, and about one in each 436,000 injured. This may be assumed as a fair average for purpose of comparison,
though it ought to be said that in Great Britain the percentage of
casualties to passengers shows a decided tendency to decrease, and
during the years 1877-8 the percentages of killed fell from one in
15,000,000 to one in 38,000,000 and those of injured from one in
436,000 to one in 766,000. The aggregates from which these results
are deduced are so enormous, rising into the thousands of millions,
that a certain degree of reliance can be placed on them. In the
case of Massachusetts, however, the entire period during which the
statistics are entitled to the slightest weight includes only eight
years, 1872-9, and offers an aggregate of but 274,000,000 journeys,
or but about forty per cent. of those included in the British
returns of the single year 1878. During these years the killed in
Massachusetts were one in each 13,000,000 and the injured one in
each 1,230,000;--or, while the killed in the two cases were very
nearly in the same proportion,--respectively one in 14.5, and one in
13, speaking in millions,--the British injured were really three to
one of the Massachusetts. The equality as respects the killed in this comparison, and the
marked discrepancy as respects the injured is calculated at first
sight to throw doubts on the fullness of the Massachusetts returns. There seems no good reason why the injured should in the one case
be so much more numerous than in the other. This, however, is
susceptible on closer examination of a very simple and satisfactory
explanation. In case of accident the danger of sustaining slight
personal injury is not so great in Massachusetts as in Great
Britain. This is due to the heavier and more solid construction
of the American passenger coaches, and their different interior
arrangement. This fact, and the real cause of the large number of
slightly injured,--"shaken" they call it,--in the English railroad
accidents is made very apparent in the following extract from Mr. Calcroft's report for 1877;--

     "It is no doubt a fact that collisions and other accidents to
     railway trains are attended with less serious consequences
     in proportion to the solidity of construction of passenger
     carriages. The accomodation and internal arrangements of
     third-class carriages, however, especially those used in
     ordinary trains, are defective as regards safety and comfort,
     as compared with many carriages of the same class on foreign
     railways. The first-class passenger, except when thrown against
     his opposite companion, or when some luggage falls upon him, is
     generally saved from severe contusion by the well-stuffed or
     padded linings of the carriages; whilst the second-class and
     third-class passenger is generally thrown with violence against
     the hard wood-work. If the second and third-class carriages
     had a high padded back lining, extending above the head of the
     passenger, it would probably tend to lesson the danger to life
     and limb which, as the returns of accidents show, passengers
     in carriages of this class are much exposed to in train
     accidents. "[28]

 [28] _General Report to the Board of Trade upon the accidents which
  have occurred on the Railways of the United Kingdom during the year
  1877, p. 37._

In 1878 the passenger journeys made in the second and third class
carriages of the United Kingdom were thirteen to one of those made
in first class carriages;--or, expressed in millions, there were
but 41 of the latter to 523 of the former. There can be very little
question indeed that if, during the last ten years, thirteen out
of fourteen of the passengers on Massachusetts railroads had been
carried in narrow compartments with wooden seats and unlined sides
the number of those returned as slightly injured in the numerous
accidents which occurred would have been at least three-fold larger
than it was. If it had not been ten-fold larger it would have been
surprising. The foregoing comparison, relates however, simply to passengers
killed in accidents for which they are in no degree responsible. When, however, the question reverts to the general cost in life
and limb at which the railroad systems are worked and the railroad
traffic is carried on to the entire communities served, the
comparison is less favorable to Massachusetts. Taking the eight
years of 1871-8, the British returns include 30,641 cases of injury,
and 9,113 of death; while those of Massachusetts for the same
years included 1,165 deaths, with only 1,044 cases of injury; in
the one case a total of 39,745 casualties, as compared with 2,209
the other. It will, however be noticed that while in the British
returns the cases of injury are nearly three-fold those of death, in
the Massachusetts returns the deaths exceed the cases of injury. This fact in the present case cannot but throw grave suspicion
on the completeness of the Massachusetts returns. As a matter of
practical experience it is well known that cases of injury almost
invariably exceed those of death, and the returns in which the
disproportion is greatest, if no sufficient explanation presents
itself, are probably the most full and reliable. Taking, therefore,
the deaths in the two cases as the better basis for comparison, it
will be found that the roads of Great Britain in the grand result
accomplished seventeen-fold the work of those of Massachusetts with
less than eight times as many casualties; had the proportion between
the results accomplished and the fatal injuries inflicted been
maintained, but 536 deaths instead of 1,165 would have appeared in
the Massachusetts returns. The reason of this difference in result
is worth looking for, and fortunately the statistical tables are
in both cases carried sufficiently into detail to make an analysis
possible; and this analysis, when made, seems to indicate very
clearly that while, for those directly connected with the railroads,
either as passengers or as employs, the Massachusetts system
in its working involves relatively a less degree of danger than
that of Great Britain, yet for the outside community it involves
very much more. Take, for instance, the two heads of accidents
at grade-crossings and accidents to trespassers, which have been
already referred to. In Great Britain highway grade-crossings
are discouraged. The results of the policy pursued may in each case be read
with sufficient distinctness in the bills of mortality. During the
years 1872-7, of 1,929 casualties to persons on the railroads of
Massachusetts, no less than 200 occurred at highway grade crossings. Had the accidents of this description in Great Britain been equally
numerous in proportion to the larger volume of the traffic of that
country, they would have resulted in over 3,000 cases of death or
personal injury; they did in fact result in 586 such cases. In
Massachusetts, again, to walk at will on any part of a railroad
track is looked upon as a sort of prescriptive and inalienable
right of every member of the community, irrespective of age, sex,
color, or previous condition of servitude. Accordingly, during the
six years referred to, this right was exercised at the cost of life
or limb to 591 persons,--one in four of all the casualties which
occurred in connection with the railroad system. In Great Britain
the custom of using the tracks of railroads as a foot-path seems to
exist, but, so far from being regarded as a right, it is practiced
in perpetual terror of the law. Accordingly, instead of some 9,000
cases of death or injury from this cause during these six years,
which would have been the proportion under like conditions in
Massachusetts, the returns showed only 2,379. These two are among
the most constant and fruitful causes of accident in connection with
the railroad system of America. In great Britain their proportion
to the whole number of casualties which take place is scarcely a
seventh part of what it is in Massachusetts. Here they constitute
very nearly fifty per cent. of all the accidents which occur; there
they constitute but a little over seven. There is in this comparison
a good deal of solid food for legislative thought, if American
legislators would but take it in; for this is one matter the public
policy in regard to which can only be fixed by law. When we pass from Great Britain to the continental countries of
Europe, the difficulties in the way of any fair comparison of
results become greater and greater. The statistics do not enter
sufficiently into detail, nor is the basis of computation apparent. It is generally conceded that, where a due degree of caution is
exercised by the passenger, railroad traveling in continental
countries is attended with a much less degree of danger than in
England. When we come to the returns, they hardly bear out this
conclusion; at least to the degree commonly supposed. Nowhere is human life more carefully guarded than in
that country; yet their returns show that of 866,000,000 passengers
transported on the French railroads during the eleven years 1859-69,
no less than 65 were killed and 1,285 injured from causes beyond
their control; or one in each 13,000,000 killed as compared with one
in 10,700,000 in Great Britain; and one in every 674,000 injured
as compared with one in each 330,000 in the other country. During
the single year 1859, about 111,000,000 passengers were carried
on the French lines, at a general cost to the community of 2,416
casualties, of which 295 were fatal. In Massachusetts, during the
four years 1871-74, about 95,000,000 passengers were carried, at
a reported cost of 1,158 casualties. This showing might well be
considered favorable to Massachusetts did not the single fact that
her returns included more than twice as many deaths as the French,
with only a quarter as many injuries, make it at once apparent that
the statistics were at fault. Under these circumstances comparison
could only be made between the numbers of deaths reported; which
would indicate that, in proportion to the work done, the railroad
operations of Massachusetts involved about twice and a half more
cases of injury to life and limb than those of the French service. As respects Great Britain the comparison is much more favorable, the
returns showing an almost exactly equal general death-rate in the
two countries in proportion to their volumes of traffic; the volume
of Great Britain being about four times that of France, while its
death-rate by railroad accidents was as 1,100 to 295. With the exception of Belgium, however, in which country the
returns cover only the lines operated by the state, the basis
hardly exists for a useful comparison between the dangers of injury
from accident on the continental railroads and on those of Great
Britain and America. The several systems are operated on wholly
different principles, to meet the needs of communities between
whose modes of life and thought little similarity exists. The
continental trains are far less crowded than either the English or
the American, and, when accidents occur, fewer persons are involved
in them. The movement, also, goes on under much stricter regulation
and at lower rates of speed, so that there is a grain of truth in
the English sarcasm that on a German railway "it almost seems as
if beer-drinking at the stations were the principal business, and
traveling a mere accessory." Limiting, therefore, the comparison to the railroads of Great
Britain, it remains to be seen whether the evil reputation of the
American roads as respects accidents is wholly deserved. Is it
indeed true that the danger to a passenger's life and limbs is so
much greater in this country than elsewhere?--Locally, and so far
as Massachusetts at least is concerned, it certainly is not. How
is it with the country taken as a whole?--The lack of all reliable
statistics as respects this wide field of inquiry has already been
referred to. We do not know with
accuracy even the number of miles of road operated; much less the
number of passengers annually carried. As respects accidents, and
the deaths and injuries resulting therefrom, some information may be
gathered from a careful and very valuable, because the only record
which has been preserved during the last six years in the columns of
the _Railroad Gazette_. It makes, of course, no pretence at either
official accuracy or fullness, but it is as complete probably as
circumstances will permit of its being made. During the five years
1874-8 there have been included in this record 4,846 accidents,
resulting in 1,160 deaths and 4,650 cases of injury;--being an
average of 969 accidents a year, resulting in 232 deaths and 930
cases of injury. These it will be remembered are casualties directly
resulting either to passengers or employs from train accidents. No account is taken of injuries sustained by employs in the
ordinary operation of the roads, or by members of the community
not passengers. In Massachusetts the accidents to passengers and
employs constitute one-half of the whole, but a very small portion
of the injuries reported as sustained by either passengers or
employs are the consequence of train accidents,--not one in three
in the case of passengers or one in seven in that of employs. In
fact, of the 2,350 accidents to persons reported in Massachusetts
in the nine years 1870-8, but 271, or less than twelve per cent.,
belonged to the class alone included in the reports of the _Railroad
Gazette_. In England during the four years 1874-7 the proportion
was larger, being about twenty-five instead of twelve per cent. For
America at large the Massachusetts proportion is undoubtedly the
most nearly correct, and the probabilities would seem to be that
the annual average of injuries to persons incident to operating the
railroads of the United States is not less than 10,000, of which at
least 1,200 are due to train accidents. Of these about two-thirds
may be set down as sustained by passengers, or, approximately, 800 a
year. It remains to be ascertained what proportion this number bears to
the whole number carried. There are no reliable statistics on this
head any more than on the other. Nothing but an approximation of
the most general character is possible. The number of passengers
annually carried on the roads of a few of the states is reported
with more or less accuracy, and averaging these the result would
seem to indicate that there are certainly not more than 350,000,000
passengers annually carried on the roads of all the states. There
is something barbarous about such an approximation, and it is
disgraceful that at this late day we should in America be forced
to estimate the passenger movement on our railroads in much the
same way that we guess at the population of Africa. We are in this respect far in the rear of civilized
communities. Taking, however, 350,000,000 as a fair approximation
to our present annual passenger movement, it will be observed that
it is as nearly as may be half that of Great Britain. In Great
Britain, in 1878, there were 1,200 injuries to passengers from
accidents to trains, and 675 in 1877. The average of the last eight
years has been 1,226. If, therefore, the approximation of 800 a
year for America is at all near the truth, the percentage would seem
to be considerably larger than that arrived at from the statistics
of Great Britain. Meanwhile it is to be noted that while in Great
Britain about 25 cases of injury are reported to each one of death,
in America but four cases are reported to each death--a discrepancy
which is extremely suggestive. Perhaps, however, the most valuable
conclusion to be drawn from these figures is that in America we as
yet are absolutely without any reliable railroad statistics on this
subject at all. Taken as a whole, however, and under the most favorable showing,
it would seem to be a matter of fair inference that the dangers
incident to railroad traveling are materially greater in the United
States than in any country of Europe. How much greater is a question
wholly impossible to answer. So that when a statistical writer
undertakes to show, as one eminent European authority has done, that
in a given year on the American roads one passenger in every 286,179
was killed, and one in every 90,737 was injured, it is charitable
to suppose that in regard to America only is he indebted to his
imagination for his figures. Neither is it possible to analyze with any satisfactory degree of
precision the nature of the accidents in the two countries, with
a view to drawing inferences from them. Without attempting to do
so it maybe said that the English Board of Trade reports for the
last five years, 1874-8, include inquiries into 755 out of 11,585
accidents, the total number of every description reported as having
taken place. Meanwhile the _Railroad Gazette_ contains mention of
4,846 reported train accidents which occurred in America during
the same five years. Of these accidents, 1,310 in America and 81
in Great Britain were due to causes which were either unexplained
or of a miscellaneous character, or are not common to the systems
of the two countries. In so far as the remainder admitted of
classification, it was somewhat as follows:--

                                   GREAT BRITAIN. Accidents due to

    Defects in permanent way        13 per cent. 24 per cent.

     " "   rolling-stock        10   "   "       8  "   "

    Misplaced switches              16   "   "      14  "   "

  Collisions

    Between trains going in
      opposite directions            3   "   "      18  "   "

    Between trains following
      each other                     5   "   "      30  "   "

    At railroad grade crossings[29]  0.6 "   "       3  "   "

    At junctions                    11   "   "

    At stations or sidings within
      fixed stations                40   "   "       6  "   "

  Unexplained                                        2  "   "

  [29] During these five years there were in Great Britain four cases
  of collision between locomotives or trains at level crossings of one
  railroad by another; in America there were 79. The probable cause of
  this discrepancy has already been referred to (_ante pp. The above record, though almost valueless for any purpose of exact
comparison, reveals, it will be noticed, one salient fact. Out of
755 English accidents, no less than 406 came under the head of
collisions--whether head collisions, rear collisions, or collisions
on sidings or at junctions. In other words, to collisions of some
sort between trains were due considerably more than half (54 per
cent.) of the accidents which took place in Great Britain, while
only 88, or less than 13 per cent. of the whole, were due to
derailments from all causes. In America on the other hand, while
of the 3,763 accidents recorded, 1,324, or but one-third part (35
per cent.) were due to collisions, no less than 586, or 24 per
cent., were classed under the head of derailments, due to defects
in the permanent way. During the the six years 1873-8 there were
in all 1698 cases of collision of every description between trains
reported as occurring in America to 1495 in the United Kingdom; but
while in America the derailments amounted to no less than 4016, or
more than twice the collisions, in the United Kingdom they were
but 817, or a little more than half their number. It has already
been noticed that the most disastrous accidents in America are apt
to occur on bridges, and Ashtabula and Tariffville at once suggest
themselves. Under the heading
of "Failures of Tunnels, Bridges, Viaducts or Culverts," there
were returned in that country during the six years 1873-8 only 29
accidents in all; while during the same time in America, under the
heads of broken bridges or tressels and open draws, the _Gazette_
recorded no less than 165. These figures curiously illustrate the
different manner in which the railroads of the two countries have
been constructed, and the different circumstances under which they
are operated. The English collisions are distinctly traceable to
constant overcrowding; the American derailments and bridge accidents
to inferior construction of our road-beds. Finally, what of late years has been done to diminish the dangers
of the rail?--What more can be done?--Few persons realize what a
tremendous pressure in this respect is constantly bearing down upon
those whose business it is to operate railroads. A great accident is
not only a terrible blow to the pride and prestige of a corporation,
not only does it practically ruin the unfortunate officials involved
in it, but it entails also portentous financial consequences. Juries
proverbially have little mercy for railroad corporations, and, when
a disaster comes, these have practically no choice but to follow the
scriptural injunction to settle with their adversaries quickly. The
Revere catastrophe, for instance, cost the railroad company liable
on account of it over half a million of dollars; the Ashtabula
accident over $600,000; the Wollaston over $300,000. A few years ago
in England a jury awarded a sum of $65,000 for damages sustained
through the death of a single individual. During the five years,
1867-71, the railroad corporations of Great Britain paid out over
$11,000,000 in compensation for damages occasioned by accidents. In
view, merely, of such money consequences of disaster, it would be
most unnatural did not each new accident lead to the adoption of
better appliances to prevent its recurrence. [30]

  [30] The other side of this proposition has been argued with
  much force by Mr. William Galt in his report as one of the Royal
  Commission of 1874 on Railway Accidents. Galt's individual
  report bears date February 5, 1877, and in it he asserts that, as
  a matter of actual experience, the principle of self-interest on
  the part of the railway companies has proved a wholly insufficient
  safeguard against accidents. However it may be in theory, he
  contends that, taking into consideration the great cost of the
  appliances necessary to insure safety to the public on the one side,
  and the amount of damages incident to a certain degree of risk on
  the other side, the possible saving in expenditure to the companies
  by assuming the risk far exceeds the loss incurred by an occasional
  accident. The companies become, in a word, insurers of their
  passengers,--the premium being found in the economies effected by
  not adopting improved appliances of recognized value, and the losses
  being the damages incurred in case of accident. He treats the whole
  subject at great length and with much knowledge and ability. His
  report is a most valuable compendium for those who are in favor of a
  closer government supervision over railroads as a means of securing
  an increased safety from accident. To return, however, to the subject of railroad accidents, and the
final conclusion to be drawn from the statistics which have been
presented. That conclusion briefly stated is that the charges of
recklessness and indifference so generally and so widely advanced
against those managing the railroads cannot for an instant be
sustained. After all, as was said in the beginning of the present
volume, it is not the danger but the safety of the railroad which
should excite our special wonder. If any one doubts this, it is
very easy to satisfy himself of the fact,--that is, if by nature
he is gifted with the slightest spark of imagination. It is but
necessary to stand once on the platform of a way-station and to
look at an express train dashing by. There are few sights finer;
few better calculated to quicken the pulse. The glare of the head-light, the rush and throb of the
locomotive,--the connecting rod and driving-wheels of which seem
instinct with nervous life,--the flashing lamps in the cars, and
the final whirl of dust in which the red tail-lights vanish almost
as soon as they are seen,--all this is well calculated to excite
our admiration; but the special and unending cause for wonder is
how, in case of accident, anything whatever is left of the train. As it plunges into the darkness it would seem to be inevitable
that something must happen, and that, whatever happens, it must
necessarily involve both the train and every one in it in utter
and irremediable destruction. Here is a body weighing in the
neighborhood of two hundred tons, moving over the face of the earth
at a speed of sixty feet a second and held to its course only by two
slender lines of iron rails;--and yet it is safe!--We have seen how
when, half a century ago, the possibility of something remotely like
this was first discussed, a writer in the _British Quarterly_ earned
for himself a lasting fame by using the expression that "We should
as soon expect people to suffer themselves to be fired off upon
one of Congreve's _ricochet_ rockets, as to trust themselves to the
mercy of such a machine, going at such a rate;"--while Lord Brougham
exclaimed that "the folly of seven hundred people going fifteen
miles an hour, in six trains, exceeds belief." At the time they
wrote, the chances were ninety-nine in a hundred that both reviewer
and correspondent were right; and yet, because reality, not for the
first nor the last time, saw fit to outstrip the wildest flights of
imagination, the former at least blundered, by being prudent, into
an immortality of ridicule. The thing, however, is still none the
less a miracle because it is with us matter of daily observation. That, indeed, is the most miraculous part of it. At all hours of the
day and of the night, during every season of the year, this movement
is going on. It depends for its even action
on every conceivable contingency, from the disciplined vigilance
of thousands of employs to the condition of the atmosphere, the
heat of an axle, or the strength of a nail. The vast machine is in
constant motion, and the derangement of a single one of a myriad of
conditions may at any moment occasion one of those inequalities of
movement which are known as accidents. Yet at the end of the year,
of the hundreds of millions of passengers fewer have lost their
lives through these accidents than have been murdered in cold blood. Not without reason, therefore, has it been asserted that, viewing
at once the speed, the certainty, and the safety with which the
intricate movement of modern life is carried on, there is no more
creditable monument to human care, human skill, and human foresight
than the statistics of railroad accidents. Accidents, railroad, about stations, 166.
    at highway crossings, 165.
      level railroad crossings, 94,165, 245, 258.
    aggravated by English car construction and stoves, 14, 41, 106,
          255.
    comments on early, 9.
    damages paid for certain, 267.
    due to bridges, 99, 206, 266.
      broken tracks, 166.
      car couplings, 117.
      collisions, 265.
      derailments, 13, 16, 23, 54, 79, 84.
        in Great Britain, 266. America, 266.
      draw-bridges, 82, 266.
      fire in train, 31.
      oil-tanks, 72.
      oscillation, 50.
      telegraph, 66.
      telescoping, 43.
      want of bell-cords, 32.
        brake power, 12, 119.
    increased safety resulting from, 2, 29, 155, 205.
    precautions against early, 10.
    statistics of, in America, 263. Great Britain, 236, 252, 257, 263. Massachusetts, 232-60.
      general, 228-70. _List of Accidents specially described or referred to_:--

      _Abergele, August 20, 1868, 72._

      _Angola, December 18, 1867, 12._

      _Ashtabula, December 29, 1876, 100._

      _Brainerd, July 27, 1875, 108._

      _Brimfield, October, 1874, 56._

      _Bristol, March 7, 1865, 150._

      _Carr's Rock, April 14, 1867, 120._

      _Camphill, July 17, 1856, 61._

      _Charlestown Bridge, November 21, 1862, 95._

      _Claypole, June 21, 1870, 85._

      _Communipaw Ferry, November 11, 1876, 207._

      _Croydon Tunnel, August 25, 1861, 146._

      _Des Jardines Canal, March 12, 1857, 112._

      _Foxboro, July 15, 1872, 53._

      _Franklin Street, New York city, June, 1879, 207._

      _Gasconade River, November 1, 1855, 108._

      _On Great Western Railway of Canada, October, 1856, 55._

      _On Great Western Railway of England, December 24, 1841, 43._

      _Heeley, November 22, 1876, 209._

      _Helmshire, September 4, 1860, 121._

      _On Housatonic Railroad, August 16, 1865, 151._

      _Huskisson, William, death of, September 15, 1830, 5._

      _Lackawaxen, July 15, 1864, 63._

      _Morpeth, March 25, 1877, 209._

      _New Hamburg, February 6, 1871, 78._

      _Norwalk, May 6, 1853, 89._

      _Penruddock, September 2, 1870, 143._

      _Port Jervis, June 17, 1858, 118._

      _Prospect, N. Y., December 24, 1872, 106._

      _Rainhill, December 23, 1832, 10._

      _Randolph, October 13, 1876, 24._

      _Revere, August 26, 1871, 125._

      _Richelieu River, June 29, 1864, 91._

      _Shipton, December 24, 1874, 16._

      _Shrewsbury River, August 9, 1877, 96._

      _Tariffville, January 15, 1878, 107._

      _Thorpe, September 10, 1874, 66._

      _Tyrone, April 4, 1875, 69._

      _Versailles, May 8, 1842, 58._

      _Welwyn Tunnel, June 10, 1866, 149._

      _Wemyss Bay Junction, December 14, 1878, 212._

      _Wollaston, October 8, 1878, 20._

  American railroad accidents, statistics of, 97, 260-6.
    locomotive engineers, intelligence of, 159.
    method of handling traffic, extravagance of, 183. Angola, accident at, 12, 201, 218. Ashtabula, accident at, 100, 267. Assaults in English railroad carriages, 33, 35, 38. Automatic electric block, 159,
      reliability of, 168,
      objections to, 174.
    train-brake, essentials of, 219.
      necessity for, 202, 237. Bell-cord, need of any, questioned, 29.
    accidents from want of, 31.
    assaults, etc., in absence of, 32-41. Beloeil, Canada, accident at, 92. Block system, American, 165.
    automatic electric, 159.
      objections to, 174.
    cost of English, 165. English, why adopted, 162.
      accident in spite of, 145.
      ignorance of, in America, 160.
    importance of, 145. Boston, passenger travel to and from, 183.
    possible future station in, 198.
    some vital statistics of, 241, 249. Boston & Albany railroad, accident on, 56. Boston & Maine railroad, accident on, 96. Boston & Providence railroad, accident on, 53. Brakes, original and improved, 200.
    the battle of the, 216.
    true simplicity in, 228. Inefficiency of hand, 201, 204.
      emergency, 202.
    necessity of automatic, continuous, 202, 227. _See Train-brake._

  Bridge accidents, 98, 266. Bridges, insufficient safeguards at, 98.
    protection of, 111. Bridge-guards, destroyed by brakemen, 244. Brougham, Lord, comments on death of Mr. Buffalo, Correy & Pittsburg railroad, accident on, 106. Burlington & Missouri River railroad, accident on, 70. Butler, B. F., on Revere accident, 142. Calcoft, Mr., extract from reports of, 196, 255. Caledonian railway, accident on, return of brake stoppages by, 211. Camden & Amboy railroad, accident on, 151. Central Railroad of New Jersey, accident on, 96. Charlestown bridge, accident on, 95. Collisions, head, 61-2.
    in America, 265. Great Britain, 265.
    occasioned by use of telegraph, 66.
    rear-end, 144-52. Communipaw Ferry, accident at, 207. Cannon Street Station in London, traffic at, 163, 183, 194. Connecticut law respecting swing draw-bridges, 82, 94, 195. American railroad, 41, 52, 65, 161, 205. Coupling, accidents due to, 117.
    the original, 49. Crossings, level, of railways, accidents at, 165.
    need of interlocking apparatus at, 195.
    stopping trains at, 95, 195. Derailments, accidents from, 13, 16, 23, 54, 79, 84.
    statistics of, 265. Draw-bridge accidents, 82, 97, 114.
      stopping as a safeguard against, 95.
    need of interlocking apparatus at, 195. Economy, cost of a small, 174.
    at risk of accident, 268. English railways, train movement on, 162, 194. Erie railroad, accidents on, 63, 118, 120. France, statistics of accidents in, 259.
    panic produced in, by Versailles accident, 60. Franklin Street, New York city, accident at, 207. Galt, William, report by, on accidents, 268. Grand Trunk railway, accident on, 91. Great Northern railway, accidents on, 84, 149. Great Western railway, accidents on, 16, 43, 112.
    of Canada, accidents on, 31, 112. Harrison, T. E., extract from letter of, 210. Highway crossings at level, accidents at, 165, 170, 244, 258.
    interlocking at, 195. Housatonic railroad, accident on, 151. Huskisson, William, death of, 3, 200. Inclines, accidents upon, 74, 110, 121. Interlocking, chapter relating to, 182.
    at draw-bridges, 97, 195.
      level crossings, 195.
    practical simplicity of, 189.
    use made of in England, 192. Investigation of accidents, no systematic, in America, 86. Lake Shore & Michigan Southern railroad, accident on, 100. Lancashire & Yorkshire railroad, accident on, 121. Legislation against accidents, futility of 94, 109.
    as regards use of telegraphs, 64.
      interlocking at draws, 97.
        level crossings, 97. London & Brighton railway, accident on, 145. London & North Western railway, assaults on, 32, 38.
    accidents on, 72, 143.
    train brake used by, 222. Manchester & Liverpool railway, accidents on, 10, 11, 45.
    opening of, 3. Massachusetts, statistics of accidents in, 156, 232-60.
    train-brakes in use in, 157, 214. Metropolitan Elevated railroad, accident on, 207.
    interlocking apparatus used by, 196. Midland railway, accident on, 209.
    protests against interlocking, 192. Miller's Platform and Buffer, chapter on, 49-57.
    accidents avoided by, 19, 53, 56, 70.
    in Massachusetts, 157. Mohawk Valley railroad, pioneer train on, 48. Murders, number of, compared with the killed by railroad accidents,
        242. New York City, passenger travel of, 184. New York, Providence & Boston railroad, accident on, 106. New York & New Haven railroad, accident on, 89. Newark, brake trials at, in 1874, 217. North Eastern railway, accident in, 209.
    brake trials on, 218.
    returns of brake-stoppages by, 211. Old Colony railroad accidents on, 20, 24, 174. Oscillation, accidents occasioned by, 50. Pacific railroad of Missouri, accident on, 108. Penruddock, accident at, 143. Phillips, Wendell, on Revere accident, 141. Port Jervis accident, 118, 202, 218. _Quarterly Review_ of 1835, article in, 199, 269. _Railroad Gazette_, records of accidents kept by, 261. Rear-end collisions in America, 144, 151. Europe, 143.
    necessity of protection against, 159. Revere accident, 125, 172.
    improvements caused by, 153.
    lessons taught by, 159.
    meeting in consequence of, 161, 205. Richelieu River, accident at, 92. Shrewsbury River draw, accident at, 96. Smith's vacuum brake, 208, 220, 226.
    popularity of in Great Britain, 220, 226.
    compared with Westinghouse, 218, 227. Stopping trains, an insufficient safeguard at draw-bridges and level
        crossings, 94, 97, 195. Stage-coach travelling, accidents in, 231. Stoves in case of accidents, 15, 41, 106. Telegraph, accidents occasioned by use of, 66.
    use of, should be made compulsory, 64. Thorpe, collision at, 67, 172. Train-brake, chapters on, 199, 216. Board of Trade specifications relating to, 219.
    doubts concerning, 28.
    failures of, to work, in Great Britain, 211.
    introduced on English roads, 29, 216.
    kinds of, used in Massachusetts, 157, 214. Sir Henry Tyler on, 222, 228.
    want of, occasioned Shipton accident, 19, 216. Trespassers on railroads, accidents to, 245.
    means of preventing, 245, 258. Tunnels, collisions in, 146, 149. Tyler, Captain H. W., investigated Claypole accident, 85.
    on Penruddock accident, 143.
      train-brakes, 222, 228.
    extracts from reports by, 192, 194, 228. United States, accidents in, 261.
    no investigation of, 86. Vermont & Massachusetts railroad, accident on, 112. Versailles, the, accident of 1842, 58. Wellington, Duke of, at Manchester & Liverpool opening, 3. Wemyss Bay Junction, accident at, 212. Westinghouse brake, chapter on, 199.
    accidents avoided by, 19, 209.
    in Newark, experiments, 217.
    objections urged against, 176.
    stoppages by, occasioned by triple valve, 211.
    use of, in Great Britain, 226. Wollaston accident, 18, 20, 155, 172, 227. *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's note: The following has been moved from the beginning
of the book to the end. =By the same Author.=


=Railroads and Railroad Questions.= 12mo, cloth, $1 25. The volume
treats of "The Genesis of the Railroad System," "Accidents," and
the "Present Railroad Problem." The author has made himself the
acknowledged authority on this group of subjects. If his book goes
only to those who are interested in the ownership, the use, or the
administration of railroads, it is sure of a large circle of readers. --_Railway World._

"Characterized by broad, progressive, liberal ideas." --_Railway
Review._

"The entire conclusions are of great value."--_N.Y. In the more rapid forms of the "Short" Boston, the
rising and sinking upon the second and third movements naturally take
the form of a hop or skip. The dance is more enjoyable and less
fatiguing in moderate tempo. THE OPEN BOSTON

The "Open" Boston contains two parts of eight measures each. The first
part is danced in the positions shown in the illustrations facing pages
8 and 10, and the second part consists of 8 measures of the "Long"
Boston. In the first part, the dancers execute three Boston steps forward,
without turning, and one Boston step turning (towards the partner) to
face directly backward (1/2 turn). This is followed by three Boston steps backward (without turning) in the
position shown in the illustration facing page 10, followed by one
Boston step turning (toward the partner) and finishing in regular Waltz
Position for the execution of the second part. [Illustration]


THE BOSTON DIP

The "Dip" is a combination dance in 3/4 or 3/8 time, and contains 4
measures of the "Long" Boston, preceded by 4 measures, as follows:

Standing upon the left foot, step directly to the side, and transfer the
weight to the right foot (count 1); swing the left leg to the right in
front of the right, at the same time raising the right heel (count 2);
lower the right heel (count 3); return the left foot to its original
place where it receives the weight (count 4); swing the right leg across
in front of the left, raising the left heel (count 5); and lower the
left heel (count 6). Swing the right foot to the right, and put it down directly at the side
of the left (count 1); hop on the right foot and swing the left across
in front (count 2); fall back upon the right foot (count 3); put down
the left foot, crossing in front of the right, and transfer weight to it
(count 4); with right foot step a whole step to the right (count 5); and
finish by bringing the left foot against the right, where it receives
the weight (count 6). In executing the hop upon counts 2 and 3 of the third measure, the
movement must be so far delayed that the falling back will exactly
coincide with the third count of the music. [Illustration]




THE TURKEY TROT

_Preparation:--Side Position of the Waltz._


During the first four measures take four Boston steps without turning
(lady forward, gentleman backward), and bending the supporting knee,
stretch the free foot backward, (lady's left, gentleman's right) as
shown in the illustration opposite. Execute four drawing steps to the side (lady's right, gentleman's left)
swaying the shoulders and body in the direction of the drawn foot, and
pointing with the free foot upon the fourth, as shown in figure. Eight whole turns, Short Boston or Two-Step. *       *       *       *       *

  A splendid specimen for this dance will be found in "The Gobbler" by
  J. Monroe. THE AEROPLANE GLIDE


The "Aeroplane Glide" is very similar to the Boston Dip. It is supposed
to represent the start of the flight of an aeroplane, and derives its
name from that fact. The sole difference between the "Dip" and "Aeroplane" consists in the
six running steps which make up the first two measures. Of these running
steps, which are executed sidewise and with alternate crossings, before
and behind, only the fourth, at the beginning of the second measure
requires special description. Upon this step, the supporting knee is
noticeably bended to coincide with the accent of the music. The rest of the dance is identical with the "Dip". [Illustration]




THE TANGO


The Tango is a Spanish American dance which contains much of the
peculiar charm of the other Spanish dances, and its execution depends
largely upon the ability of the dancers so to grasp the rhythm of the
music as to interpret it by their movements. The steps are all simple,
and the dancers are permitted to vary or improvise the figures at will. Of these figures the two which follow are most common, and lend
themselves most readily to verbal description. 1

The partners face one another as in Waltz Position. The gentleman takes
the lady's right hand in his left, and, stretching the arms to the full
extent, holding them at the shoulder height, he places her right hand
upon his left shoulder, and holds it there, as in the illustration
opposite page 30. In starting, the gentleman throws his right shoulder slightly back and
steps directly backward with his left foot, while the lady follows
forward with her right. In this manner both continue two steps, crossing
one foot over the other and then execute a half-turn in the same
direction. This is followed by four measures of the Two-Step and the
whole is repeated at will. [Illustration]


TANGO No. 2

This variant starts from the same position as Tango No. The gentleman
takes two steps backward with the lady following forward, and then two
steps to the side (the lady's right and the gentleman's left) and two
steps in the opposite direction to the original position. These steps to the side should be marked by the swaying of the bodies as
the feet are drawn together on the second count of the measure, and the
whole is followed by 8 measures of the Two-Step. IDEAL MUSIC FOR THE "BOSTON"


PIANO SOLO

(_Also to be had for Full or Small Orchestra_)

LOVE'S AWAKENING           _J. Danglas_       .60
ON THE WINGS OF DREAM      _J. Danglas_       .60
FRISSON (Thrill!) Sinibaldi_     .50
LOVE'S TRIUMPH             _A. Daniele_       .60
DOUCEMENT                  _G. Robert_        .60
VIENNOISE                  _A. Duval_         .60

These selected numbers have attained success, not alone for their
attractions of melody and rich harmony, but for their rhythmical
flexibility and perfect adaptedness to the "Boston." FOR THE TURKEY TROT

Especially recommended

THE GOBBLER                _J. Monroe_        .50


Any of the foregoing compositions will be supplied on receipt of
one-half the list price. PUBLISHED BY

THE BOSTON MUSIC COMPANY 26 & 28 WEST ST., BOSTON, MASS. TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES:


  Text in italics is surrounded with underscores: _italics_. Care must be taken that the lime of the pearl shells
is used for nothing but the little work that has yet to be done in
the fort, such as the pavements for the canons and the floors of the
galleries in the dwelling houses. The Opperhoofd and other officers
who up to now have been living outside the fort must now move into
it, as there are many reasons why it is undesirable that they should
reside outside--a practice, besides, which is against the Company's
rules with regard to military stations in India. (54)

Provisions and ammunition of war are matters of foremost consideration
if we desire to have our minds at ease with regard to these stations,
for the one is necessary for the maintenance of the garrison and the
officials, while the other is the instrument of defence. These two
things ought at all times to be well provided. His late Excellency
van Mydregt for this reason very wisely ordered that every station
should be stocked with provisions for two years, as may be seen in
the letter sent from Negapatam bearing date March 17, 1688. This is
with regard to the Castle, but as regards the outstations it will be
sufficient if they are provided with rice for six or eight months. On
account of the great expense the Castle has not of late been provided
for two years, but this will soon be changed now that the passage to
Trincomalee and Batticaloa has been opened, even if the scarcity in
Coromandel should continue, or if the Theuver should still persist in
his prohibition of the importation of nely from Tondy. I have heard,
however, that this veto has been withdrawn, and that vessels with this
grain will soon arrive here. If this rumour be true and if a good
deal of rice is sent here from Cotjaar, Tammelegan, and Batticaloa,
a large quantity of it might be purchased on behalf of the Company
with authority of His Excellency the Governor and the Council of
Colombo, which might be obtained by means of our sloops. Perhaps
also the people of Jaffnapatam who come here with their grain may be
prevailed upon to deliver it to the Company at 50 per cent. or so
less, as may be agreed upon. This they owe to their lawful lords,
since the Company has to spend so much in governing and protecting
them. Sanction to this measure was granted by His Excellency van
Mydregt in his letter from Negapatam to Jaffnapatam of June 12, 1688,
which may be looked up. If a calculation be made of the quantity of
provisions required for two years, I think it would be found that it
is no less than 300 lasts of rice a year. This includes provisions
for the garrison and those who would have to come into the fort in
case of a siege, so that 600 lasts would be required for two years,
a last being equal to 3,000 lb. or 75 Ceylon parras, thus in all
45,000 parras. At the rate of one parra per month for each person,
1,875 people could be maintained for two years with this store of
rice. This would be about the number of people the Company would
have to provide for in case of necessity, considering that there are
according to the latest regulations 600 Company's servants, while
there are according to the latest enumeration 1,212 women, children,
and slaves in the town, making a total of 1,812 persons who have to be
fed; so that the above calculation is fairly correct. Sometimes also
Manaar will have to be provided, because Mantotte does not yield a
sufficient quantity of nely to supply that fort for two years. This
must also be included in the calculation, and if Your Honours are
well provided in this manner you will be in a position to assist some
of the married soldiers, the orphanage, and the poor house with rice
from the Company's stores in times of scarcity, and will be able to
prevent the sale in rice being monopolized again. It was the intention
of His Excellency van Mydregt that at such times the Company's stores
should be opened and the rice sold below the bazaar price. Care must
be taken that this favour is not abused, because it has happened
that some of the Company's servants sent natives on their behalf,
who then sold the rice in small quantities at the market price. This
was mentioned in our letter to Colombo of October 1 and December 12,
1695. The Company can hardly have too much rice in store, for it can
always be disposed of with profit when necessary, and therefore I think
600 lasts need not be the limit, so long as there is a sufficient
number of vessels available to bring it. But as rice alone will not
suffice, other things, such as salt, pepper, bacon, meat, &c., must
also be considered. Salt may be obtained in sufficient quantities
in this Commandement, but pepper has to be obtained from Colombo,
and therefore this spice must never be sold or issued from the store
houses until the new supply arrives, keeping always 3,000 or 4,000
lb. Bacon and meat also have to be obtained from Colombo,
and His Excellency the Governor and the Council of Colombo were kind
enough to send us on my verbal request ten kegs of each from Galle
last August by the ship "Nederland." But I find that it has become
stale already, and it must be changed for new as soon as possible,
with authority of His Excellency and the Council, in order that it may
not go further bad. In compliance with the orders of His Excellency
van Mydregt in his letter of November 23, 1687, the old meat and
bacon must be returned to Colombo, and a new supply sent here every
three or four years, the stale meat being supplied in Colombo to
some of the Company's vessels. But considering that His Excellency
the Governor and the Council of Colombo are not always in a position
to supply Jaffnapatam with a sufficient quantity of meat and bacon,
as there are so many other stations in Ceylon to be provided for,
it would be well to keep in mind the advice of the late Mr. Paviljoen
that in emergencies 1,000 or 1,200 cattle could be captured and kept
within the fort, where they could be made to graze on the large plain,
while as much straw from the nely would have to be collected as could
be got together to feed these animals as long as possible. This
small loss the inhabitants would have to bear, as the Company has to
protect them and their lands, and if we are victorious a recompense
could be made afterwards. I would also advise that as much carrawaat
[58] as could be found in the quarters of the Carreas, Palwelys,
[59] and other fishermen should be brought into the fort; because
this dried fish makes a very good and durable provision, except
for the smell. The provision of arrack must also not be forgotten,
because used moderately this drink does as much good to our people as
it does harm when taken in large quantities. As I have heard so many
complaints about the arrack here, as well as in Trincomalee, at the
pearl fishery, at Coromandel, &c., it is apparent that the Company is
not properly served in this respect. On this account also some arrack
was returned from Negapatam and the Bay of Condaatje. Henceforth
no arrack must be accepted which has not been tested by experts,
neither for storing in the warehouses nor for sending to the different
stations, because at present I cannot say whether it is adulterated by
the people who deliver it to the Company or by those who receive it
in the stores, or even by those who transport it in the sloops. With
regard to the munitions of war, I think nothing need be stated here,
but that there is a sufficient stock of it, because by the last stock
taking on August 31, 1696, it appears that there is a sufficient
store of canons, gun-carriages, gunpowder, round and long grenades,
instruments for storming, filled fire bombs, caseshot-bags, martavandes
for the keeping of gunpowder, and everything that pertains to the
artillery. The Arsenal is likewise sufficiently provided with guns,
muskets, bullets, native side muskets, &c. I would only recommend that
Your Honours would continue to have ramrods made for all the musket
barrels which are still lying there, suitable timber for which may be
found in the Wanni. It is from there also that the boards are obtained
for gun-carriages. And as I found that some had not been completed,
I think this work ought to be continued, so that they may be ready
when wanted. No doubt His Excellency the Governor and the Council of
Colombo will be willing to send a sufficient quantity of pitch and
tar for the preservation both of the sloops and the gun-carriages,
which otherwise will soon decay during the heavy rains which we have
here in India. Although the Arsenal is at present well provided with
guns and muskets, it is possible that half of them may be found unfit
for use. I have therefore given orders to examine them all carefully,
so that those that are unfit may be sent to Colombo and from there to
the Fatherland, and new ones returned. Water and fuel are also two of
the most important things to think of for the defence of a fortress,
and I had therefore a large room built behind the smith's shop where
fuel could be stored away. This room must be stocked and closed, and
no fuel issued from it to any one. Those who receive firewood from
the Company may be supplied from that which is daily brought from the
forest. With regard to the water which is found within this Castle,
it is drinkable in cases of emergency, especially in some of the
wells found there. [55]

The military and garrison would be sufficiently strong if the full
number of Europeans allowed for this Commandement by the latest
Batavian regulation of December 29, 1692, could be obtained, which
could not be considered too strong for a Commandement numbering
608 men in all, including those for commercial, civil, judicial,
ecclesiastical, naval, and military services. At present we have only
the following number of persons in the Company's service, who have
to be classified, as they are of different colour and descent, viz. :--


                            Europeans. In the Castle              287         56        7       350
    In Manaar                   52          2        9        63
    In Hammenhiel               21          4        1        26
    In Ponneryn                  1          1       21        23
    In the redoubts the
    "Pyl," "Beschutter,"
    and "Elephant"              11          3       45        59
    For various services,
    also in the Island,
    for  surveying, wood
    felling, &c. 13         10        2        25
                               ===        ===      ===       ===
                    Total      385         76       85       546


In the number of Europeans is included, as stated above, all manner
of Company's servants employed in the Trade, Church, Navigation,
Military Duties, &c., all of which together number 385 men. The 76
mestises and the 85 toepasses will therefore have to be retained until
this Commandement can have its full number of Europeans, and it would
be well if Your Honours would continue to engage a few more toepasses
when they offer themselves, because the Passes are hardly sufficiently
guarded; about which matter communication has been made in our letter
to Colombo of March 5, 1695. Your Honours must also keep in mind the
recommendation of His Excellency van Mydregt in his letter of March
27, 1688, wherein he suggests that a close watch should be kept on
the Wannias, as they are not to be trusted in a case of treason on
the part of the Sinhalese; and on this account the advanced guards
must be always well provided with ammunition and provisions, while
discipline and drill must be well attended to, so that as far as lies
in our power we may be prepared for emergencies. I have been rather prolix in treating of the fortifications and all
that pertains thereto, not so much because I am ignorant of the fact
that the Company's power in India depends more on her naval force
than on her fortresses, but because I consider that since the latter
are in our possession it is our duty to preserve them, as otherwise
the large amount expended on them at the beginning of the Government
in Ceylon would have been spent in vain. [56]

The public works are carried out here without expenditure to the
Company by the Oeliaars, because, as stated before, no cooly wages
are paid here, payment being made only to the native artisans, such
as smiths, carpenters, and masons. The number of men employed is
daily entered in a book by one of the Pennisten of the Comptoirs,
which he has to hand over in the evening to the person whose turn
it will be the next day to do this work. Care must be taken that
these assistants personally see and count the men, and the payments
must be made according to their list and not according to those of
the Dutch foremen or the native Cannecappuls. This is in compliance
with the orders from Batavia. The foremen of the carpenters' yard,
the smiths' shop, the gunpowder mill, and the masonry works must
also every evening, at sunset, bring in their reports with regard to
the progress of the work. This is to be done by the sergeant Hendrik
Rademaker, who, for some years, has been acting as overseer of the
Oeliaars. The Oeliaars are changed on Mondays and Thursdays, each
of them working only for three days at a time, which suffices for
three months, as they owe twelve days of service in the year. Those
who have performed their labour receive an ola from the Cannecappul,
which is called a Sito, and is marked with a steel stamp thus: I-VOC,
which serves them as a receipt. The names of those who fail to appear
are written down by the Cannecappul and by the Majoraal, and they
have to pay a fine which is called sicos. [60] The stamp is in the
custody of the Chief, who also arranges and divides the work among
the Oeliaars. He must see that the sergeant does not allow any of
the coolies to depart before the three days have expired, and making
a profit for himself and causing loss to the Company. Care must also
be taken that no more than 18 persons are employed as Pandarepulles
or native cooly drivers, who are each in charge of 16 to 30 men,
whom they have to keep to their work. These 18 Pandarepulles must be
appointed by written documents, otherwise the sergeant appoints such
officers on his own authority and thus also makes a profit. Then
also it must be seen that the materials, such as timber, bricks,
lime, &c., are not taken to other places than they have been ordered
for by the person in authority, for all these are tricks to which
the Company is subject on the part of the overseers when they see
that no regard is taken of their doings. The principal of the public
works at present in progress is the building of the church within the
fort, [61] which has advanced to 8 feet above the ground, and may be
completed during the southern season, if there is only a sufficient
quantity of bricks. According to my calculation about 1,000,000 more
will be required, which is a large quantity, but will not cost more
than 3 fannums per thousand, and even this expense does not fall to
the Company, but may be found out of the sicos or fines. The Dessave
has the best opportunity for seeing that the work at the brickworks
at Iroewale is pushed on as quickly as possible, so that there may
be no waiting for bricks or tiles, which are also baked there and
paid at the rate of 3 1/2 fannums a thousand. I consider it a shame
that in a country where the cost of building is so small, and where
religion is to be promoted, there should not even be a church in
the fort, a state of things that has existed these last four years,
during which the warehouses had to be used for this purpose, while
many old and infirm people could not attend the services because of
the inconvenience of the steps that lead to them. It would have been
better if the old Portuguese church had not been broken down before
the building of the new church was commenced, because an old proverb
says: "That one must not cast away old shoes till one has got new
ones." [62] However, for the present we must row with the oars we
possess, until the new church is completed, the plan for which is in
the hands of the surveyor Martinus Leusekam. The sergeant in the Wanni,
Harmen Claasz, had already on my orders felled the necessary beams,
and now the rafters must be thought of, which would be best made
of palmyra wood, if they could be obtained sufficiently long. The
timber for the pulpit I hope to send from Mallabaar, but as ebony is
also found in the Wanni, some trees might be felled also there and be
brought down here without expenditure to the Company. As may be seen
in the answers to the questions from Jaffnapatam of March 12, 1691,
and February 17, 1692, authority for the building of this church was
obtained long ago. The only other works required within the Castle
at present are the barracks for the married soldiers; which may be
found indicated in the map, and the rebuilding of the four dwelling
houses yet remaining of the Portuguese buildings which are old and
decayed. They are no longer worth repairing, and it would be best
if they were broken down and new and better houses built on their
site. But before this is done it will be necessary to rebuild the
Armoury, which fell into ruins last December. This building also
remained from the Portuguese. Some new tiles are also required for
the Company's building at Anecatte where the red-dyeing is done,
the cross-beams of which building I had renewed. Likewise a number
of tiles is required for the new warehouses in the island Leyden,
which have been built there in compliance with the orders of His
late Excellency van Mydregt. This was when it was intended to provide
Ceylon with grain from Tansjouwer, [63] which was to be laid up there
before the northern season. These warehouses may yet come in useful
if the Moorish trade flourishes. [57]

The horse stable within the fort has been built in a bad place,
and is very close and unhealthy; so that the animals die one after
another. It would therefore be better if the stable referred to
under the heading of "fortification" and situated outside the fort be
used. If this is done it must be provided with the necessary cribs,
&c., and not more than seven horses have been allowed by the last
regulation. The supervision of the stable has been entrusted for some
time to the Captain Jan van der Bruggen, but I could not approve of
this, and consider it better that this supervision be also left to
the chief person in authority, the more so as the said Captain has
been troubled for the last five years with gout and gravel; so that
he has often to remain at home for weeks, while, even when he is well,
it is impossible for him to go about much, in consequence of weakness
arising from the pain. For this reason he cannot properly supervise
the stable; and this is not the first time he is excused from his
duty, as it was done also during the time of Commandeur Cornelis van
der Duyn, who also considered that it was more in the interest of
the Company that this and other duties should be performed by the
chief instead of by private persons. The Dessave is best aware if
the hides of the stags and elks sent to this stable from the Wanny
and the Passes are properly utilized for saddles, carriages, &c.,
in the said stable, and also in the Arsenal for cartridge cases,
bandoleers, sword-belts, &c. [58]

The hospital was built too low, so that the patients had to lie in
damp places during the northern monsoon. I therefore had the floor
raised, in view of the fact that this is a place where the Company
shows its sympathy with its suffering servants and wishes them to have
every comfort. For this reason also regents are appointed to see that
nothing wrong is done by the doctor or the steward. For some time this
supervision was entrusted to Captain Jan van der Bruggen, but for the
reason stated above I cannot approve of the arrangement any longer,
while moreover, his daughter is the wife of the Chief Surgeon Hendrick
Warnar, who has a very large family, and suspicious people might try to
find fault with the arrangement. The supervision of the hospital must
therefore be entrusted every alternate month to the Administrateur
Biermans and the Lieutenant Claas Isaacsz, as it is against the
principles of the Company to entrust such work to one person only. [59]

The Company's slaves here are few in number, consisting of 82
individuals, including men, boys, women, and children. But no more are
required, as the Oeliaars perform many of the duties for which slaves
would be otherwise required. They are employed in the stable, the
warehouses, the arsenal, the hospital, and with the shipbuilders and
masons. The only pay they receive is 3 fannums and a parra of rice per
month, except some of the masons. This payment is sufficient for some
of them, but not for all, as there are some employed in masonry work
who do their work as well as any of the natives, and, as they have to
maintain a wife and children, the master mason has often recommended
higher pay for them. There is one among the masons who receives
6 fannums a month, another gets 4, and two others 3 fannums. This
might be raised from 6 to 10, from 4 to 8, and from 3 to 6 fannums
respectively, so that these poor people may not be discouraged; and on
the other hand increased pay often produces increased labour, and thus
the Company would perhaps not lose by the extra expense. The matter
must, however, be submitted to His Excellency the Governor, as also
the request of one of the masons that his daughter may be emancipated,
in order to marry a native who has proposed to her. The father offers
in her place as a slave another young and capable woman. There is also
another application for emancipation from a dyer who is now, he says,
60 years of age. The Company would lose nothing in granting this
request, because all he delivers is two or three pieces of ordinary
chintz a year. All these matters must be submitted to His Excellency
the Governor and the Council. [60]

Having now treated of the Wanny, of the lands of Ponneryn and Mantotte
within the Province of Jaffnapatam, and of the fort, we must see what
is to be said with regard to the seacoast, and also if any important
matter has been forgotten. Manaar is the last island on this side, and the banks and islets near
it form together what is called "Adam's Bridge," which closes the
passage between Ceylon and Coromandel. This island also protects
Jaffnapatam on the south, as no vessel could come here without
passing Manaar. The passage through the river is so inconvenient on
account of its shallowness that no vessel can pass without being first
unloaded. Therefore no vessel is able to pass nor any smuggling take
place without its being known in Manaar. It is on this account that
an order was issued by His Excellency the Governor and the Council
in their letter of March 5, 1695, to Jaffnapatam, to the effect that
no smuggled areca-nut from Colombo or Calpentyn must be allowed to
pass there. This was when the trade in these waters was re-opened
for private enterprise from Coromandel, and the order was conveyed
by us to Manaar by letter of March 11. A close watch must be kept,
but so long as the passage of Ramacoil or Lembe in the domain of the
Teuver is so well known by some people as it is said to be, it is
not likely that attempts at smuggling would be made in Manaar. [61]

Manaar not only protects Jaffnapatam, but it also yields to the
Company the profits of Mantotte, Moesely, and Setticoulang, and of
the capture of elephants. The latter might be more if not for the
death of the animals, as, for instance, last year, when not a single
animal delivered by the hunters survived. The hunters must therefore
be encouraged to bring as many as possible. [62]

About 50 or 60 bharen of dye-roots are also yearly obtained from
Manaar, which cultivation must also be attended to, in order that
the Company may be in a position to deliver the red cloths ordered
from this Commandement. [63]

Some revenue is also obtained from taxes and rents. These are yearly
sold to the highest bidder. Last year they were sold for 1 1/2 year,
like those in Jaffnapatam. 2,268, as also
Rds. 879.7.8 for poll tax and land rent in Manaar. The tithes of the
harvest in Mantotte are paid in grain, which is usually issued to the
Company's servants. This amounted on the last occasion to 1,562 1/2
paras of rice. The tax in cooking butter in Mantotte is also paid
in kind and likewise issued to the Company's servants. Besides,
there are 3,000 or 4,000 paras of salt and 10,000 or 12,000 coils
of straw or bark lunt which the inhabitants of the opposite lands
have to deliver, as also chanks from the divers; but these do not
amount to much, for, in 1695, were dived five kinds of cauries to
the amount of 204 5/8 paras, and in 1696 only 94 7/8 paras; so that
the amount for two years was only 299 1/2 paras of cauries. For this
reason I submitted on May 10, 1695, to His Excellency the Governor
and the Council, a proposal from the Moor Perietamby, who offered to
pay the Company yearly Rds. 8,000 for the license to dive for chanks
between Manaar and Calpentyn. This was refused by the reply received
from Colombo on the 17th of the same month. [64]

From the Instructions to Commandeur Blom sent from Colombo on February
17, 1692, it may be seen what prices are paid to the divers for the
chanks, mentioned already under the subject of the Moorish trade,
so that it is not necessary to enter into detail on the subject here. I think that I have now sufficiently explained all matters relating to
this station, and would refer for further information to the report
compiled by Mr. Blom for Governor van Mydregt, which is kept here at
the Secretariate, [64] as also the answers thereto of September 13 and
October 7, 1690. Jorephaas
Vosch for the Opperkoopman Jan de Vogel, bearing date August 30, 1666,
[65] which may also be read, but I think that I have mentioned all
the most important matters with regard to Manaar appearing therein. The pearl fishery is an extraordinary enterprise, the success of
which depends on various circumstances; as there are various causes
by which the banks or the oysters may be destroyed. It would take too
long to mention here all that may be said on the subject, and as it
would be tiresome to read it all, I will merely state here that the
usual place for the fishery is near Aripo in the Bay of Condaatje,
where the banks lie, and if no untoward events take place, a fishery
may be held for several years in succession; because the whole bay
is covered with different banks, the oysters of which will become
successively matured. But sometimes they are washed away and completely
destroyed within a very short time. The banks are to be inspected in
November by a Commission sent for this purpose, who come in tonys from
Jaffnapatam, Manaar, and Madura, and with them also some Patangatyns
and other native chiefs who understand this work. The chief points to
be considered when a pearl fishery has been authorized are the lodgings
for the Commissioners appointed in Colombo; the inclosure of the tanks
in Mantotte with banks for obtaining good drinking water; the supply
of poultry, butter, oil, rice, sheep, cattle, &c., for provisions;
Lascoreens and servants; military men, if they can be spared from
the garrison, &c. The fishery usually takes place in the months of
March, April, and May. I will not enter into detail on this matter,
as it would not be in agreement with the nature of these instructions;
while the Commissioners will be able to find ample information in the
various documents of the years 1666 and 1667, but especially in those
of 1694, 1695, and 1696, including reports, journals, and letters, in
case they have not gained sufficient experience yet. These documents
relate to the fishery, the collection of the Company's duties, the
purchase and valuation of pearls, &c. I will therefore only state
here the successive profits derived from the pearl fishery by the
Company, viz. :--


                   Rds. 1666       19,655    91/980       58,965.11. 6
        1667       24,641   461/968       73,924. 8.13
        1694       21,019    19/60        63,057.13. 0
        1695       24,708    11/12        74,126.15. 0
        1696       25,327    43/60        75,983. 0
                  =======   =======      =============
           Total  115,352   499/960      346,057.11. 3 [66]


This is a considerable amount, and it is expected, according to the
reports of the Commissioners, that the fishery now authorized for
December 31, 1697, will yield still greater profits. I have already
given orders for the repair of the banks of the tanks in Mantotte,
which were damaged during the last storm, in order that there may
be no want of drinking water, which is one of the most important
points. Whether the prohibition to export coconuts from this Province
applies also to the pearl fishery is a matter to be submitted to
His Excellency the Governor and the Council; because many people use
this fruit as food. This subject has been already dealt with under
the head of Coconuts. [65]

The inhabited little islands are considered as the fifth Province
of the Commandement, the others being Walligammo, Waddemoraatsche,
Timmeraatsche, and Patchelepalle. Taxes, &c., are levied in these
islands in the same way as in the other Provinces, the revenue
amounting last time to Rds. 2,767.2.5 1/2, viz. :--


                                              Rds. Land rent                                1,190.11.3
    Tithes                                     712. 8.6 1/4
    Poll tax                                   605. 1.0
    Adigary                                    173. 9.0
    Officie                                    162. 5.8 3/4
                                             --------------
                               Total         2,844.11.8

    Deducted as salaries for the Collector,
    Majoraal, Cayals, &c. 9.2 1/4
                                             ==============
                               Total         2,767. 2.5 1/2 [67]


The islands are named as follows:--

Carredive, called by us Amsterdam; Tamiedive, Leyden; Pongedive,
Middleburg; Nerendive, Delft; Neynadive, Haarlem; Aneledive, Rotterdam;
Remedive, "de Twee Gebroeders," or Hoorn and Enkhuisen. Besides the revenue stated above, Carredive yields the best dye-roots
in this Commandement, although the quantity is no more than 10 or
12 bharen a year. The dye-roots from Delft are just as good, but it
yields only 4 or 5 bharen a year. Salt, lime, and coral stone are
also obtained from these islands, but particulars with regard to these
matters have been stated at length in the report by the late Commandeur
Blom to His late Excellency van Mydregt, to which I would refer. [66]

Horse-breeding is an enterprise of which much was expected, but so far
the Company has not made much profit by it. Yet there is no reason
to despair, and better results may be hoped for. Your Honours must
remember that formerly in the islands Delft, Hoorn, and Enkhuizen all
kinds of horses were bred together; so that but few good animals were
obtained. In 1690 and 1691 orders were given to shoot all horses that
were too small or defective, and to capture the rest and send them to
Colombo and Coromandel. The latter were sold at Negapatam by public
auction, while the rest were given to soldiers on the opposite coast
in the Company's service, who used the animals so badly that they were
soon unfit for work. In this way the islands have become destitute
of horses, and the only thing to be done was to send there some good
mares and two or three Persian stallions for breeding purposes. So
far no good horses could be obtained, because a foal has to be 4 or
3 1/2 years old before it is fit for use. It is only since 1692,
1693, and 1694 that we had good stallions, and this accounts for
the fact that no foals have yet been obtained. 8,982.9, so that it would seem as if expenditure and
trouble are the only results to be expected from this enterprise;
but it must be remembered that at present there are on the island of
Delft alone about 400 or 500 foals of 1, 1 1/2, 2, and 2 1/2 years
old, while there are also a number of horses on the island "de Twee
Gebroeders." The expenditure was incurred mostly in the purchase of the
Persian stallions, and this expenditure has not been in vain, because
we possess now more than 400 horses, each of which will be worth about
a hundred guilders, so that the whole number will be worth about 40,000
guilders. In compliance with the orders by His Excellency van Mydregt
of November 29, 1690, these animals must be sold at Coromandel on
account of this Commandement, and the valuation of the horses may be
determined from the fact that the Prince of Tansjour has accepted one
or two of them in lieu of the recognition which the Company owes him
yearly for two Arabian horses. For this reason and in compliance with
the said orders the first horses captured must be sent to Negapatam,
so that the account in respect of horse-breeding may be balanced. As
the stallions kept on the islands have become too old, application
has been made for younger animals, and also for five or six mares
from Java, which have been granted by His Excellency the Governor
and the Council in their letter of April 29, 1695. Your Honours are
further advised not to sell any horses from the island of Delft for
less than Rds. 25 and from the islands "de Twee Gebroeders" for less
than Rds. 35 to the Company's servants, as they fetch more than that
at the public auctions in Negapatam. Even this is a favour to them;
but I noticed that the horses from Delft have been sold at 15 and
those from Hoorn and Enkhuisen at Rds. 20, which I think cannot be
done in future, since the destruction of the defective animals has
improved the race. I hope that this will clear up the passage with
regard to the horse-breeding in the letter from Batavia to Ceylon of
July 3, 1696, as also that Their Excellencies may be satisfied with
the result. I think expectations were raised too high at first; as
the real advantage could only be known in course of time; while, on
the other hand, the capital expended must be looked upon as standing
out on interest. [67]

The Passes of this Commandement are various, but all are guarded in
such a way that no goods can be brought in or taken out without a
license, nor are people able to go through without a passport. At
Kayts and Point Pedro passports are issued in the usual way to
those who come or go by sea; while to those who travel by land an
Acte of Permission is issued, which is written in Mallabaar on ola,
and is called Cayoppe. These are issued both by the Dessave and by
the Commandeur, but as so many thousands of people come and go, and
the signing of these Cayoppes occupies so much of the time of the
Commandeurs, a steel stamp is used now by the Dessave to mark these
also. I have followed the same practice, and used a seal with the
letters H. Z., [68] which I handed over shortly before my departure for
Colombo in February, 1696, to the Political Council, together with the
seal for the oely service, with instructions that these seals were to
be used just as if I were still on the spot, because the Dessave was
absent at the pearl fishery, and I was commissioned by the Supreme
Government of India to proceed to Mallabaar without being formally
relieved of my office in this Commandement. On my return from Colombo
in August I found that this order had not been carried out, but that
the Captain Jan van der Bruggen had thought it well to have another
seal specially made, with the monogram VOC, not only suppressing my
order given to him in full Council, but also having a new seal made,
which was beyond his authority and seemed to me quite out of place. I
cannot account for his extraordinary conduct in any other way than by
supposing that he desired to confirm the rumour which had been spread
among the natives and Europeans during the time of the Commissioners
Messrs. Jan van Keulen and Pieter Petitfilz, that I would never return
to this Commandement to rule, and thus by suppressing my seal to give
public confirmation to this rumour, and so make it appear to the world
that it was no longer legal. I therefore order again that this seal is
not to be suppressed, but used for the stamping of the Cayoppes at the
Passes in case the Dessave should be absent from this Commandement,
it being his province alone to issue and sign such olas. This order
is to be carried out as long as no contrary orders are received from
higher authorities. Colomboture and Catsay are two Passes on the inner boundary of this
Commandement at the river leading to Ponneryn and the Wanny, and
in order to prevent any one passing without a passport a guard is
stationed there. The duties on goods are also collected there, being
leased out, but they do not amount to much. These Passes, however,
must be properly guarded, and care taken that the people stationed
there submit their reports regularly. One of these may be found in
a letter from here to Colombo of December 12 last. Ponneryn, a good redoubt, serves as a place from where to watch the
doings of the Wannias and to protect the inhabitants from invasions. It
is garrisoned by Toepasses under the command of a Dutch Sergeant. The Passes Pyl, Elephant, and Beschutter serve chiefly to close this
Province against the Wannias and to protect the inhabitants from
invasions of the Sinhalese, and also to prevent persons passing in
or out without a passport, or goods being taken in or out without a
license, as also to prevent the theft of slaves and the incursions of
elephants and other wild animals into the Provinces. A difficulty is
that the earth mounds are not close together, so that notwithstanding
the continual patrol of the militia, now and again a person passes
through unnoticed. Means of drawing these redoubts together, or at
least of making a trench to prevent persons or goods from passing
without a license, have often been considered. Some have proposed
a hedge of palmyra trees, others a fence of thorns, others a moat,
others again a wall, because at this point the Commandement measures
only two miles in breadth. But none of these proposals have been
adopted all these years, as stated in our letter of August 24, 1695,
to Batavia. Their Excellencies replied in their letter of July 3,
1696, that this is a good work, but as it is entirely to the advantage
of the inhabitants it must be carried out without expense to the
Company. This, in my humble opinion, is quite fair, and the Dessave,
whom this matter principally concerns, will have to consider in what
way such a trench as proposed could be made. The yearly Compendium
will give much information on this subject, and will show what defects
and obstacles have been met with. It has been stated already how the
Passes are garrisoned, and they are commanded by an Ensign according
to the regulations. Point Pedro, on the outer boundary of this Commandement, has resident
only one Corporal and four Lascoreens, who are chiefly employed in
the sending and receiving of letters to and from Coromandel and
Trincomalee, in the loading of palmyra wood and other goods sent
from there to the said two places, and in the search of departing
and arriving private vessels, and the receipt of passports. These men
also supervise the Oeliaars who have to work at the church which was
commenced during the time of Commandeur Blom, and also those who have
to burn lime or break coral stone from the old Portuguese fortress. The fortress Kayts or Hammenhiel serves on the north, like Manaar
in the south, to guard the passage by water to this Castle, and
also serves the same purposes as Point Pedro, viz., the searching of
private vessels, &c. Next to this fort is the island Leyden, where is
stationed at present the Assistant Jacob Verhagen, who performs the
same duties as the Corporal at Point Pedro, which may be found stated
more in detail in the Instructions of January 4, 1696, compiled and
issued by me for the said Assistant. The Ensign at the Passes received
his instructions from Commandeur Blom, all of which must be followed. As the Dessave is Commander over the military scattered in the
country, and therefore also over those stationed at the said Passes
and stations, it will chiefly be his duty to see that they are
properly guarded so far as the small garrison here will permit,
and also that they are provided with sufficient ammunition and
provisions. The latter consist mostly of grain, oil, pepper, and
arrack. This is mostly meant for Hammenhiel, as the other places can
always be provided from the land side, but rice and ammunition must be
always kept in store. Hammenhiel must be specially garrisoned during
the southern monsoon, and be manned as much as possible by Dutchmen,
who, if possible, must be transferred every three months, because many
of these places are very unhealthy and others exceedingly lonesome,
for which reasons it is not good to keep the people very long in one
place. The chief officers are transferred every six months, which also
must not be neglected, as it is a good rule in more than one respect. Aripo, Elipoecarrewe, and Palmeraincattoe were formerly fortresses
garrisoned like the others, but since the revolution of the Sinhalese
and the Wannias of 1675, under the Dessave Tinnekon, these have
become unnecessary and are only guarded now by Lascoreens, who are
mostly kept on for the transport of letters between Colombo, Manaar,
and Jaffnapatam. [68]

Water tanks are here very necessary, because the country has no fresh
water rivers, and the water for the cultivation of lands is that which
is collected during the rainfall. Some wealthy and influential natives
contrived to take possession of the tanks during the time the Company
sold lands, with a view of thus having power over their neighbours
and of forcing them to deliver up to them a large proportion of their
harvests. They had to do this if they wished to obtain water for
the cultivation of their fields, and were compelled thus to buy at
high price that which comes as a blessing from the Lord to all men,
plants, and animals in general. His Excellency Laurens Pyl, then
Governor of Ceylon, issued an order in June, 1687, on his visit to
this Commandement, that for these reasons no tanks should be private
property, but should be left for common use, the owners being paid
by those who require to water their fields as much as they could
prove to have spent on these tanks. I found that this good order
has not been carried out, because the family of Sangere Pulle alone
possesses at present three such tanks, one of which is the property
of Moddely Tamby. Before my departure to Colombo I had ordered that
it should be given over to the surrounding landowners, who at once
offered to pay the required amount, but I heard on my return that
the conveyance had not been made yet by that unbearably proud and
obstinate Bellale caste, they being encouraged by the way their patron
Moddely Tamby had been favoured in Colombo, and the Commandeur is
not even recognized and his orders are passed by. Your Honours must
therefore see that my instructions with regard to these tanks are
carried out, and that they are paid for by those interested, or that
they are otherwise confiscated, in compliance with the Instructions
of 1687 mentioned above, which Instructions may be found among the
papers in the Mallabaar language kept by the schoolmasters of the
parishes. Considering that many of the Instructions are preserved in
the native language only, they ought to be collected and translated
into our Dutch language. [69]

The public roads must be maintained at a certain breadth, and the
natives are obliged to keep them in order. But their meanness and
impudence is so great that they have gradually, year by year, extended
the fences along their lands on to these roads, thus encroaching
upon the high road. They see more and more that land is valuable on
account of the harvests, and therefore do not leave a foot of ground
uncultivated when the time of the rainy season is near. This is quite
different from formerly; so much so, that the lands are worth not
only thrice but about four or five times as much as formerly. This
may be seen when the lands are sold by public auction, and it may
be also considered whether the people of Jaffnapatam are really so
badly off as to find it necessary to agitate for an abatement of the
tithes. The Dessave must therefore see that these roads are extended
again to their original breadth and condition, punishing those who
may have encroached on the roads. [70]

The Company's elephant stalls have been allowed to fall into decay
like the churches, and they must be repaired as soon as possible,
which is also a matter within the province of the Dessave. [71]

Great expectations were cherished by some with regard to the thornback
skins, Amber de gris, Besoar stones, Carret, and tusks from the
elephants that died in the Company's stalls, but experience did
not justify these hopes. As these points have been dealt with in the
Compendium of November 26, 1693, by Commandeur Blom, I would here refer
to that document. I cannot add anything to what is stated there. [72]

The General Paresse is a ceremony which the Mudaliyars, Collectors,
Majoraals, Aratchchies, &c., have to perform twice a year on behalf
of the whole community, appearing together before the Commandeur in
the fort. This is an obligation to which they have been subject from
heathen times, partly to show their submission, partly to report on
the condition of the country, and partly to give them an opportunity
to make any request for the general welfare. As this Paresse tends
to the interest of the Company as Sovereign Power on the one hand
and to that of the inhabitants on the other hand, the custom must be
kept up. When the Commandeur is absent at the time of this Paresse
Your Honours could meet together and receive the chiefs. It is held
once during the northern and once during the southern monsoon, without
being bound to any special day, as circumstances may require it to be
held earlier or later. During my absence the day is to be fixed by the
Dessave, as land regent. Any proposal made by the native chiefs must
be carefully written down by the Secretary, so that it may be possible
to send a report of it to His Excellency the Governor and the Council
if it should be of importance. All transactions must be carefully
noted down and inserted in the journal, so that it may be referred to
whenever necessary. The practice introduced by the Onderkoopman William
de Ridder in Manaar of requiring the Pattangatyns from the opposite
coast to attend not twice but twelve times a year or once a month is
unreasonable, and the people have rightly complained thereof. De Ridder also appointed
a second Cannekappul, which seems quite unnecessary, considering the
small amount of work to be done there for the natives. Jeronimo could
be discharged and Gonsalvo retained, the latter having been specially
sent from Calpentyn by His Excellency Governor Thomas van Rhee and
being the senior in the service. Of how little consequence the work
at Manaar was considered by His Excellency Governor van Mydregt may
be seen from the fact that His Excellency ordered that no Opperhoofd
should be stationed there nor any accounts kept, but that the fort
should be commanded by an Ensign as chief of the military. A second
Cannekappul is therefore superfluous, and the Company could be saved
the extra expense. [73]

I could make reference to a large number of other matters, but it
would be tedious to read and remember them all. I will therefore now
leave in Your Honours' care the government of a Commandement from which
much profit may be derived for the Company, and where the inhabitants,
though deceitful, cunning, and difficult to rule, yet obey through
fear; as they are cowardly, and will do what is right more from fear of
punishment than from love of righteousness. I hope that Your Honours
may have a more peaceful time than I had, for you are well aware
how many difficulties, persecutions, and public slights I have had to
contend with, and how difficult my government was through these causes,
and through continual indisposition, especially of late. However,
Jaffnapatam has been blessed by God during that period, as may be seen
from what has been stated in this Memoir. I hope that Your Honours'
dilligence and experience may supplement the defects in this Memoir,
and, above all, that you will try to live and work together in harmony,
for in that way the Company will be served best. There are people who
will purposely cause dissension among the members of the Council,
with a view to further their own ends or that of some other party,
much to the injury of the person who permits them to do so. [74]

The Political Council consists at present of the following members:--


Ryklof de Bitter, Dessave, Opperkoopman. Abraham M. Biermans, Administrateur. Pieter Boscho, Onderkoopman, Store- and Thombo-keeper. Johannes van Groenevelde, Fiscaal. With a view to enable His Excellency the Governor and the Council to
alter or amplify this Memoir in compliance with the orders from Their
Excellencies at Batavia, cited at the commencement of this document,
I have purposely written on half of the pages only, so that final
instructions might be added, as mine are only provisional. In case
Your Honours should require any of the documents cited which are
not kept here at the Secretariate, they may be applied for from His
Excellency the Governor and the Council of Colombo. Wishing Your
Honours God's blessing, and all prosperity in the administration of
this extensive Commandement,


I remain, Sirs,
Yours faithfully,
H. ZWAARDECROON. Jaffnapatam, January 1, 1697. A.--The above Instructions were ready for Your Honours when, on
January 31 last, the yacht "Bekenstyn" brought a letter from Colombo
dated January 18, in which we were informed of the arrival of our new
Governor, His Excellency Gerrit de Heere. By the same vessel an extract
was sent from a letter of the Supreme Government of India of October
19 last, in which my transfer to Mallabaar has been ordered. But,
much as I had wished to serve the Company on that coast, I could
not at once obey the order owing to a serious illness accompanied
by a fit, with which it pleased the Lord to afflict me on January
18. Although not yet quite recovered, I have preferred to undertake
the voyage to Mallabaar without putting it off for another six months,
trusting that God will help me duly to serve my superiors, although
the latter course seemed more advisable on account of my state of
health. As some matters have occurred and some questions have arisen
since the writing of my Memoir, I have to add here a few explanations. B.--Together with the above-mentioned letter from Colombo, of January
18, we also received a document signed by both Their Excellencies
Governors Thomas van Rhee and Gerrit de Heere, by which all trade
in Ceylon except that of cinnamon is made open and free to every
one. Since no extract from the letter from Batavia with regard to this
matter was enclosed, I have been in doubt as to how far the permission
spoken of in that document was to be extended. As I am setting down
here my doubt on this point, His Excellency the Governor and the
Council of Colombo will, I have no doubt, give further information
upon it. I suppose that the trade in elephants is excepted as well
as that in cinnamon, and that it is still prohibited to capture,
transport, or sell these animals otherwise than on behalf of the
Company, either directly or indirectly, as has been the usage so far. C.--I suppose there will be no necessity now to obtain the areca-nuts
as ordered in the Instructions from Colombo of March 23, 1695, but
that these nuts are included among the articles open to free trade,
so that they may be now brought from Jaffnapatam through the Wanni to
Tondy, Madura, and Coromandel, as well as to other places in Ceylon,
provided the payment of the usual Customs duty of the Alphandigo,
[69] which is 7 1/2 per cent. for export, and that it may also be
freely transported through the Passes on the borders of the Wanni, and
that no Customs duty is to be paid except when it is sent by sea. I
understand that the same will be the rule for cotton, pepper, &c.,
brought from the Wanni to be sent by sea. This will greatly increase
the Alphandigo, so that the conditions for the farming of these must
be altered for the future accordingly. If the Customs duty were also
charged at the Passes, the farming out of these would still increase,
but I do not think that it would benefit the Company very much, because
there are many opportunities for smuggling beyond these three Passes,
and the expenditure of keeping guards would be far too great. The
duty being recovered as Alphandigo, there is no chance of smuggling,
as the vessels have to be provided with proper passports. All vessels
from Jaffnapatam are inspected at the Waterfort, Hammenhiel and at
the redoubt Point Pedro. D.--In my opinion the concession of free trade will necessitate the
remission of the duty on the Jaffnapatam native and foreign cloths,
because otherwise Jaffnapatam would be too heavily taxed compared
with other places, as the duty is 20 and 25 per cent. I think both
the cloths made here and those imported from outside ought to be
taxed through the Alphandigo of 7 1/2 per cent. This would still more
increase the duty, and this must be borne in mind when these revenues
are farmed out next December, if His Excellency the Governor and the
Council approve of my advice. is far too
high, and it must be remembered that this was a duty imposed with a
view to prevent the weaving of cloths and to secure the monopoly of
the trade to the Company, and not in order to make a revenue out of
it. This project did not prove a success; but I will not enter into
details about it, as these may be found in the questions submitted
by me to the Council of Ceylon on January 22, 1695, and I have also
mentioned them in this Memoir under the heading of Rents. E.--It seems to me that henceforth the people of Jaffnapatam would,
as a result of this free trade, be no longer bound to deliver to the
Company the usual 24 casks of coconut oil yearly before they are
allowed to export their nuts. This rule was laid down in a letter
from Colombo of October 13, 1696, with a view to prevent Ceylon being
obliged to obtain coconut oil from outside. This duty was imposed
upon Jaffnapatam, because the trees in Galle and Matura had become
unfruitful from the Company's elephants having to be fed with the
leaves. The same explanation was not urged with regard to Negombo,
which is so much nearer to Colombo than Galle, Matura, or Jaffnapatam,
and it is a well-known fact that many of the ships from Jaffnapatam
and other places are sent with coconuts from Negombo to Coromandel
or Tondel, while the nuts from the lands of the owners there are held
back. I expect therefore that the new Governor His Excellency Gerrit
de Heere and the Council of Colombo will give us further instructions
with regard to this matter. More details may be found in this Memoir
under the heading of Coconut Trees. F.--A letter was received from Colombo, bearing date March 4 last,
in which was enclosed a form of a passport which appears to have been
introduced there after the opening of the free trade, with orders to
introduce the same here. This has been done already during my presence
here and must be continued. G.--In the letter of the 9th instant we received various and important
instructions which must be carried out. An answer to this letter was
sent by us on the 22nd of the same month. One of these instructions is
to the effect that a new road should be cut for the elephants which are
to be sent from Colombo. Another requires the compilation of various
lists, one of which is to be a list of all lands belonging to the
Company or given away on behalf of it, with a statement showing by
whom, to whom, when, and why they were granted. I do not think this
order refers to Jaffnapatam, because all fields were sold during the
time of Commandeur Vosch and others. Only a few small pieces of land
were discovered during the compilation of the new Land Thombo, which
some of the natives had been cultivating. A few wild palmyra trees
have been found in the Province of Patchelepalle, but these and the
lands have been entered in the new Thombo. We cannot therefore very
well furnish such a list of lands as regards Jaffnapatam, because
the Company does not possess any, but if desired a copy of the new
Land Thombo (which will consist of several reams of imperial paper)
could be sent. I do not, however, think this is meant, since there is
not a single piece of land in Jaffnapatam for which no taxes are paid,
and it is for the purpose of finding this out that the new Thombo is
being compiled. H.--The account between the Moorish elephant purchasers and the
Company through the Brahmin Timmerza as its agent, about which so
much has been written, was settled on August 31 last, and so also
was the account of the said Timmerza himself and the Company. A
difficulty arises now as to how the business with these people is
to be transacted; because three of the principal merchants from
Galconda arrived here the other day with three cheques to the amount
of 7,145 Pagodas in the name of the said Timmerza. According to the
orders by His Excellency Thomas van Rhee the latter is no longer to
be employed as the Company's agent, so there is some irregularity
in the issue of these cheques and this order, in which it is stated
that the cheques must bear the names of the purchasers themselves,
while on the other hand the purchasers made a special request that
the amount due to them might be paid to their attorneys in cash or
elephants through the said Timmerza. However this may be, I do not
wish to enter into details, as these matters, like many others, had
been arranged by His Excellency the Governor and the Council without
my knowledge or advice. Your Honours must await an answer from His
Excellency the Governor Gerrit de Heere and the Council of Colombo,
and follow the instructions they will send with regard to the said
cheques; and the same course may be followed as regards the cheques
of two other merchants who may arrive here just about the time of my
departure. I cannot specify the amount here, as I did not see these
people for want of time. The merchants of Golconda have also requested
that, as they have no broker to deal with, they may be allowed an
advance by the Company in case they run short of cash, which request
has been communicated in our letter to Colombo of the 4th instant. I.--As we had only provision of rice for this Commandement for
about nine months, application has been made to Negapatam for 20,000
paras of rice, but a vessel has since arrived at Kayts from Bengal,
belonging to the Nabob of Kateck, by name Kaimgaarehen, and loaded as
I am informed with very good rice. If this be so, the grain might be
purchased on behalf of the Company, and in that case the order for
nely from Negapatam could be countermanded. It must be remembered,
however, that the rice from Bengal cannot be stored away, but must
be consumed as soon as possible, which is not the case with that of
Negapatam. The people from Bengal must be well treated and assisted
wherever possible without prejudice to the Company; so that they
may be encouraged to come here more often and thus help us to make
provision for the need of grain, which is always a matter of great
concern here. I have already treated of the Moorish trade and also
of the trade in grain between Trincomalee and Batticaloa, and will
only add here that since the arrival of the said vessel the price
has been reduced from 6 to 5 and 4 fannums the para. K.--On my return from Colombo last year the bargemen of the Company's
pontons submitted a petition in which they complained that they had
been obliged to make good the value of all the rice that had been lost
above 1 per cent. from the cargoes that had been transported from
Kayts to the Company's stores. They complained that the measuring
had not been done fairly, and that a great deal had been blown away
by the strong south-west winds; also that there had been much dust in
the nely, and that besides this it was impossible for them to prevent
the native crew who had been assigned to them from stealing the grain
both by day and night, especially since rice had become so expensive
on account of the scarcity. I appointed a Committee to investigate
this matter, but as it has been postponed through my illness, Your
Honours must now take the matter in hand and have it decided by
the Council. In future such matters must always be brought before
the Council, as no one has the right to condemn others on his own
authority. The excuse of the said bargemen does not seem to carry
much weight, but they are people who have served the Company for 30
or 40 years and have never been known to commit fraud. It must also
be made a practice in future that these people are held responsible
for their cargo only till they reach the harbour where it is unloaded,
as they can only guard it on board of their vessels. L.--I have spoken before of the suspicion I had with regard to the
changing of golden Pagodas, and with a view to have more security in
future I have ordered the cashier Bout to accept no Pagodas except
directly from the Accountant at Negapatam, who is responsible for the
value of the Pagodas. He must send them to the cashier in packets of
100 at a time, which must be sealed. M.--The administration of the entire Commandement having been left by
me to the Opperkoopman and Dessave Mr. Ryklof de Bitter and the other
members of the Council, this does not agree with the orders from the
Supreme Government of India contained in their letter of October 19
last year, but since the Dessave de Bitter has since been appointed as
the chief of the Committee for the pearl fishery and has left already,
it will be for His Excellency the Governor and the Council to decide
whether the Lieutenant Claas Isaacsz is to be entrusted with the
administration, as was done last year. Wishing Your Honours for the second time God's blessing,


I remain,
Yours faithfully,
(Signed) H. ZWAARDECROON. On board the yacht "Bekenstyn," in the harbour of
Manaar, March 29, 1697. SHORT NOTES by Gerrit de Heere, Governor of the Island of Ceylon,
    on the chief points raised in these Instructions of Commandeur
    Hendrick Zwaardecroon, for the guidance of the Opperkoopman
    Mr. Ryklof de Bitter, Second in authority and Dessave of the
    Commandement, and the other members of the Political Council of
    Jaffnapatam. Where the notes contradict the Instructions the orders
    conveyed by the former are to be followed. In other respects the
    Instructions must be observed, as approved by Their Excellencies
    the Governor-General and the Council of India. The form of Government, as approved at the time mentioned here, must
be also observed with regard to the Dessave and Secunde, Mr. Ryklof
de Bitter, as has been confirmed by the Honourable the Government of
Batavia in their special letter of October 19 last. What is stated here is reasonable and in compliance with the
Instructions, but with regard to the recommendation to send to
Mr. Zwaardecroon by Manaar and Tutucorin advices and communications
of all that transpires in this Commandement, I think it would be
sufficient, as Your Honours have also to give an account to us, and
this would involve too much writing, to communicate occasionally
and in general terms what is going on, and to send him a copy of
the Compendium which is yearly compiled for His Excellency the
Governor. de Bitter and the other members of
Council to do. The Wanni, the largest territory here, has been divided by the
Company into several Provinces, which have been given in usufruct to
some Majoraals, who bear the title of Wannias, on the condition that
they should yearly deliver to the Company 42 1/2 alias (elephants). The
distribution of these tributes is as follows:--


                                                        Alias. Don Philip Nellamapane and Don Gaspar Ilengenarenne,
    for the Provinces of--
        Pannegamo                                           17
        Pelleallacoelan                                      2
        Poedicoerie-irpoe                                    2
                                                          ----   21

    Don Diogo Poevenelle Mapane, for the Provinces of--
        Carrecattemoele                                      7
        Meelpattoe                                           5
                                                          ----   12

    Don Amblewannar, for the Province of--
        Carnamelpattoe                                            4

    Don Chedoega Welemapane, for the  Province of--
        Tinnemerwaddoe                                            2

    Don Peria Meynaar, for the Province of--
        Moeliawalle                                               3 1/2
                                                                 ======
                                     Total                       42 1/2


The accumulated arrears from the years 1680 to 1694, of which they
were discharged, amounted to 333 1/2 elephants. From that time up to
the present day the arrears have again accumulated to 86 3/4 alias,
namely:--


                                                   Alias. Don Philip Nellamapane                        57 1/2
        Don Diogo Poevenelle Mapane                   23
        Peria Meynaar Oediaar                          4 3/4
        Chedoega Welemapane                            1 1/2
                                                      ======
                     Total                            86 3/4


The result proves that all the honour and favours shown to these people
do not induce them to pay up their tribute; but on the contrary,
as has been shown in the annexed Memoir, they allow them to go on
increasing. This is the reason I would not suffer the indignity of
requesting payment from them, but told them seriously that this would
be superfluous in the case of men of their eminence; which they,
however, entirely ignored. I then exhorted them in the most serious
terms to pay up their dues, saying that I would personally come within
a year to see whether they had done so. As this was also disregarded,
I dismissed them. Don Philip Nellamapane and Don Gaspar Ilengenarenne,
who owed 57 1/2 alias, made the excuse that these arrears were caused
by the bad terms on which they were with each other, and asked that
I would dissociate them, so that each could pay his own tribute. I
agreed that they should arrange with the Dessave about the different
lands, writing down on ola the arrangements made, and submitting them
to me for approval; but as I have heard no more about the matter up
to the present day, I fear that they only raised these difficulties
to make believe that they were unable to pay, and to try to get the
Company again to discharge them from the delivery of their tribute
of 21 elephants for next year. It would perhaps be better to do this
than to be continually fooled by these people. But you have all
seen how tremblingly they appeared before me (no doubt owing to a
bad conscience), and how they followed the palanquin of the Dessave
like boys, all in order to obtain more favourable conditions; but I
see no reason why they should not pay, and think they must be urged
to do so. They have promised however to pay up their arrears as soon
as possible, so that we will have to wait and see; while Don Diogo
Poevenelle Mapane also has to deliver his 23 alias. In compliance with
the orders from Colombo of May 11, 1696, Don Philip Nellamapane will be
allowed to sell one elephant yearly to the Moors, on the understanding
that he had delivered his tribute, and not otherwise; while the sale
must be in agreement with the orders of Their Excellencies at Batavia,
contained in their letter of November 13, 1683. The other Provinces,
Carnamelpattoe, Tinnemerwaddoe, and Moeliawalle are doing fairly well,
and the tribute for these has been paid; although it is rather small
and consists only of 9 1/2 alias (elephants), which the Wannias there,
however, deliver regularly, or at least do not take very long in
doing so. Perhaps they could furnish more elephants in lieu of the
tithes of the harvest, and it would not matter if the whole of it
were paid in this way, because this amount could be made up for by
supplies from the lands of Colombo, Galle, and Matara, or a larger
quantity could be ordered overland. That the Master of the Hunt, Don Gasper Nitchenchen Aderayen, should,
as if he were a sovereign, have put to death a Lascoreen and a hunter
under the old Don Gaspar on his own responsibility, is a matter which
will result in very bad consequences; but I have heard rumours to
the effect that it was not his work, but his father's (Don Philip
Nellamapane). With regard to these people Your Honours must observe
the Instructions of Mr. Zwaardecroon, and their further actions must be
watched; because of their conspiracies with the Veddas, in one of which
the brother of Cottapulle Odiaar is said to have been killed. Time
does not permit it, otherwise I would myself hold an inquiry. Mantotte, Moesely, and Pirringaly, which Provinces are ruled by
officers paid by the Company, seem to be doing well; because the
Company received from there a large number of elephants, besides the
tithes of the harvest, which are otherwise drawn by the Wannias. The
two Wannias, Don Philip Nellamapane and Don Gaspar, complain that
they do not receive the tribute of two elephants due to them from the
inhabitants of Pirringaly, but I do not find in the decree published
by Commandeur Blom on June 11, 1693, in favour of the inhabitants,
any statement that they owe such tribute for liberation from the rule
of the Wannias, but only that they (these Wannias) will be allowed
to capture elephants. These Wannias, however, sent me a dirty little
document, bearing date May 12, 1694, in which it is stated that the
hunters of Pirringaly had delivered at Manaar for Pannengamo in the
year 1693 two alias, each 4-3/8 cubits high. If more evidence could be
found, it might be proved that such payment of 2 alias yearly really
had to be made, and it would be well for Your Honours to investigate
this matter, because it is very necessary to protect and assist the
hunters as much as possible, as a reward for their diligence in the
capture of elephants. Payment must be made to them in compliance with
the orders of His Excellency van Mydregt. Ponneryn, the third Province from which elephants should
be obtained, and which, like Illepoecarwe, Polweraincattoe, and
Mantotte, was ruled formerly by an Adigar or Lieutenant-Dessave,
was doing fairly well; because the Company received yearly on an
average no less than 25 alias, besides the tithes of the harvest,
until in 1690 the mode of government was changed, and the revenue of
Ponneryn was granted by public decree to the young Don Gaspar by the
Lord Commissioner van Mydregt, while those of the other two Provinces
were granted to the old Don Gaspar, on condition that the young Don
Gaspar would capture and deliver to the Company all elephants which
could be obtained in the said Provinces, while the inhabitants of
Ponneryn would be obliged to obey the Master of the Hunt as far as
their services should be required by the Company and as they had been
accustomed to render. This new arrangement did not prove a success;
because, during seven years, he only delivered 44 elephants, although
in the annexed Memoir it is stated that he delivered 74. Of these 44
animals, 7 were tuskers and 37 alias, viz. :--


                                    Elephants. For 1690                4
                    1691-92             6
                    1692-93             5
                    1693-94            16
                    1694-95            13
                                      ====
                             Total     44


During the last two years he did not deliver a single animal,
so that the Company lost on account of this Master of the Hunt,
131 elephants. He only appropriated the tithes of the harvest, and
did not care in the least about the hunt, so that the Company is even
prevented from obtaining what it would have received by the old method;
and, I must say, I do not understand how these privileges have been
granted so long where they are so clearly against the interest of the
Company, besides being the source of unlawful usurpation practised
over the inhabitants, which is directly against the said deeds of
gift. The elephant hunters have repeatedly applied to be relieved of
their authority and to be allowed to serve again under the Company. For
these reasons, as Your Honour is aware, I have considered it necessary
for the service of the Company to provisionally appoint the sergeant
Albert Hendriksz, who, through his long residence in these Provinces,
has gained a great deal of experience, Adigar over Ponneryn; which
was done at the request of the elephant hunters. He will continue the
capture of elephants with the hunters without regard to the Master of
the Hunt, and Your Honour must give him all the assistance required,
because the hunt has been greatly neglected. Your Honour may allow
both the Don Gaspars to draw the tithes of the harvest until our
authorities at Batavia will have disposed of this matter. The trade in elephants is undoubtedly the most important, as
the rest does not amount to much more than Rds. 7,000 to 9,000 a
year. During the year 1695-1696 the whole of the sale amounted to
Fl. 33,261.5, including a profit of Fl. We find it stated
in the annexed Memoir that the merchants spoilt their own market by
bidding against each other at the public auctions, but whether this
was really the case we will not discuss here. I positively disapprove
of the complicated and impractical way in which this trade has been
carried on for some years, and which was opposed to the interests
of the Company. I therefore considered it necessary to institute
the public auctions, by which, compared with the former method, the
Company has already gained a considerable amount; which is, however,
no more than what it was entitled to, without it being of the least
prejudice to the trade. I will not enlarge on this subject further,
as all particulars relating to it and everything connected with it may
be found in our considerations and speculations and in the decisions
arrived at in accordance therewith, which are contained in the daily
resolutions from July 24 to August 20 inclusive, a copy of which was
left with Your Honours, and to which I refer you. As to the changed
methods adopted this year, these are not to be altered by any one
but Their Excellencies at Batavia, whose orders I will be obliged
and pleased to receive. As a number of elephants was sold last year
for the sum of Rds. 53,357, it was a pity that they could not all
be transported at once, without a number of 126 being left behind on
account of the northern winds. We have therefore started the sale a
little earlier this year, and kept the vessels in readiness, so that
all the animals may be easily transported during August next. On the
20th of this month all purchasers were, to their great satisfaction,
ready to depart, and requested and obtained leave to do so. This year
the Company sold at four different auctions the number of 86 elephants
for the sum of Rds. 36,950, 16 animals being left unsold for want of
cash among the purchasers, who are ready to depart with about 200
animals which they are at present engaged in putting on board. The
practice of the early preparation of vessels and the holding of
public auctions must be always observed, because it is a great loss
to the merchants to have to stay over for a whole year, while the
Company also suffers thereby, because in the meantime the animals
do not change masters. It is due to this reason and to the want of
ready cash that this year 16 animals were left unsold. In future it
must be a regular practice in Ceylon to have all the elephants that
are to be sold brought to these Provinces before July 1, so that all
preparations may be made to hold the auctions about the middle of July,
or, if the merchants do not arrive so soon, on August 1. Meanwhile
all the required vessels must be got ready, so that no animals need be
left behind on account of contrary winds. As we have now cut a road,
by which the elephants may be led from Colombo, Galle, and Matura,
as was done successfully one or two months ago, when in two trips
from Matura, Galle, Colombo, Negombo, and Putulang were brought here
with great convenience the large number of 63 elephants, the former
plan of transporting the animals in native vessels from Galle and
Colombo can be dropped now, a few experiments having been made and
proving apparently unsuccessful. It must be seen that at least 12 or
15 elephants are trained for the hunt, as a considerable number is
always required, especially if the animals from Putulang have to be
fetched by land. For this reason I have ordered that two out of the 16
animals that were left from the sale and who have some slight defects,
but which do not unfit them for this work, should be trained, viz.,
No 22, 5 3/8 cubits high, and No. 72, 5 1/2 cubits high, which may
be employed to drive the other animals. Meanwhile the Dessave must
see that the two animals which, as he is aware, were lent to Don
Diogo, are returned to the Company. These animals were not counted
among those belonging to the Company, which was very careless. As is
known to Your Honours, we have abolished the practice of branding the
animals twice with the mark circled V, as was done formerly, once when
they were sent to these Provinces and again when they were sold, and
consider it better to mark them only once with a number, beginning
with No. 1, 2, 3, &c., up to No. Ten iron brand numbers have
been made for this purpose. If there are more than 100 animals, they
must begin again with number 1, and as a mark of distinction a cross
must be put after each number, which rule must be observed in future,
especially as the merchants were pleased with it and as it is the best
way of identifying the animals. We trust that with the opening of the
King's harbours the plan of obtaining the areca-nut from the King's
territory by water will be unnecessary, but the plan of obtaining
these nuts by way of the Wanni will be dealt with in the Appendix. The trade with the Moors from Bengal must be protected, and these
people fairly and reasonably dealt with, so that we may secure the
necessary supply of grain and victuals. We do not see any reason
why these and other merchants should not be admitted to the sale of
elephants, as was done this year, when every one was free to purchase
as he pleased. The people of Dalpatterau only spent half of their
cash, because they wished to wait till next year for animals which
should be more to their liking. His Excellency the High Commissioner
informed me that he had invited not only the people from Golconda,
but also those of Tanhouwer, [70] &c., to take part in that trade,
and this may be done, especially now that the prospects seem to all
appearances favourable; while from the districts of Colombo, Galle,
and Matura a sufficient number of elephants may be procured to make
up for the deficiency in Jaffnapatam, if we only know a year before
what number would be required, which must be always inquired into. As the Manaar chanks are not in demand in Bengal, we have kept here a
quantity of 36 1/2 Couren of different kinds, intending to sell in the
usual commercial way to the Bengal merchants here present; but they
did not care to take it, and said plainly that the chanks were not of
the required size or colour; they must therefore be sent to Colombo by
the first opportunity, to be sent on to Bengal next year to be sold at
any price, as this will be better than having them lying here useless. The subject of the inhabitants has been treated of in such a way
that it is unnecessary for me to add anything. With regard to the tithes, I agree with Mr. Zwaardecroon that
the taxes need not be reduced, especially as I never heard that the
inhabitants asked for this to be done. It will be the duty of the
Dessave to see that the tenth of the harvest of the waste lands,
which were granted with exemption of taxes for a certain period, is
brought into the Company's stores after the stated period has expired. Poll tax.--It is necessary that a beginning should be made with
the work of revising the Head Thombo, and that the names of the old
and infirm people and of those that have died should be taken off the
list, while the names of the youths who have reached the required age
are entered. This renovation should take place once in three years,
and the Dessave as Land Regent should sometimes assist in this work. Officie Gelden.--It will be very well if this be divided according
to the number of people in each caste, so that each individual pays
his share, instead of the amount being demanded from each caste as
a whole, because it is apparent that the Majoraals have profited by
the old method. No remarks are at present necessary with regard to the Adigary. The Oely service, imposed upon those castes which are bound to
serve, must be looked after, as this is the only practicable means
of continuing the necessary works. The idea of raising the fine for
non-attendance from 2 stivers, which they willingly pay, to 4 stivers
or one fanam, [71] is not bad, but I found this to be the practise
already for many years, as may be seen from the annexed account of two
parties of men who had been absent, which most likely was overlooked
by mistake. This is yet stronger evidence that the circumstances
of the inhabitants have improved, and I therefore think it would be
well to raise the chicos from 4 stivers to 6 stivers or 1 1/2 fanam,
with a view to finding out whether the men will then be more diligent
in the performance of their duty; because the work must be carried on
by every possible means. Your Honours are again seriously recommended
to see that the sicos or fines specified in the annexed Memoir are
collected without delay, and also the amount still due for 1693,
because such delay cannot but be prejudicial to the Company. The old
and infirm people whose names are not entered in the new Thombo must
still deliver mats, and kernels for coals for the smith's shop. No
objections will be raised to this if they see that we do not slacken
in our supervision. Tax Collectors and Majoraals.--The payment of the taxes does not
seem satisfactory, because only Rds. 180 have been paid yet out of
the Rds. 2,975.1 due as sicos for the year 1695. It would be well
if these officers could be transferred according to the Instructions
of 1673 and 1675. It used to be the practice to transfer them every
three years; but I think it will be trouble in vain now, because when
an attempt was made to have these offices filled by people of various
castes, it caused such commotion and uproar that it was not considered
advisable to persist in this course except where the interest of the
Company made it strictly necessary. Perhaps a gradual change could
be brought about by filling the places of some of the Bellales when
they die by persons of other castes, which I think could be easily
done. Zwaardecroon seems to think it desirable that
the appointment of new officials for vacancies and the issuing of
the actens should be deferred till his return from Mallabaar or
until another Commandeur should come over, we trust that he does
not mean that these appointments could not be made by the Governor
of the Island or by the person authorized by him to do so. If the
Commandeur were present, such appointment should not be made without
his knowledge, especially after the example of the commotion caused
by the transfer of these officers in this Commandement, but in order
that Your Honours may not be at a loss what to do, it will be better
for you not to wait for the return of Mr. Zwaardecroon from Mallabaar,
nor for the arrival of any other Commandeur, but to refer these and
all other matters concerning this Commandement, which is subordinate
to us, to Colombo to the Governor and Council, so that proper advice
in debita forma may be given. The Lascoreens certainly make better messengers than soldiers. The
Dessave must therefore maintain discipline among them, and take
care that no men bound to perform other duties are entered as
Lascoreens. This they often try to bring about in order to be
excused from labour, and the Company is thus deprived of labourers
and is put to great inconvenience. I noticed this to be the case in
Colombo during the short time I was in Ceylon, when the labour had to
be supplied by the Company's slaves. There seems to be no danger of
another famine for some time, as the crop in Coromandel has turned out
very well. We cannot therefore agree to an increase of pay, although
it is true that the present wages of the men are very low. It must
be remembered, however, that they are also very simple people, who
have but few wants, and are not always employed in the service of
the Company; so that they may easily earn something besides if they
are not too lazy. We will therefore keep their wages for the present
at the rate they have been at for so many years; especially because
it is our endeavour to reduce the heavy expenditure of the Company
by every practicable means. We trust that there was good reason why
the concession made by His Excellency the Extraordinary Councillor
of India, Mr. Laurens Pyl, in favour of the Lascoreens has not been
executed, and we consider that on account of the long interval that
has elapsed it is no longer of application. The proposal to transfer
the Lascoreens in this Commandement twice, or at least once a year,
will be a good expedient for the reasons stated. The importation of slaves from the opposite coast seems to be most
profitable to the inhabitants of Jaffnapatam, as no less a number
than 3,584 were brought across in two years' time, for which they
paid 9,856 guilders as duty. It would be better if they imported a
larger quantity of rice or nely, because there is so often a scarcity
of food supplies here. It is also true that the importation of so many
slaves increases the number of people to be fed, and that the Wannias
could make themselves more formidable with the help of these men, so
that there is some reason for the question whether the Company does
not run the risk of being put to inconvenience with regard to this
Commandement. Considering also that the inhabitants have suffered
from chicken-pox since the importation of slaves, which may endanger
whole Provinces, I think it will be well to prevent the importation of
slaves. As to the larger importation on account of the famine on the
opposite coast, where these creatures were to be had for a handful of
rice, this will most likely cease now, after the better harvest. The
danger with regard to the Wannias I do not consider so very great, as
the rule of the Company is such that the inhabitants prefer it to the
extreme hardships they had to undergo under the Wannia chiefs, and they
would kill them if not for fear of the power of the Company. Therefore
I think it unnecessary to have any apprehension on this score. Rice and nely are the two articles which are always wanting,
not only in Jaffnapatam, but throughout Ceylon all over the Company's
territory, and therefore the officers of the Government must constantly
guard against a monopoly being made of this grain. This opportunity
is taken to recommend the matter to Your Honours as regards this
Commandement. I do not consider any remarks necessary with regard to the
native trade. I agree, however, with the method practised by
Mr. Zwaardecroon in order to prevent the monopoly of grain, viz.,
that all vessels returning with grain, which the owners take to Point
Pedro, Tellemanaar, and Wallewitteture, often under false pretexts,
in order to hide it there, should be ordered to sail to Kayts. This
matter is recommended to Your Honours' attention. With regard to the coconut trees, we find that more difficulties
are raised about the order from Colombo of October 13 last, for the
delivery of 24 casks of coconut oil, than is necessary, considering
the large number of trees found in this country. It seems to me that
this could be easily done; because, according to what is published from
time to time, and from what is stated in the Pass Book, it appears that
during the period of five years 1692 to 1696 inclusive, a number of
5,397,800 of these nuts were exported, besides the quantity smuggled
and the number consumed within this Commandement. Calculating that
one cask, or 400 cans of 10 quarterns, of oil can be easily drawn from
5,700 coconuts (that is to say, in Colombo: in this Commandement 6,670
nuts would be required for the same quantity, and thus, for the whole
supply of 24 casks, 160,080 nuts would be necessary), I must say I do
not understand why this order should be considered so unreasonable,
and why the Company's subjects could not supply this quantity for
good payment. Instead of issuing licenses for the export of the nuts
it will be necessary to prohibit it, because none of either of the
kinds of oil demanded has been delivered. I do not wish to express
my opinion here, but will only state that shortly after my arrival,
I found that the inhabitants on their own account gladly delivered the
oil at the Company's stores at the rate of 3 fanams or Rd. 1/4 per
marcal of 36 quarterns, even up to 14 casks, and since then, again,
10 casks have been delivered, and they still continue to do so. They
also delivered 3 amen of margosa oil, while the Political Council
were bold enough to assert in their letter of April 4 last that it
was absolutely impossible to send either of the two kinds of oil,
the excuse being that they had not even sufficient for their own
requirements. How far this statement can be relied upon I will not
discuss here; but I recommend to Your Honours to be more truthful
and energetic in future, and not to trouble us with unnecessary
correspondence, as was done lately; although so long as the Dessave
is present I have better expectations. No remarks are necessary on the subject of the iron and steel
tools, except that there is the more reason why what is recommended
here must be observed; because the free trade with Coromandel and
Palecatte has been opened this year by order of the Honourable the
Supreme Government of India. It is very desirable that the palmyra planks and laths should
be purchased by the Dessave. As reference is made here to the large
demand for Colombo and Negapatam, I cannot refrain from remarking
that the demand from Negapatam has been taken much more notice of
than that from Colombo; because, within a period of four years, no
more than 1,970 planks and 19,652 laths have been sent here, which was
by no means sufficient, and in consequence other and far less durable
wood had to be used. We also had to obtain laths from private persons
at Jaffnapatam at a high rate and of inferior quality. I therefore
specially request that during the next northern monsoon the following
are sent to this Commandement of Colombo, [72] where several necessary
building operations are to be undertaken:--4,000 palmyra planks in
two kinds, viz., 2,000 planks, four out of one tree; 2,000 planks,
three out of one tree; 20,000 palmyra laths. Your Honour must see that
this timber is sent to Colombo by any opportunity that offers itself. It will be necessary to train another able person for the
supervision of the felling of timber, so that we may not be put to
any inconvenience in case of the death of the old sergeant. Such
a person must be well acquainted with the country and the forests,
and the advice here given must be followed. Charcoal, which is burnt from kernels, has been mentioned under
the heading of the Oely service, where it is stated who are bound
to deliver it. These persons must be kept up to the mark, but as
a substitute in times of necessity 12 hoeden [73] of coals were
sent last January as promised to Your Honour. This must, however,
be economically used. As stated here, the bark-lunt is more a matter of convenience
than of importance. It is, however, necessary to continue exacting
this duty, being an old right of the lord of the land; but on the
other hand it must be seen that too much is not extorted. The coral stone is a great convenience, and it would be well
if it could be found in more places in Ceylon, when so many hoekers
would not be required to bring the lime from Tutucorin. The lime found here is also a great convenience and profit,
as that which is required in this Commandement is obtained free of
cost. When no more lime is required for Coromandel, the 8,000 or 9,000
paras from Cangature must be taken to Kayts as soon as possible in
payment of what the lime-burners still owe. If it can be proved that
any amount is still due, they must return it in cash, as proposed
by Commandeur Zwaardecroon, which Your Honour is to see to. But as
another order has come from His Excellency the Governor of Coromandel
for 100 lasts of lime, it will be easier to settle this account. The dye-roots have been so amply treated of here and in such a way
that I recommend to Your Honour to follow the advice given. I would
add some remarks on the subject if want of time did not prevent my
doing so. The farming out of the duties, including those on the import of
foreign cloth of 20 per cent., having increased by Rds. 4,056 1/2,
must be continued in the same way. The stamping of native cloth
(included in the lease) must be reduced, from September 1 next, to 20
per cent. The farmers must also be required to pay the monthly term
at the beginning of each month in advance, which must be stipulated
in the lease, so that the Company may not run any risks. There are
prospects of this lease becoming more profitable for the Company in
future, on account of the passage having been opened. With regard to the Trade Accounts, such good advice has been
given here, that I fully approve of it and need not make any further
comments, but only recommend the observance of the rules. The debts due to the Company, amounting to 116,426.11.14 guilders
at the end of February, 1694, were at the departure of Mr. Zwaardecroon
reduced to 16,137.8 guilders. This must no doubt be attributed
to the greater vigilance exercised, in compliance with the orders
from the Honourable the Supreme Government of India by resolution
of 1693. This order still holds good and seems to be still obeyed;
because, since the date of this Memoir, the debt has been reduced to
14,118.11.8 guilders. The account at present is as follows:--


                                                     Guilders. [74]
    The Province of Timmoraatsche                    376. 2.8
    The Province of Patchelepalle                    579.10.0
    Tandua Moeti and Nagachitty (weavers)          2,448.13.0
    Manuel of Anecotta                             8,539. 6.0
    The Tannecares caste                           1,650. 0.0
    Don Philip Nellamapane                           375. 0.0
    Ambelewanner                                     150. 0.0
                                                  ===========
                                      Total       14,118.11.8


Herein is not included the Fl. 167.15 which again has been paid to
the weavers Tandua Moeti and Naga Chitty on account of the Company for
the delivery of Salampoeris, while materials have been issued to them
later on. It is not with my approval that these poor people continue
to be employed in the weaving of cloth, because the Salampoeris which I
have seen is so inferior a quality and uneven that I doubt whether the
Company will make any profit on it; especially if the people should
get into arrears again as usual on account of the thread and cash
issued to them. I have an idea that I read in one of the letters from
Batavia, which, however, is not to be found here at the Secretariate,
that Their Excellencies forbid the making of the gingams spoken of
by Mr. Zwaardecroon, as there was no profit to be made on these,
but I am not quite sure, and will look for the letter in Colombo,
and inform Their Excellencies at Batavia of this matter. Meantime,
Your Honours must continue the old practice as long as it does not
act prejudicially to the Company. At present their debt is 2,448.13
guilders, from which I think it would be best to discharge them,
and no advance should be given to them in future, nor should they be
employed in the weaving of cloth for the Company. I do not think they
need be sent out of the country on account of their idolatry on their
being discharged from their debt; because I am sure that most of the
natives who have been baptized are more heathen than Christian, which
would be proved on proper investigation. Besides, there are still so
many other heathen, as, for instance, the Brahmin Timmerza and his
large number of followers, about whom nothing is said, and who also
openly practise idolatry and greatly exercise their influence to aid
the vagabonds (land-loopers) dependent on him, much to the prejudice of
Christianity. I think, therefore, that it is a matter of indifference
whether these people remain or not, the more so as the inhabitants of
Jaffnapatam are known to be a perverse and stiff-necked generation,
for whom we can only pray that God in His mercy will graciously
enlighten their understanding and bless the means employed for their
instruction to their conversion and knowledge of their salvation. It is to be hoped that the debt of the dyers, amounting to 8,539.6
guilders, may yet be recovered by vigilance according to the
instructions. The debt of the Tannekares, who owe 1,650 guilders for 11
elephants, and the amount of 375 guilders due by Don Gaspar advanced
to him for the purchase of nely, as also the amount of Fl. 150 from
the Ambelewanne, must be collected as directed here. With regard to the pay books nothing need be observed here but
that the instructions given in the annexed Memoir be carried out. What is said here with regard to the Secretariate must be observed,
but with regard to the proposed means of lessening the duties of
the Secretary by transferring the duties of the Treasurer to the
Thombo-keeper, Mr. Bolscho (in which work the latter is already
employed), I do not know whether it would be worth while, as it is
best to make as few changes as possible. The instructions with regard
to the passports must be followed pending further orders. I will not comment upon what is stated here with regard to the
Court of Justice, as these things occurred before I took up the reins
of Government, and that was only recently. I have besides no sufficient
knowledge of the subject, while also time does not permit me to peruse
the documents referred to. Zwaardecroon's advice must be followed,
but in case Mr. Bolscho should have to be absent for a short time
(which at present is not necessary, as it seems that the preparation
of the maps and the correction of the Thombo is chiefly left to the
surveyors), I do not think the sittings of the Court need be suspended,
but every effort must be made to do justice as quickly as possible. In
case of illness of some of the members, or when the Lieutenant Claas
Isaacsz has to go to the interior to relieve the Dessave of his duties
there, Lieut. van Loeveningen, and, if necessary, the Secretary of the
Political Council, could be appointed for the time; because the time
of the Dessave will be taken up with the supervision of the usual work
at the Castle. I think that there are several law books in stock in
Colombo, of which some will be sent for the use of the Court of Justice
by the first opportunity; as it appears that different decisions have
been made in similar cases among the natives. Great precaution must
be observed, and the documents occasionally submitted to us. I think
that the number of five Lascoreens and six Caffirs will be sufficient
for the assistance of the Fiscaal. I will not make any remarks here on the subject of religion, but
will refer to my annotations under the heading of Outstanding Debts. I agree with all that has been stated here with regard to the
Seminary and need not add anything further, except that I think this
large school and church require a bell, which may be rung on Sundays
for the services and every day to call the children to school and
to meals. As there are bells in store, the Dessave must be asked to
see that one is put up, either at the entrance of the church on some
steps, or a little more removed from the door, or wherever it may be
considered to be most convenient and useful. All that is said here with regard to the Consistory I can only
confirm. I approve of the advice given to the Dessave to see to the
improvement of the churches and the houses belonging thereto; but I
have heard that the neglect has extended over a long period and the
decay is very serious. It should have been the duty of the Commandeur
to prevent their falling into ruin. The Civil or Landraad ought to hold its sittings as stated in the
Memoir. I am very much surprised to find that this Court is hardly
worthy of the name of Court any more, as not a single sitting has been
held or any case heard since March 21, 1696. It appears that these
sittings were not only neglected during the absence of the Commandeur
in Colombo, but even after his return and since his departure for
Mallabaar, and it seems that they were not even thought of until my
arrival here. This shows fine government indeed, considering also
that the election of the double number of members for this College had
twice taken place, the members nominated and the list sent to Colombo
without a single meeting being held. It seems to me incomprehensible,
and as it is necessary that this Court should meet again once every
week without fail, the Dessave, as chief in this Commandement when the
Commandeur is absent, is entrusted with the duty of seeing that this
order is strictly observed. As Your Honours are aware, I set apart a
meeting place both for this Court as well as the Court of Justice,
namely, the corner house next to the house of the Administrateur
Biermans, consisting of one large and one small room, while a roof has
been built over the steps. This, though not of much pretension, will
quite do, and I consider it unnecessary to build so large a building as
proposed either for this Court or for the Scholarchen. The scholarchial
meetings can be held in the same place as those of the Consistory,
as is done in Colombo and elsewhere, and a large Consistory has been
built already for the new church. As it is not necessary now to put up
a special building for those assemblies, I need not point out here the
errors in the plan proposed, nor need I state how I think such a place
should be arranged. I have also been averse to such a building being
erected so far outside the Castle and in a corner where no one comes
or passes, and I consider it much better if this is done within the
Castle. There is a large square adjoining the church, where a whole
row of buildings might be put up. It is true that no one may erect
new buildings on behalf of the Company without authority and special
orders from Batavia. I have to recommend that this order be strictly
observed. Whether or not the said foul pool should be filled up I
cannot say at present, as it would involve no little labour to do so. I approve of the advice given in the annexed Memoir with regard
to the Orphan Chamber. I agree with this passage concerning the Commissioners of Marriage
Causes, except that some one else must be appointed in the place of
Lieutenant Claas Isaacsz if necessary. Superintendent of the Fire Brigade and Wardens of the Town. As stated here, the deacons have a deficit of Rds. 1,145.3.7 over
the last five and half years, caused by the building of an Orphanage
and the maintenance of the children. At present there are 18 orphans,
10 boys and 8 girls, and for such a small number certainly a large
building and great expenditure is unnecessary. As the deficit has been
chiefly caused by the building of the Orphanage, which is paid for
now, and as the Deaconate has invested a large capital, amounting to
Fl. 40,800, on interest in the Company, I do not see the necessity of
finding it some other source of income, as it would have to be levied
from the inhabitants or paid by the Company in some way or other. No more sums on interest are to be received in deposit on behalf
of the Company, in compliance with the instructions referred to. What is stated here with regard to the money drafts must be
observed. Golden Pagodas.--I find a notice, bearing date November 18,
1695, giving warning against the introduction of Pagodas into this
country. It does not seem to have had much effect, as there seems
to be a regular conspiracy and monopoly among the chetties and other
rogues. This ought to be stopped, and I have therefore ordered that
none but the Negapatam and Palliacatte Pagodas will be current at 24
fannums or Rds. 2, while it will be strictly prohibited to give in
payment or exchange any other Pagodas, whether at the boutiques or
anywhere else, directly or indirectly, on penalty of the punishment
laid down in the statutes. Your Honours must see that this rule
is observed, and care must be taken that no payment is made to the
Company's servants in coin on which they would have to lose. The applications from outstations.--The rules laid down in the
annexed Memoir must be observed. With regard to the Company's sloops and other vessels, directions
are given here as to how they are employed, which directions must be
still observed. Further information or instructions may be obtained
from Colombo. The Fortifications.--I think it would be preferable to leave the
fortifications of the Castle of Jaffnapatam as they are, instead
of raising any points or curtains. But improvements may be made,
such as the alteration of the embrazures, which are at present on the
outside surrounded by coral stone and chunam, and are not effective,
as I noticed that at the firing of the salute on my arrival, wherever
the canons were fired the coral stone had been loosened and in some
places even thrown down. The sentry boxes also on the outer points
of the flank and face had been damaged. These embrazures would be
very dangerous for the sentry in case of an attack, as they would
not stand much firing. I think also that the stone flooring for the
artillery ought to be raised a little, or, in an emergency, boards
could be placed underneath the canon, which would also prevent the
stones being crushed by the wheels. I noticed further that each canon
stands on a separate platform, which is on a level with the floor of
the curtain, so that if the carriage should break when the canon are
fired, the latter would be thrown down, and it would be with great
difficulty only that they could be replaced on their platform. It
would be much safer if the spaces between these platforms were filled
up. The ramparts are all right, but the curtain <DW72>s too much;
this was done most likely with a view of permitting the shooting with
muskets at even a closer range than half-way across the moat. This
definitely}