{Here is a bunch of text that you should pay attention to: The 29th, which is of course above
the 15th of the lower story, is 5,, 5 in circumference, which little
piece of evidence will be of no small value to us by-and-by. The 35th
carries the angle of the palace, and is 6,, 0 round. The 47th, which
comes above the 24th and carries the party wall of the Sala del Gran
Consiglio, is strengthened by a pilaster; and the 51st, which comes over
the 26th, is 5,, 4-1/2 round, or nearly the same as the 29th; it
carries the party wall of the Sala del Scrutinio; a small room
containing part of St. Mark's library, coming between the two saloons;
a room which, in remembrances of the help I have received in all my
inquiries from the kindness and intelligence of its usual occupant, I
shall never easily distinguish otherwise than as "Mr. "[104]

I may as well connect with these notes respecting the arcades of the
Ducal Palace, those which refer to Plate XIV., which represents one of
its spandrils. Every spandril of the lower arcade was intended to have
been occupied by an ornament resembling the one given in that plate. The
mass of the building being of Istrian stone, a depth of about two inches
is left within the mouldings of the arches, rough hewn, to receive the
slabs of fine marble composing the patterns. I cannot say whether the
design was ever completed, or the marbles have been since removed, but
there are now only two spandrils retaining their fillings, and vestiges
of them in a third. The two complete spandrils are on the sea facade,
above the 3rd and 10th capitals (_vide_ method of numbering, Chap. I.,
page 30); that is to say, connecting the 2nd arch with the 3rd, and the
9th with the 10th. The latter is the one given in Plate XIV. The white
portions of it are all white marble, the dental band surrounding the
circle is in coarse sugary marble, which I believe to be Greek, and
never found in Venice to my recollection, except in work at least
anterior to the fifteenth century. The shaded fields charged with the
three white triangles are of red Verona marble; the inner disc is green
serpentine, and the dark pieces of the radiating leaves are grey marble. The two uppermost are 1,, 5 each
side, and the lower 1,, 2. The extreme diameter of the circle is 3,, 10-1/2; its field is slightly
raised above the red marbles, as shown in the section at A, on the left. A _a_ is part of the red marble field; _a b_ the section of the dentil
moulding let into it; _b c_ the entire breadth of the rayed zone,
represented on the other side of the spandril by the line C _f_; _c d_
is the white marble band let in, with the dogtooth on the face of it;
_b c_ is 7-3/4 inches across; _c d_ 3-3/4; and at B are given two joints
of the dentil (mentioned above, in the chapter on dentils, as unique in
Venice) of their actual size. At C is given one of the inlaid leaves;
its measure being (in inches) C _f_ 7-3/4; C _h_ 3/4; _f g_ 3/4; _f e_
4-3/4, the base of the smaller leaves being of course _f e_ - _f g_ = 4. The pattern which occupies the other spandril is similar, except that
the field _b c_, instead of the intersecting arcs, has only triangles of
grey marble, arranged like rays, with their bases towards the centre. There being twenty round the circle, the reader can of course draw them
for himself; they being isosceles, touching the dentil with their
points, and being in contact at their bases: it has lost its central
boss. The marbles are, in both, covered with a rusty coating, through
which it is excessively difficult to distinguish the colors (another
proof of the age of the ornament). But the white marbles are certainly,
in places (except only the sugary dentil), veined with purple, and the
grey seem warmed with green. A trace of another of these ornaments may be seen over the 21st capital;
but I doubt if the marbles have ever been inserted in the other
spandrils, and their want of ornament occasions the slight meagreness in
the effect of the lower story, which is almost the only fault of the
building. This decoration by discs, or shield-like ornaments, is a marked
characteristic of Venetian architecture in its earlier ages, and is
carried into later times by the Byzantine Renaissance, already
distinguished from the more corrupt forms of Renaissance, in Appendix 6. Of the disc decoration, so borrowed, we have already an example in Plate
I. In Plate VII. we have an earlier condition of it, one of the discs
being there sculptured, the others surrounded by sculptured bands: here
we have, on the Ducal Palace, the most characteristic of all, because
likest to the shield, which was probably the origin of the same ornament
among the Arabs, and assuredly among the Greeks. Donaldson's
restoration of the gate of the treasury of Atreus, this ornament is
conjecturally employed, and it occurs constantly on the Arabian
buildings of Cairo. ANCIENT REPRESENTATIONS OF WATER. I have long been desirous of devoting some time to an enquiry into the
effect of natural scenery upon the pagan, and especially the Greek,
mind, and knowing that my friend, Mr. C. Newton, had devoted much
thought to the elucidation of the figurative and symbolic language of
ancient art, I asked him to draw up for me a few notes of the facts
which he considered most interesting, as illustrative of its methods of
representing nature. I suggested to him, for an initiative subject, the
representation of water; because this is one of the natural objects
whose portraiture may most easily be made a test of treatment, for it is
one of universal interest, and of more closely similar aspect in all
parts of the world than any other. Waves, currents, and eddies are much
liker each other, everywhere, than either land or vegetation. Rivers and
lakes, indeed, differ widely from the sea, and the clear Pacific from
the angry Northern ocean; but the Nile is liker the Danube than a knot
of Nubian palms is to a glade of the Black Forest; and the Mediterranean
is liker the Atlantic than the Campo Felice is like Solway moss. Newton has accordingly most kindly furnished me with the following
data. One or two of the types which he describes have been already
noticed in the main text; but it is well that the reader should again
contemplate them in the position which they here occupy in a general
system. Newton's definitions of
the terms "figurative" and "symbolic," as applied to art, in the
beginning of the paper. *       *       *       *       *

In ancient art, that is to say, in the art of the Egyptian, Assyrian,
Greek, and Roman races, water is, for the most part, represented
conventionally rather than naturally. By natural representation is here meant as just and perfect an imitation
of nature as the technical means of art will allow: on the other hand,
representation is said to be conventional, either when a confessedly
inadequate imitation is accepted in default of a better, or when
imitation is not attempted at all, and it is agreed that other modes of
representation, those by figures or by symbols, shall be its substitute
and equivalent. In figurative representation there is always _impersonation_; the
sensible form, borrowed by the artist from organic life, is conceived to
be actuated by a will, and invested with such mental attributes as
constitute personality. The sensible _symbol_, whether borrowed from organic or from inorganic
nature, is not a personification at all, but the conventional sign or
equivalent of some object or notion, to which it may perhaps bear no
visible resemblance, but with which the intellect or the imagination has
in some way associated it. For instance, a city may be figuratively represented as a woman crowned
with towers; here the artist has selected for the expression of his idea
a human form animated with a will and motives of action analogous to
those of humanity generally. Or, again, as in Greek art, a bull may be a
figurative representation of a river, and, in the conception of the
artist, this animal form may contain, and be ennobled by, a human mind. This is still impersonation; the form only in which personality is
embodied is changed. Again, a dolphin may be used as a symbol of the sea; a man ploughing
with two oxen is a well-known symbol of a Roman colony. In neither of
these instances is there impersonation. The dolphin is not invested,
like the figure of Neptune, with any of the attributes of the human
mind; it has animal instincts, but no will; it represents to us its
native element, only as a part may be taken for a whole. Again, the man ploughing does not, like the turreted female figure,
_personify_, but rather _typifies_ the town, standing as the visible
representation of a real event, its first foundation. To our mental
perceptions, as to our bodily senses, this figure seems no more than
man; there is no blending of his personal nature with the impersonal
nature of the colony, no transfer of attributes from the one to the
other. Though the conventionally imitative, the figurative, and the symbolic,
are three distinct kinds of representation, they are constantly combined
in one composition, as we shall see in the following examples, cited
from the art of successive races in chronological order. In Egyptian art the general representation of water is the
conventionally imitative. In the British Museum are two frescoes from
tombs at Thebes, Nos. 177 and 170: the subject of the first of these is
an oblong pond, ground-plan and elevation being strangely confused in
the design. In this pond water is represented by parallel zigzag lines,
in which fish are swimming about. On the surface are birds and lotos
flowers; the herbage at the edge of the pond is represented by a border
of symmetrical fan-shaped flowers; the field beyond by rows of trees,
arranged round the sides of the pond at right angles to each other, and
in defiance of all laws of perspective. 170, we have the representation of a river with
papyrus on its bank. Here the water is rendered by zigzag lines arranged
vertically and in parallel lines, so as to resemble herring-bone
masonry, thus. There are fish in this fresco as in the preceding, and in
both each fish is drawn very distinctly, not as it would appear to the
eye viewed through water. The mode of representing this element in
Egyptian painting is further abbreviated in their hieroglyphic writing,
where the sign of water is a zigzag line; this line is, so to speak, a
picture of water written in short hand. In the Egyptian Pantheon there
was but one aquatic deity, the god of the Nile; his type is, therefore,
the only figurative representation of water in Egyptian art. (Birch,
"Gallery of British Museum Antiquities," Pl. In Assyrian sculpture
we have very curious conventionally imitative representations of water. On several of the friezes from Nimroud and Khorsabad, men are seen
crossing a river in boats, or in skins, accompanied by horses swimming
(see Layard, ii. In these scenes water is represented by masses
of wavy lines somewhat resembling tresses of hair, and terminating in
curls or volutes; these wavy lines express the general character of a
deep and rapid current, like that of the Tigris. Fish are but sparingly
introduced, the idea of surface being sufficiently expressed by the
floating figures and boats. In the representation of these there is the
same want of perspective as in the Egyptian fresco which we have just
cited. In the Assyrian Pantheon one aquatic deity has been discovered, the god
Dagon, whose human form terminates in a fish's tail. Of the character
and attributes of this deity we know but little. The more abbreviated mode of representing water, the zigzag line, occurs
on the large silver coins with the type of a city or a war galley (see
Layard, ii. These coins were probably struck in Assyria, not
long after the conquest of it by the Persians. In Greek art the modes of representing water are far more varied. Two
conventional imitations, the wave moulding and the Maeander, are well
known. Both are probably of the most remote antiquity; both have been
largely employed as an architectural ornament, and subordinately as a
decoration of vases, costume, furniture and implements. In the wave
moulding we have a conventional representation of the small crisping
waves which break upon the shore of the Mediterranean, the sea of the
Greeks. Their regular succession, and equality of force and volume, are
generalised in this moulding, while the minuter varieties which
distinguish one wave from another are merged in the general type. The
character of ocean waves is to be "for ever changing, yet the same for
ever;" it is this eternity of recurrence which the early artist has
expressed in this hieroglyphic. With this profile representation of water may be compared the sculptured
waves out of which the head and arms of Hyperion are rising in the
pediment of the Parthenon (Elgin Room, No. (65) 91, Museum Marbles, vi. Phidias has represented these waves like a mass of overlapping
tiles, thus generalising their rippling movement. In the Maeander pattern
the graceful curves of nature are represented by angles, as in the
Egyptian hieroglyphic of water: so again the earliest representation of
the labyrinth on the coins of the Cnossus is rectangular; on later coins
we find the curvilinear form introduced. In the language of Greek mythography, the wave pattern and the Maeander
are sometimes used singly for the idea of water, but more frequently
combined with figurative representation. The number of aquatic deities
in the Greek Pantheon led to the invention of a great variety of
beautiful types. Everybody is
familiar with the general form of Poseidon (Neptune), the Nereids, the
Nymphs and River Gods; but the modes in which these types were combined
with conventional imitation and with accessory symbols deserve careful
study, if we would appreciate the surpassing richness and beauty of the
language of art formed out of these elements. This class of representations may be divided into two principal groups,
those relating to the sea, and those relating to fresh water. The power of the ocean and the great features of marine scenery are
embodied in such types as Poseidon, Nereus and the Nereids, that is to
say, in human forms moving through the liquid element in chariots, or on
the back of dolphins, or who combine the human form with that of the
fish-like Tritons. The sea-monsters who draw these chariots are called
Hippocamps, being composed of the tail of a fish and the fore-part of a
horse, the legs terminating in web-feet: this union seems to express
speed and power under perfect control, such as would characterise the
movements of sea deities. A few examples have been here selected to show
how these types were combined with symbols and conventional imitation. In the British Museum is a vase, No. 1257, engraved (Lenormant et De
Witte, Mon. 27), of which the subject is, Europa crossing
the sea on the back of the bull. In this design the sea is represented
by a variety of expedients. First, the swimming action of the bull
suggests the idea of the liquid medium through which he moves. Behind
him stands Nereus, his staff held perpendicularly in his hand; the top
of his staff comes nearly to the level of the bull's back, and is
probably meant as the measure of the whole depth of the sea. Towards the
surface line thus indicated a dolphin is rising; in the middle depth is
another dolphin; below a shrimp and a cuttle-fish, and the bottom is
indicated by a jagged line of rocks, on which are two echini. On a mosaic found at Oudnah in Algeria (Revue Archeol., iii. 50), we
have a representation of the sea, remarkable for the fulness of details
with which it is made out. This, though of the Roman period, is so thoroughly Greek in feeling,
that it may be cited as an example of the class of mythography now under
consideration. The mosaic lines the floor and sides of a bath, and, as
was commonly the case in the baths of the ancients, serves as a
figurative representation of the water it contained. On the sides are hippocamps, figures riding on dolphins, and islands on
which fishermen stand; on the floor are fish, crabs, and shrimps. These, as in the vase with Europa, indicate the bottom of the sea: the
same symbols of the submarine world appear on many other ancient
designs. Thus in vase pictures, when Poseidon upheaves the island of Cos
to overwhelm the Giant Polydotes, the island is represented as an
immense mass of rock; the parts which have been under water are
indicated by a dolphin, a shrimp, and a sepia, the parts above the water
by a goat and a serpent (Lenormant et De Witte, i., tav. Sometimes these symbols occur singly in Greek art, as the types, for
instance, of coins. In such cases they cannot be interpreted without
being viewed in relation to the whole context of mythography to which
they belong. If we find, for example, on one coin of Tarentum a shell,
on another a dolphin, on a third a figure of Tarus, the mythic founder
of the town, riding on a dolphin in the midst of the waves, and this
latter group expresses the idea of the town itself and its position on
the coast, then we know the two former types to be but portions of the
greater design, having been detached from it, as we may detach words
from sentences. The study of the fuller and clearer examples, such as we have cited
above, enables us to explain many more compendious forms of expression. We have, for instance, on coins several representations of ancient
harbors. Of these, the earliest occurs on the coins of Zancle, the modern Messina
in Sicily. The ancients likened the form of this harbor to a sickle, and
on the coins of the town we find a curved object, within the area of
which is a dolphin. On this curve are four square elevations placed at
equal distances. It has been conjectured that these projections are
either towers or the large stones to which galleys were moored still to
be seen in ancient harbors (see Burgon, Numismatic Chronicle, iii. With this archaic representation of a harbor may be compared some
examples of the Roman period. Severus struck at
Corinth (Millingen, Sylloge of Uned. 30) we have a female figure standing on a rock between two recumbent
male figures holding rudders. From an arch at the foot of the rock a
stream is flowing: this is a representation of the rock of the Acropolis
of Corinth: the female figure is a statue of Aphrodite, whose temple
surmounted the rock. The two
recumbent figures are impersonations of the two harbors, Lechreum and
Cenchreia, between which Corinth was situated. 16) describes a similar picture of the Isthmus between the two
harbors, one of which was in the form of a youth, the other of a nymph. On another coin of Corinth we have one of the harbors in a semicircular
form, the whole arc being marked with small equal divisions, to denote
the archways under which the ancient galleys were drawn, _subductae_; at
the either horn or extremity of the harbor is a temple; in the centre of
the mouth, a statue of Neptune. (Millingen, Medailles Ined., Pl. Compare also Millingen, Ancient Coins of Cities and Kings, 1831,
pp. 246; and the
harbor of Ostium, on the large brass coins of Nero, in which there is a
representation of the Roman fleet and a reclining figure of Neptune.) In vase pictures we have occasionally an attempt to represent water
naturally. On a vase in the British Museum (No. 785), of which the
subject is Ulysses and the Sirens, the Sea is rendered by wavy lines
drawn in black on a red ground, and something like the effect of light
playing on the surface of the water is given. On each side of the ship
are shapeless masses of rock on which the Sirens stand. One of the most beautiful of the figurative representations of the sea
is the well-known type of Scylla. She has a beautiful body, terminating
in two barking dogs and two serpent tails. Sometimes drowning men, the
_rari nantes in gurgite vasto_, appear caught up in the coils of these
tails. Scylla generally brandishes a rudder to show
the manner in which she twists the course of ships. For varieties of her
type see Monum. The representations of fresh water may be arranged under the following
heads--rivers, lakes, fountains. There are several figurative modes of representing rivers very
frequently employed in ancient mythography. In the type which occurs earliest we have the human form combined with
that of the bull in several ways. On an archaic coin of Metapontum in
Lucania, (see frontispiece to Millingen, Ancient Coins of Greek Cities
and Kings,) the river Achelous is represented with the figure of a man
with a shaggy beard and bull's horns and ears. On a vase of the best
period of Greek art (Brit. of
Lit., New Series, Lond. 100) the same river is represented
with a satyr's head and long bull's horns on the forehead; his form,
human to the waist, terminates in a fish's tail; his hair falls down his
back; his beard is long and shaggy. In this type we see a combination of
the three forms separately enumerated by Sophocles, in the commencement
of the Trachiniae. [Greek: Acheloon lego,
  os m' en trisin morphaisin exetei patros,
  phoiton enarges auros allot' aiolos,
  drakon heliktos, allot' andreio kytei
  bouproros, ek de daskiou geneiados
  krounoi dierrhainonto krenaiou potou]. In a third variety of this type the human-headed body is united at the
waist with the shoulders of a bull's body, in which it terminates. This
occurs on an early vase. On the coins of Oeniadae
in Acarnia, and on those of Ambracia, all of the period after Alexander
the Great, the Achelous has a bull's body, and head with a human face. In this variety of the type the human element is almost absorbed, as in
the first variety cited above, the coin of Metapontum, the bull portion
of the type is only indicated by the addition of the horns and ears to
the human head. On the analogy between these, varieties in the type of
the Achelous and those under which the metamorphoses of the marine
goddess Thetis are represented, see Gerhard, Auserl. It is probable that, in the type of Thetis, of Proteus, and
also of the Achelous, the singular combinations and transformations are
intended to express the changeful nature of the element water. Numerous other examples may be cited, where rivers are represented by
this combination of the bull and human form, which maybe called, for
convenience, the Androtauric type. On the coins of Sicily, of the
archaic and also of the finest period of art, rivers are most usually
represented by a youthful male figure, with small budding horns; the
hair has the lank and matted form which characterises aquatic deities in
Greek mythography. The name of the river is often inscribed round the
head. When the whole figure occurs on the coin, it is always represented
standing, never reclining. The type of the bull on the coins of Sybaris and Thurium, in Magna
Graecia, has been considered, with great probability, a representation of
this kind. On the coins of Sybaris, which are of a very early period,
the head of the bull is turned round; on those of Thurium, he stoops his
head, butting: the first of these actions has been thought to symbolise
the winding course of the river, the second, its headlong current. On
the coins of Thurium, the idea of water is further suggested by the
adjunct of dolphins and other fish in the exergue of the coin. The
ground on which the bull stands is indicated by herbage or pebbles. Two bulls' head occur on the coins
of Sardis, and it has been ingeniously conjectured by Mr. Burgon that
the two rivers of the place are expressed under this type. The representation of river-gods as human figures in a reclining
position, though probably not so much employed in earlier Greek art as
the Androtauric type, is very much more familiar to us, from its
subsequent adoption in Roman mythography. The earliest example we have
of a reclining river-god is in the figure in the Elgin Room commonly
called the Ilissus, but more probably the Cephissus. This occupied one
angle in the western pediment of the Parthenon; the other Athenian
river, the Ilissus, and the fountain Callirrhoe being represented by a
male and female figure in the opposite angle; this group, now destroyed,
is visible in the drawing made by Carrey in 1678. It is probable that the necessities of pedimental composition first led
the artist to place the river-god in a reclining position. The head of
the Ilissus being broken off, we are not sure whether he had bull's
horns, like the Sicilian figures already described. His form is
youthful, in the folds of the drapery behind him there is a flow like
that of waves, but the idea of water is not suggested by any other
symbol. When we compare this figure with that of the Nile (Visconti,
Mus. 38), and the figure of the Tiber in the Louvre,
both of which are of the Roman period, we see how in these later types
the artist multiplied symbols and accessories, ingrafting them on the
original simple type of the river-god, as it was conceived by Phidias in
the figure of the Ilissus. The Nile is represented as a colossal bearded
figure reclining. At his side is a cornucopia, full of the vegetable
produce of the Egyptian soil. Round his body are sixteen naked boys, who
represent the sixteen cubits, the height to which the river rose in a
favorable year. The statue is placed on a basement divided into three
compartments, one above another. In the uppermost of these, waves are
flowing over in one great sheet from the side of the river-god. In the
other two compartments are the animals and plants of the river; the
bas-reliefs on this basement are, in fact, a kind of abbreviated
symbolic panorama of the Nile. The Tiber is represented in a very similar manner. On the base are, in
two compartments, scenes taken from the early Roman myths; flocks,
herds, and other objects on the banks of the river. 39; Millin, Galerie Mythol., i. p. In the types of the Greek coins of Camarina, we find two interesting
representations of Lakes. On the obverse of one of these we have, within
a circle of the wave pattern, a male head, full face, with dishevelled
hair, and with a dolphin on either side; on the reverse a female figure
sailing on a swan, below which a wave moulding, and above, a dolphin. On another coin the swan type of the reverse is associated with the
youthful head of a river-god, inscribed "Hipparis" on the obverse. On
some smaller coins we have the swan flying over the rippling waves,
which are represented by the wave moulding. When we examine the chart of
Sicily, made by the Admiralty survey, we find marked down at Camarina, a
lake through which the river Hipparis flows. We can hardly doubt that the inhabitants of Camarina represented both
their river and their lakes on their coins. The swan flying over the
waves would represent a lake; the figure associated with it being no
doubt the Aphrodite worshipped at that place: the head, in a circle of
wave pattern, may express that part of the river which flows through the
lake. Fountains are usually represented by a stream of water issuing from a
lion's head in the rock: see a vase (Gerhard, Auserl. ), where Hercules stands, receiving a shower-bath from a hot
spring at Thermae in Sicily. On the coins of Syracuse the fountain
Arethusa is represented by a female head seen to the front; the flowing
lines of her dishevelled hair suggest, though they do not directly
imitate, the bubbling action of the fresh-water spring; the sea in which
it rises is symbolized by the dolphins round the head. This type
presents a striking analogy with that of the Camarina head in the circle
of wave pattern described above. These are the principal modes of representing water in Greek
mythography. In the art of the Roman period, the same kind of figurative
and symbolic language is employed, but there is a constant tendency to
multiply accessories and details, as we have shown in the later
representations of harbors and river-gods cited above. In these crowded
compositions the eye is fatigued and distracted by the quantity it has
to examine; the language of art becomes more copious but less terse and
emphatic, and addresses itself to minds far less intelligent than the
refined critics who were the contemporaries of Phidias. Rivers in Roman art are usually represented by reclining male figures,
generally bearded, holding reeds or other plants in their hands, and
leaning on urns from which water is flowing. On the coins of many Syrian
cities, struck in imperial times, the city is represented by a turreted
female figure seated on rocks, and resting her feet on the shoulder of a
youthful male figure, who looks up in her face, stretching out his arms,
and who is sunk in the ground as high as the waist. See Mueller
(Denkmaeler d. A. Kunst, i., taf. 220) for a group of this kind
in the Vatican, and several similar designs on coins. On the column of Trajan there occur many rude representations of the
Danube, and other rivers crossed by the Romans in their military
expeditions. The water is imitated by sculptured wavy lines, in which
boats are placed. In one scene (Bartoli, Colonna Trajana, Tav. 4) this
rude conventional imitation is combined with a figure. In a recess in
the river bank is a reclining river-god, terminating at the waist. This
is either meant for a statue which was really placed on the bank of the
river, and which therefore marks some particular locality, or we have
here figurative representation blended with conventional imitation. On the column of Antoninus (Bartoli, Colon. 15) a storm of
rain is represented by the head of Jupiter Pluvius, who has a vast
outspread beard flowing in long tresses. In the Townley collection, in
the British Museum, is a Roman helmet found at Ribchester in Lancashire,
with a mask or vizor attached. The helmet is richly embossed with
figures in a battle scene; round the brow is a row of turrets; the hair
in the forehead is so treated as to give the idea of waves washing the
base of the turrets. This head is perhaps a figurative representation of
a town girt with fortifications and a moat, near which some great battle
was fought. It is engraved (Vetusta Monum. In the Galeria at Florence is a group in alto relievo (Gori, Inscript. 14) of three female figures, one of whom is
certainly Demeter Kourotrophos, or the earth; another, Thetis, or the
sea; the centre of the three seems to represent Aphrodite associated, as
on the coins of Camarina, with the element of fresh water. This figure is seated on a swan, and holds over her head an arched veil. Her hair is bound with reeds; above her veil grows a tall water plant,
and below the swan other water plants, and a stork seated on a _hydria_,
or pitcher, from which water is flowing. The swan, the stork, the water
plants, and the _hydria_ must all be regarded as symbols of fresh water,
the latter emblem being introduced to show that the element is fit for
the use of man. Fountains in Roman art are generally personified as figures of nymphs
reclining with urns, or standing holding before them a large shell. One of the latest representations of water in ancient art is the mosaic
of Palestrina (Barthelemy, in Bartoli, Peint. Antiques) which may be
described as a kind of rude panorama of some district of Upper Egypt, a
bird's-eye view, half man, half picture, in which the details are
neither adjusted to a scale, nor drawn according to perspective, but
crowded together, as they would be in an ancient bas-relief. ARABIAN ORNAMENTATION. I do not mean what I have here said of the Inventive power of the Arab
to be understood as in the least applying to the detestable
ornamentation of the Alhambra. [105] The Alhambra is no more
characteristic of Arab work, than Milan Cathedral is of Gothic: it is a
late building, a work of the Spanish dynasty in its last decline, and
its ornamentation is fit for nothing but to be transferred to patterns
of carpets or bindings of books, together with their marbling, and
mottling, and other mechanical recommendations. The Alhambra ornament
has of late been largely used in shop-fronts, to the no small detriment
of Regent Street and Oxford Street. LXXII., be the original angle of the wall. Inscribe
within it a circle, _p_ Q N _p_, of the size of the bead required,
touching A B, A C, in _p_, _p_; join _p_, _p_, and draw B C parallel to
it, touching the circle. Then the lines B C, _p p_ are the limits of the possible chamfers
constructed with curves struck either from centre A, as the line Q _q_,
N _d_, _r u_, _g c_, &c., or from any other point chosen as a centre in
the direction Q A produced: and also of all chamfers in straight lines,
as _a b_, _e f_. There are, of course, an infinite number of chamfers to
be struck between B C and _p p_, from every point in Q A produced to
infinity; thus we have infinity multiplied into infinity to express the
number of possible chamfers of this species, which are peculiarly
Italian chamfers; together with another singly infinite group of the
straight chamfers, _a b_, _e f_, &c., of which the one formed by the
line _a b_, passing through the centre of the circle, is the universal
early Gothic chamfer of Venice. Either on the line A C, or on any other lines A _l_ or A _m_,
radiating from A, any number of centres may be taken, from which, with
any radii not greater than the distance between such points and Q, an
infinite number of curves may be struck, such as _t u_, _r s_, N _n_
(all which are here struck from centres on the line A C). These lines
represent the great class of the northern chamfers, of which the number
is infinity raised to its fourth power, but of which the curve N _n_
(for northern) represents the average condition; the shallower chamfers
of the same group, _r s_, _t u_, &c., occurring often in Italy. The
lines _r u_, _t u_, and _a b_ may be taken approximating to the most
frequent conditions of the southern chamfer. It is evident that the chords of any of these curves will give a
relative group of rectilinear chamfers, occurring both in the North and
South; but the rectilinear chamfers, I think, invariably fall within the
line Q C, and are either parallel with it, or inclined to A C at an
angle greater than A C Q, and often perpendicular to it; but never
inclined to it at an angle less than A C Q. The following extract from my note-book refers also to some features of
late decoration of shafts. "The Scuola di San Rocco is one of the most interesting examples of
Renaissance work in Venice. Its fluted pillars are surrounded each by a
wreath, one of vine, another of laurel, another of oak, not indeed
arranged with the fantasticism of early Gothic; but, especially the
laurel, reminding one strongly of the laurel sprays, powerful as well as
beautiful, of Veronese and Tintoret. Their stems are curiously and
richly interlaced--the last vestige of the Byzantine wreathed work--and
the vine-leaves are ribbed on the surfaces, I think, nearly as finely as
those of the Noah,[106] though more injured by time. The capitals are
far the richest Renaissance in Venice, less corrupt and more masculine
in plan, than any other, and truly suggestive of support, though of
course showing the tendency to error in this respect; and finally, at
the angles of the pure Attic bases, on the square plinth, are set
couchant animals; one, an elephant four inches high, very curiously and
cleverly cut, and all these details worked with a spirit, finish, fancy,
and affection quite worthy of the middle ages. But they have all the
marked fault of being utterly detached from the architecture. The
wreaths round the columns look as if they would drop off the next
moment, and the animals at the bases produce exactly the effect of mice
who had got there by accident: one feels them ridiculously diminutive,
and utterly useless." The effect of diminutiveness is, I think, chiefly owing to there being
no other groups of figures near them, to accustom the eye to the
proportion, and to the needless choice of the largest animals,
elephants, bears, and lions, to occupy a position so completely
insignificant, and to be expressed on so contemptible a scale,--not in a
bas-relief or pictorial piece of sculpture, but as independent figures. The whole building is a most curious illustration of the appointed fate
of the Renaissance architects,--to caricature whatever they imitated,
and misapply whatever they learned. ROMANIST DECORATION OF BASES. I have spoken above (Appendix 12) of the way in which the Roman Catholic
priests everywhere suffer their churches to be desecrated. But the worst
instances I ever saw of sacrilege and brutality, daily permitted in the
face of all men, were the uses to which the noble base of St. Mark's was
put, when I was last in Venice. Portions of nearly all cathedrals may be
found abandoned to neglect; but this base of St. Full fronting the western sun--crossing the whole breadth of
St. Mark's Place--the termination of the most noble square in the
world--the centre of the most noble city--its purple marbles were, in
the winter of 1849, the customary _gambling tables_ of the idle children
of Venice; and the parts which flank the Great Entrance, that very
entrance where "Barbarossa flung his mantle off," were the counters of a
common bazaar for children's toys, carts, dolls, and small pewter spoons
and dishes, German caricatures and books of the Opera, mixed with those
of the offices of religion; the caricatures being fastened with twine
round the porphyry shafts of the church. One Sunday, the 24th of
February, 1850, the book-stall being somewhat more richly laid out than
usual, I noted down the titles of a few of the books in the order in
which they lay, and I give them below. The irony conveyed by the
juxtaposition of the three in Italics appears too shrewd to be
accidental; but the fact was actually so. Along the edge of the white plinth were a row of two kinds of books,

  Officium Beatae Virg. M.; and Officium Hebdomadae sanctae, juxta Formam
    Missalis et Breviarii Romani sub Urbano VIII. Behind these lay, side by side, the following:

  Don Desiderio. Breve Esposizione della Carattere di vera Religione. On the top of this latter, keeping its leaves open,

  La Figlia del Reggimento. _Carteggio di Madama la Marchesa di Pompadour, ossia
     raccolta di Lettere scritte della Medesima._
  _Istruzioni di morale Condotta per le Figlie._
  _Francesca di Rimini. Dramma per Musica._

Then, a little farther on, after a mass of plays:--

  Orazioni a Gesu Nazareno e a Maria addolorata. Semiramide; Melodramma tragico da rappresentarsi nel Gran Teatro
    il Fenice. Modo di orare per l'Acquisto del S. Giubileo, conceduto a tutto il
    Mondo Cattolico da S. S. Gregorio XVI. Le due illustre Rivali, Melodramma in Tre Atti, da rappresentarsi
    nel nuovo Gran Teatro il Fenice. Il Cristiano secondo il Cuore di Gesu, per la Pratica delle sue
    Virtu. Traduzione dell'Idioma Italiana. La chiava Chinese; Commedia del Sig. La Pelarina; Intermezzo de Tre Parti per Musica. Il Cavaliero e la Dama; Commedia in Tre Atti in Prosa. But this being the last piece of
Appendix I have to add to the present volume, I would desire to close
its pages with a question to my readers--a statistical question, which,
I doubt not, is being accurately determined for us all elsewhere, and
which, therefore, it seems to me, our time would not be wasted in
determining for ourselves. There has now been peace between England and the continental powers
about thirty-five years, and during that period the English have visited
the continent at the rate of many thousands a year, staying there, I
suppose, on the average, each two or three months; nor these an inferior
kind of English, but the kind which ought to be the best--the noblest
born, the best taught, the richest in time and money, having more
leisure, knowledge, and power than any other portion of the nation. These, we might suppose, beholding, as they travelled, the condition of
the states in which the Papal religion is professed, and being, at the
same time, the most enlightened section of a great Protestant nation,
would have been animated with some desire to dissipate the Romanist
errors, and to communicate to others the better knowledge which they
possessed themselves. I doubt not but that He who gave peace upon the
earth, and gave it by the hand of England, expected this much of her,
and has watched every one of the millions of her travellers as they
crossed the sea, and kept count for him of his travelling expenses, and
of their distribution, in a manner of which neither the traveller nor
his courier were at all informed. I doubt not, I say, but that such
accounts have been literally kept for all of us, and that a day will
come when they will be made clearly legible to us, and when we shall see
added together, on one side of the account book, a great sum, the
certain portion, whatever it may be, of this thirty-five years'
spendings of the rich English, accounted for in this manner:--

To wooden spoons, nut-crackers, and jewellery, bought at Geneva, and
elsewhere among the Alps, so much; to shell cameos and bits of mosaic
bought at Rome, so much; to coral horns and lava brooches bought at
Naples, so much; to glass beads at Venice, and gold filigree at Genoa,
so much; to pictures, and statues, and ornaments, everywhere, so much;
to avant-couriers and extra post-horses, for show and magnificence, so
much; to great entertainments and good places for seeing sights, so
much; to ball-dresses and general vanities, so much. This, I say, will
be the sum on one side of the book; and on the other will be written:

To the struggling Protestant Churches of France, Switzerland, and
Piedmont, so much. Had we not better do this piece of statistics for ourselves, in time? FOOTNOTES:

  [93] Ed. [95] L'Artiste en Batiments, par Louis Berteaux: Dijon, 1848. My
    printer writes at the side of the page a note, which I insert with
    thanks:--"This is not the first attempt at a French order. The
    writer has a Treatise by Sebastian Le Clerc, a great man in his
    generation, which contains a Roman order, a Spanish order, which the
    inventor appears to think very grand, and a _new_ French order
    nationalised by the Gallic cock crowing and clapping its wings in
    the capital." [96] The lower group in Plate XVII. [97] One of the upper stories is also in Gally Knight's plate
    represented as merely banded, and otherwise plain: it is, in
    reality, covered with as delicate inlaying as the rest. The whole
    front is besides out of proportion, and out of perspective, at once;
    and yet this work is referred to as of authority, by our architects. Well may our architecture fall from its place among the fine arts,
    as it is doing rapidly; nearly all our works of value being devoted
    to the Greek architecture, which is _utterly useless_ to us--or
    worse. _One_ most noble book, however, has been dedicated to our
    English abbeys,--Mr. E. Sharpe's "Architectural Parallels"--almost a
    model of what I should like to see done for the Gothic of all
    Europe. [98] Except in the single passage "tell it unto the Church," which
    is simply the _extension_ of what had been commanded before, i.e.,
    tell the fault first "between thee and him," then taking "with thee
    one or two more," then, to all Christian men capable of hearing the
    cause: if he refuse to hear their common voice, "let him be unto
    thee as a heathen man and publican:" (But consider how Christ
    treated both.) [99] One or two remarks on this subject, some of which I had
    intended to have inserted here, and others in Appendix 5, I have
    arranged in more consistent order, and published in a separate
    pamphlet, "Notes on the Construction of Sheep-folds," for the
    convenience of readers interested in other architecture than that of
    Venetian palaces. [100] Not, however, by Johnson's _testimony_: Vide Adventurer, No. "Such operations as required neither celerity nor strength,--the
    low drudgery of collating copies, comparing authorities, _digesting
    dictionaries_, or accumulating compilations." [101] We have done so--theoretically; just as one would reason on
    the human form from the bones outwards: but the Architect of human
    form frames all at once--bone and flesh. [102] Of course mere multiplicability, as of an engraving, does not
    diminish the intrinsic value of the work; and if the casts of
    sculpture could be as sharp as the sculpture itself, they would hold
    to it the relation of value which engravings hold to paintings. And,
    if we choose to have our churches all alike, we might cast them all
    in bronze--we might actually coin churches, and have mints of
    Cathedrals. It would be worthy of the spirit of the century to put
    milled edges for mouldings, and have a popular currency of religious
    subjects: a new cast of nativities every Christmas. I have not heard
    this contemplated, however, and I speak, therefore, only of the
    results which I believe are contemplated, as attainable by mere
    mechanical applications of glass and iron. [103] I shall often have occasion to write measures in the current
    text, therefore the reader will kindly understand that whenever they
    are thus written, 2,, 2, with double commas between, the first
    figures stand for English feet, the second for English inches. [104] I cannot suffer this volume to close without also thanking my
    kind friend, Mr. Rawdon Brown, for help given me in a thousand ways
    during my stay in Venice: but chiefly for his direction to passages
    elucidatory of my subject in the MSS. [105] I have not seen the building itself, but Mr. Owen Jones's work
    may, I suppose, be considered as sufficiently representing it for
    all purposes of criticism. [106] The sculpture of the Drunkenness of Noah on the Ducal Palace,
    of which we shall have much to say hereafter. *       *       *       *       *




CORRECTIONS MADE TO THE ORIGINAL TEXT. Footnote [31] 'Greek porticos' changed to 'Greek porticoes'. Page 161: Added 'r' to 'timbe' in 'long stone or piece of timbe'. Page 237:'rererence' changed to'reference' in 'How is ornament to be
  treated with rererence'. Page 273: 'no' changed to 'not' in 'a peculiar look, which I can no
  otherwise describe'. Page 333: comma changed to period at the paragraph ending with
 'separates its ornament into distinct families, broadly definable'. Page 370: 'two-thsrds' corrected to 'two-thirds'. Page 397: 'bodly' corrected to 'bodily' in'merely through the channel
  of the bodly dexterities'. Page 398: 'calld' corrected to 'called' in 'Men engaged in the practice
  of these are calld artizans'. Page 401: 'necesary' corrected to 'necessary' in 'as Rubens was of that
  necesary for his'. Page 406: Space placement corrected in 'I found it a sugly at last' to
  'I found it as ugly at last'. Page 423: 'Milligen' corrected to 'Millingen' in 'Compare also Milligen,
  Ancient Coins of Cities and Kings'. Page 433: space between 'rappresent' and 'arsi' removed in 'Tre Atti, da
  rappresent arsi'. Page 433: 'del' corrected to 'dell' in 'Traduzione del' Idioma
  Italiana'. We had
quite a crowd in the evening and took in over three hundred dollars. Charlie Hills and Ellsworth Daggett stayed there all night to take care
of the hall. We had a fish pond, a grab-bag and a post-office. Anna says
they had all the smart people in the post-office to write the
letters,--Mr. Morse, Miss Achert, Albert Granger and herself. Some one
asked Albert Granger if his law business was good and he said one man
thronged into his office one day. _February_ 23.--We took in two hundred dollars to-day at the fair. George Willson if she could not
write a poem expressing our thanks to Mr. Backus and she stepped aside
for about five minutes and handed us the following lines which we sent
to him. We think it is about the nicest thing in the whole fair. "In ancient time the God of Wine
    They crowned with vintage of the vine,
    And sung his praise with song and glee
    And all their best of minstrelsy. The Backus whom we honor now
    Would scorn to wreathe his generous brow
    With heathen emblems--better he
    Will love our gratitude to see
    Expressed in all the happy faces
    Assembled in these pleasant places. May joy attend his footsteps here
    And crown him in a brighter sphere." _February_ 24.--Susie Daggett and I went to the hall this morning to
clean up. We sent back the dishes, not one broken, and disposed of
everything but the tables and stoves, which were to be taken away this
afternoon. We feel quite satisfied with the receipts so far, but the
expenses will be considerable. In _Ontario County Times_ of the following week we find this card of
thanks:

_February_ 28.--The Fair for the benefit of the Freedmen, held in the
Town Hall on Thursday and Friday of last week was eminently successful,
and the young ladies take this method of returning their sincere thanks
to the people of Canandaigua and vicinity for their generous
contributions and liberal patronage. It being the first public
enterprise in which the Society has ventured independently, the young
ladies were somewhat fearful of the result, but having met with such
generous responses from every quarter they feel assured that they need
never again doubt of success in any similar attempt so long as
Canandaigua contains so many large hearts and corresponding purses. But
our village cannot have all the praise this time. S. D. Backus of New
York City, for their very substantial aid, not only in gifts and
unstinted patronage, but for their invaluable labor in the decoration of
the hall and conduct of the Fair. But for them most of the manual labor
would have fallen upon the ladies. The thanks of the Society are
especially due, also, to those ladies who assisted personally with their
superior knowledge and older experience. W. P. Fiske for his
valuable services as cashier, and to Messrs. Daggett, Chapin and Hills
for services at the door; and to all the little boys and girls who
helped in so many ways. The receipts amounted to about $490, and thanks to our cashier, the
money is all good, and will soon be on its way carrying substantial
visions of something to eat and to wear to at least a few of the poor
Freedmen of the South. By order of Society,
                                            Carrie C. Richards, Pres't. Editor--I expected to see an account of the Young Ladies' Fair in
your last number, but only saw a very handsome acknowledgment by the
ladies to the citizens. Your "local" must have been absent; and I beg
the privilege in behalf of myself and many others of doing tardy justice
to the successful efforts of the Aid Society at their debut February
22nd. Gotham furnished an artist and an architect, and the Society did the
rest. The decorations were in excellent taste, and so were the young
ladies. The skating pond was never in
better condition. On entering the hall I paused first before the table
of toys, fancy work and perfumery. Here was the President, and I hope I
shall be pardoned for saying that no President since the days of
Washington can compare with the President of this Society. Then I
visited a candy table, and hesitated a long time before deciding which I
would rather eat, the delicacies that were sold, or the charming
creatures who sold them. One delicious morsel, in a pink silk, was so
tempting that I seriously contemplated eating her with a
spoon--waterfall and all. [By the way, how do we know that the Romans
wore waterfalls? Because Marc Antony, in his funeral oration on Mr. Caesar, exclaimed, "O water fall was there, my countrymen!"] At this
point my attention was attracted by a fish pond. I tried my luck, caught
a whale, and seeing all my friends beginning to blubber, I determined to
visit the old woman who lived in a shoe.--She was very glad to see me. I
bought one of her children, which the Society can redeem for $1,000 in
smoking caps. The fried oysters were delicious; a great many of the bivalves got into
a stew, and I helped several of them out. Delicate ice cream, nicely
"baked in cowld ovens," was destroyed in immense quantities. I scream
when I remember the plates full I devoured, and the number of bright
women to whom I paid my devours. Beautiful cigar girls sold fragrant
Havanas, and bit off the ends at five cents apiece, extra. The fair
post-mistress and her fair clerks, so fair that they were almost
fairies, drove a very thriving business. --Let no man say hereafter that
the young ladies of Canandaigua are uneducated in all that makes women
lovely and useful. The
members of this Society have won the admiration of all their friends,
and especially of the most devoted of their servants,
                                                            Q. E. D.

If I had written that article, I should have given the praise to Susie
Daggett, for it belongs to her. _Sunday, June_ 24.--My Sunday School scholars are learning the shorter
catechism. One recited thirty-five answers to questions to-day, another
twenty-six, another twenty, the others eleven. They do
not see why it is called the "shorter" Catechism! They all had their
ambrotypes taken with me yesterday at Finley's--Mary Hoyt, Fannie and
Ella Lyon, Ella Wood, Ella Van Tyne, Mary Vanderbrook, Jennie Whitlaw
and Katie Neu. They are all going to dress in white and sit on the front
seat in church at my wedding. Gooding make
individual fruit cakes for each of them and also some for each member of
our sewing society. _Thursday, June_ 21.--We went to a lawn fete at Mrs. F. F. Thompson's
this afternoon. The flowers, the grounds, the
young people and the music all combined to make the occasion perfect. _Note:_ Canandaigua is the summer home of Mrs. Thompson, who has
previously given the village a children's playground, a swimming school,
a hospital and a home for the aged, and this year (1911) has presented a
park as a beauty spot at foot of Canandaigua Lake. _June_ 28.--Dear Abbie Clark and Captain Williams were married in the
Congregational church this evening. The church was trimmed beautifully
and Abbie looked sweet. We attended the reception afterwards at her
house. "May calm and sunshine hallow their clasped hands." _July_ 15.--The girls of the Society have sent me my flag bed quilt,
which they have just finished. It was hard work quilting such hot days
but it is done beautifully. Bessie Seymour wrote the names on the stars. In the center they used six stars for "Three rousing cheers for the
Union." The names on the others are Sarah McCabe, Mary Paul, Fannie
Paul, Fannie Palmer, Nettie Palmer, Susie Daggett, Fannie Pierce, Sarah
Andrews, Lottie Clark, Abbie Williams, Carrie Lamport, Isadore Blodgett,
Nannie Corson, Laura Chapin, Mary F. Fiske, Lucilla F. Pratt, Jennie H.
Hazard, Sarah H. Foster, Mary Jewett, Mary C. Stevens, Etta Smith,
Cornelia Richards, Ella Hildreth, Emma Wheeler, Mary Wheeler, Mrs. Pierce, Alice Jewett, Bessie Seymour, Clara Coleman, Julia Phelps. It
kept the girls busy to get Abbie Clark's quilt and mine finished within
one month. They hope that the rest of the girls will postpone their
nuptials till there is a change in the weather. Mercury stands 90
degrees in the shade. _July_ 19, 1866.--Our wedding day. We saw the dear little Grandmother,
God bless her, watching us from the window as we drove away. Alexandria Bay, _July_ 26.--Anna writes me that Charlie Wells said he
had always wanted a set of Clark's Commentaries, but I had carried off
the entire Ed. _July_ 28.--As we were changing boats at Burlington, Vt, for Saratoga,
to our surprise, we met Captain and Abbie Williams, but could only stop
a moment. Saratoga, 29_th._--We heard Rev. Theodore Cuyler preach to-day from the
text, "Demas hath forsaken me, having loved this present world." He
leads devotional exercises every morning in the parlors of the Columbian
Hotel. I spoke to him this morning and he said my father was one of his
best and earliest friends. Canandaigua, _September_ 1.--A party of us went down to the Canandaigua
hotel this morning to see President Johnson, General Grant and Admiral
Farragut and other dignitaries. The train stopped about half an hour and
they all gave brief speeches. 1867

_July_ 27.--Col. James M. Bull was buried from the home of Mr. Alexander
Howell to-day, as none of his family reside here now. _November_ 13.--Our brother John and wife and baby Pearl have gone to
London, England, to live. _December_ 28.--A large party of Canandaiguans went over to Rochester
last evening to hear Charles Dickens' lecture, and enjoyed it more than
I can possibly express. He was quite hoarse and had small bills
distributed through the Opera House with the announcement:

                    MR. CHARLES DICKENS

    Begs indulgence for a Severe Cold, but hopes its effects
    may not be very perceptible after a few minutes' Reading. We brought these notices home with us for souvenirs. It was worth a great deal just to look upon the man
who wrote Little Dorrit, David Copperfield and all the other books,
which have delighted us so much. We hope that he will live to write a
great many more. He spoke very appreciatively of his enthusiastic
reception in this country and almost apologized for some of the opinions
that he had expressed in his "American Notes," which he published, after
his first visit here, twenty-five years ago. He evidently thinks that
the United States of America are quite worth while. 1871

_August_ 6.--Under the auspices of the Y.M.C.A., Hon. George H. Stuart,
President of the U. S. Christian Commission, spoke in an open air
meeting on the square this afternoon and in our church this evening. The
house was packed and such eloquence I never heard from mortal lips. He
ought to be called the Whitefield of America. He told of the good the
Christian Commission had done before the war and since. They took up a collection which must have amounted to
hundreds of dollars. 1872

_Naples, June._--John has invited Aunt Ann Field, and James, his wife
and me and Babe Abigail to come to England to make them a visit, and we
expect to sail on the Baltic July sixth. Baltic, July_ 7.--We left New York yesterday under
favorable circumstances. It was a beautiful summer day, flags were
flying and everything seemed so joyful we almost forgot we were leaving
home and native land. There were many passengers, among them being Mr. Anthony Drexel and U. S. Grant, Jr., who boarded the steamer
from a tug boat which came down the bay alongside when we had been out
half an hour. President Grant was with him and stood on deck, smoking
the proverbial cigar. We were glad to see him and the passengers gave
him three cheers and three times three, with the greatest enthusiasm. _Liverpool, July_ 16.--We arrived here to-day, having been just ten days
on the voyage. There were many clergymen of note on board, among them,
Rev. John H. Vincent, D.D., eminent in the Methodist Episcopal Church,
who is preparing International Sunday School lessons. He sat at our
table and Philip Phillips also, who is a noted evangelistic singer. They
held services both Sabbaths, July 7 and 15, in the grand saloon of the
steamer, and also in the steerage where the text was "And they willingly
received him into the ship." The immigrants listened eagerly, when the
minister urged them all to "receive Jesus." We enjoyed several evening
literary entertainments, when it was too cold or windy to sit on deck. We had the most luscious strawberries at dinner to-night, that I ever
ate. So large and red and ripe, with the hulls on and we dipped them in
powdered sugar as we ate them, a most appetizing way. _London, July_ 17.--On our way to London to-day I noticed beautiful
flower beds at every station, making our journey almost a path of roses. In the fields, men and women both, were harvesting the hay, making
picturesque scenes, for the sky was cloudless and I was reminded of the
old hymn, commencing

    "Sweet fields beyond the swelling flood,
    Stand dressed in living green." We performed the journey from Liverpool to London, a distance of 240
miles, in five hours. John, Laura and little Pearl met us at Euston
Station, and we were soon whirled away in cabs to 24 Upper Woburn Place,
Tavistock Square, John's residence. Dinner was soon ready, a most
bountiful repast. We spent the remainder of the day visiting and
enjoying ourselves generally. It seemed so good to be at the end of the
journey, although we had only two days of really unpleasant weather on
the voyage. John and Laura are so kind and hospitable. They have a
beautiful home, lovely children and apparently every comfort and luxury
which this world can afford. _Sunday, July_ 22.--We went to Spurgeon's Tabernacle this morning to
listen to this great preacher, with thousands of others. I had never
looked upon such a sea of faces before, as I beheld from the gallery
where we sat. The pulpit was underneath one gallery, so there seemed as
many people over the preacher's head, as there were beneath and around
him and the singing was as impressive as the sermon. I thought of the
hymn, "Hark ten thousand harps and voices, Sound the notes of praise
above." Spurgeon was so lame from rheumatism that he used two canes
and placed one knee on a chair beside him, when preaching. His text was
"And there shall be a new heaven and a new earth." I found that all I
had heard of his eloquence was true. _Sunday, July_ 29.--We have spent the entire week sightseeing, taking in
Hyde Park, Windsor Castle, Westminster Abbey, St. Paul's Cathedral, the
Tower of London and British Museum. We also went to Madame Tussaud's
exhibition of wax figures and while I was looking in the catalogue for
the number of an old gentleman who was sitting down apparently asleep,
he got up and walked away! We drove to Sydenham ten miles from London,
to see the Crystal Palace which Abbie called the "Christmas Palace." Henry Chesebro of Canandaigua are here and came
to see us to-day. _August_ 13.--Amid the whirl of visiting, shopping and sightseeing in
this great city, my diary has been well nigh forgotten. The descriptive
letters to home friends have been numerous and knowing that they would
be preserved, I thought perhaps they would do as well for future
reference as a diary kept for the same purpose, but to-day, as St. Pancras' bell was tolling and a funeral procession going by, we heard by
cable of the death of our dear, dear Grandmother, the one who first
encouraged us to keep a journal of daily deeds, and who was always most
interested in all that interested us and now I cannot refrain if I
would, from writing down at this sad hour, of all the grief that is in
my heart. She has only stepped inside the
temple-gate where she has long been waiting for the Lord's entrance
call. I weep for ourselves that we shall see her dear face no more. It
does not seem possible that we shall never see her again on this earth. She took such an interest in our journey and just as we started I put my
dear little Abigail Beals Clarke in her lap to receive her parting
blessing. As we left the house she sat at the front window and saw us go
and smiled her farewell. _August_ 20.--Anna has written how often Grandmother prayed that "He who
holds the winds in his fists and the waters in the hollow of his hands,
would care for us and bring us to our desired haven." She had received
one letter, telling of our safe arrival and how much we enjoyed going
about London, when she was suddenly taken ill and Dr. Anna's letter came, after ten days, telling us all
the sad news, and how Grandmother looked out of the window the last
night before she was taken ill, and up at the moon and stars and said
how beautiful they were. Anna says, "How can I ever write it? Our dear
little Grandmother died on my bed to-day." _August_ 30.--John, Laura and their nurse and baby John, Aunt Ann Field
and I started Tuesday on a trip to Scotland, going first to Glasgow
where we remained twenty-four hours. We visited the Cathedral and were
about to go down into the crypt when the guide told us that Gen. We stopped to look at him and felt like
telling him that we too were Americans. He was in good health and
spirits, apparently, and looked every inch a soldier with his cloak
a-la-militaire around him. We visited the Lochs and spent one night at
Inversnaid on Loch Lomond and then went on up Loch Katrine to the
Trossachs. When we took the little steamer, John said, "All aboard for
Naples," it reminded him so much of Canandaigua Lake. We arrived safely
in Edinburgh the next day by rail and spent four days in that charming
city, so beautiful in situation and in every natural advantage. We saw
the window from whence John Knox addressed the populace and we also
visited the Castle on the hill. Then we went to Melrose and visited the
Abbey and also Abbotsford, the residence of Sir Walter Scott. We went
through the rooms and saw many curios and paintings and also the
library. Sir Walter's chair at his desk was protected by a rope, but
Laura, nothing daunted, lifted the baby over it and seated him there for
a moment saying "I am sure, now, he will be clever." We continued our
journey that night and arrived in London the next morning. _Ventnor, Isle of Wight, September_ 9.--Aunt Ann, Laura's sister,
Florentine Arnold, nurse and two children, Pearl and Abbie, and I are
here for three weeks on the seashore. _September_ 16.--We have visited all the neighboring towns, the graves
of the Dairyman's daughter and little Jane, the young cottager, and the
scene of Leigh Richmond's life and labors. We have enjoyed bathing in
the surf, and the children playing in the sands and riding on the
donkeys. We have very pleasant rooms, in a house kept by an old couple, Mr. Tuddenham, down on the esplanade. They serve excellent meals in a
most homelike way. We have an abundance of delicious milk and cream
which they tell me comes from "Cowes"! _London, September_ 30.--Anna has come to England to live with John for
the present. She came on the Adriatic, arriving September 24. We are so
glad to see her once more and will do all in our power to cheer her in
her loneliness. _Paris, October_ 18.--John, Laura, Aunt Ann and I, nurse and baby,
arrived here to-day for a few days' visit. We had rather a stormy
passage on the Channel. I asked one of the seamen the name of the vessel
and he answered me "The H'Albert H'Edward, Miss!" This information must
have given me courage, for I was perfectly sustained till we reached
Calais, although nearly every one around me succumbed. _October_ 22.--We have driven through the Bois de Boulogne, visited Pere
la Chaise, the Morgue, the ruins of the Tuileries, which are left just
as they were since the Commune. We spent half a day at the Louvre
without seeing half of its wonders. I went alone to a photographer's, Le
Jeune, to be "taken" and had a funny time. He queried "Parlez-vous
Francais?" I shook my head and asked him "Parlez-vous Anglaise?" at
which query he shrugged his shoulders and shook his head! I ventured to
tell him by signs that I would like my picture taken and he held up two
sizes of pictures and asked me "Le cabinet, le vignette?" I held up my
fingers, to tell him I would like six of each, whereupon he proceeded to
make ready and when he had seated me, he made me understand that he
hoped I would sit perfectly still, which I endeavored to do. After the
first sitting, he showed displeasure and let me know that I had swayed
to and fro. Another attempt was more satisfactory and he said "Tres
bien, Madame," and I gave him my address and departed. _October_ 26.--My photographs have come and all pronounce them indeed
"tres bien." We visited the Tomb of Napoleon to-day. _October_ 27.--We attended service to-day at the American Chapel and I
enjoyed it more than I can ever express. After hearing a foreign tongue
for the past ten days, it seemed like getting home to go into a
Presbyterian church and hear a sermon from an American pastor. The
singing in the choir was so homelike, that when they sang "Awake my soul
to joyful lays and sing thy great Redeemer's praise," it seemed to me
that I heard a well known tenor voice from across the sea, especially in
the refrain "His loving kindness, oh how free." The text was "As an
eagle stirreth up her nest, fluttereth over her young, spreadeth abroad
her wings, taketh them, beareth them on her wings, so the Lord did lead
him and there was no strange God with him." It was a
wonderful sermon and I shall never forget it. On our way home, we
noticed the usual traffic going on, building of houses, women were
standing in their doors knitting and there seemed to be no sign of
Sunday keeping, outside of the church. _London, October_ 31.--John and I returned together from Paris and now I
have only a few days left before sailing for home. There was an
Englishman here to-day who was bragging about the beer in England being
so much better than could be made anywhere else. He said, "In America,
you have the 'ops, I know, but you haven't the Thames water, you know." _Sunday, November_ 3.--We went to hear Rev. He is a new light, comparatively, and bids fair to rival
Spurgeon and Newman Hall and all the rest. He is like a lion and again
like a lamb in the pulpit. _Liverpool, November_ 6.--I came down to Liverpool to-day with Abbie and
nurse, to sail on the Baltic, to-morrow. There were two Englishmen in
our compartment and hearing Abbie sing "I have a Father in the Promised
Land," they asked her where her Father lived and she said "In America,"
and told them she was going on the big ship to-morrow to see him. Then
they turned to me and said they supposed I would be glad to know that
the latest cable from America was that U. S. Grant was elected for his
second term as President of the United States. I assured them that I was
very glad to hear such good news. _November_ 9.--I did not know any of the passengers when we sailed, but
soon made pleasant acquaintances. Sykes from New York and in course of conversation I found that she as
well as myself, was born in Penn Yan, Yates County, New York, and that
her parents were members of my Father's church, which goes to prove that
the world is not so very wide after all. Abbie is a great pet among the
passengers and is being passed around from one to another from morning
till night. They love to hear her sing and coax her to say "Grace" at
table. She closes her eyes and folds her hands devoutly and says, "For
what we are about to receive, may the Lord make us truly thankful." They
all say "Amen" to this, for they are fearful that they will not perhaps
be "thankful" when they finish! _November_ 15.--I have been on deck every day but one, and not missed a
single meal. There was a terrible storm one night and the next morning I
told one of the numerous clergymen, that I took great comfort in the
night, thinking that nothing could happen with so many of the Lord's
anointed, on board. He said that he wished he had thought of that, for
he was frightened almost to death! We have sighted eleven steamers and
on Wednesday we were in sight of the banks of Newfoundland all the
afternoon, our course being unusually northerly and we encountered no
fogs, contrary to the expectation of all. Every one pronounces the
voyage pleasant and speedy for this time of year. _Naples, N. Y., November_ 20.--We arrived safely in New York on Sunday. Abbie spied her father very quickly upon the dock as we slowly came up
and with glad and happy hearts we returned his "Welcome home." We spent
two days in New York and arrived home safe and sound this evening. _November_ 21.--My thirtieth birthday, which we, a reunited family, are
spending happily together around our own fireside, pleasant memories of
the past months adding to the joy of the hour. From the _New York Evangelist_ of August 15, 1872, by Rev. "Died, at Canandaigua, N. Y., August 8, 1872, Mrs. Abigail Field Beals,
widow of Thomas Beals, in the 98th year of her age. Beals, whose
maiden name was Field, was born in Madison, Conn., April 7, 1784. David Dudley Field, D.D., of Stockbridge, Mass.,
and of Rev. Timothy Field, first pastor of the Congregational church of
Canandaigua. She came to Canandaigua with her brother, Timothy, in 1800. In 1805 she was married to Thomas Beals, Esq., with whom she lived
nearly sixty years, until he fell asleep. They had eleven children, of
whom only four survive. In 1807 she and her husband united with the
Congregational church, of which they were ever liberal and faithful
supporters. Beals loved the good old ways and kept her house in the
simple and substantial style of the past. She herself belonged to an age
of which she was the last. With great dignity and courtesy of manner
which repelled too much familiarity, she combined a sweet and winning
grace, which attracted all to her, so that the youth, while they would
almost involuntarily 'rise up before her,' yet loved to be in her
presence and called her blessed. She possessed in a rare degree the
ornament of a meek and quiet spirit and lived in an atmosphere of love
and peace. Her home and room were to her children and her children's
children what Jerusalem was to the saints of old. There they loved to
resort and the saddest thing in her death is the sundering of that tie
which bound so many generations together. She never ceased to take a
deep interest in the prosperity of the beautiful village of which she
and her husband were the pioneers and for which they did so much and in
the church of which she was the oldest member. Her mind retained its
activity to the last and her heart was warm in sympathy with every good
work. While she was well informed in all current events, she most
delighted in whatever concerned the Kingdom. Her Bible and religious
books were her constant companions and her conversation told much of her
better thoughts, which were in Heaven. Living so that those who knew her
never saw in her anything but fitness for Heaven, she patiently awaited
the Master's call and went down to her grave in a full age like a shock
of corn fully ripe that cometh in its season." I don't think I shall keep a diary any more, only occasionally jot down
things of importance. Noah T. Clarke's brother got possession of my
little diary in some way one day and when he returned it I found written
on the fly-leaf this inscription to the diary:

    "You'd scarce expect a volume of my size
    To hold so much that's beautiful and wise,
    And though the heartless world might call me cheap
    Yet from my pages some much joy shall reap. As monstrous oaks from little acorns grow,
    And kindly shelter all who toil below,
    So my future greatness and the good I do
    Shall bless, if not the world, at least a few." I think I will close my old journal with the mottoes which I find upon
an old well-worn writing book which Anna used for jotting down her
youthful deeds. On the cover I find inscribed, "Try to be somebody," and
on the back of the same book, as if trying to console herself for
unexpected achievement which she could not prevent, "Some must be
great!" *       *       *       *       *




1880

_June_ 17.--Our dear Anna was married to-day to Mr. Alonzo A. Cummings
of Oakland, Cal., and has gone there to live. I am sorry to have her go
so far away, but love annihilates space. There is no real separation,
except in alienation of spirit, and that can never come--to us. THE END

------------------------------------------------------------------------

BOOKS TO MAKE ELDERS YOUNG AGAIN

By Inez Haynes Gillmore

PHOEBE AND ERNEST

With 30 illustrations by R. F. Schabelitz. Parents will recognize themselves in the story, and laugh understandingly
with, and sometimes at, Mr. Martin and their children, Phoebe
and Ernest. "Attracted delighted attention in the course of its serial publication. Sentiment and humor are deftly mingled in this clever book." "We must go back to Louisa Alcott for their equals." "For young and old alike we know of no more refreshing story." PHOEBE, ERNEST, AND CUPID

Illustrated by R. F. Schabelitz. In this sequel to the popular "Phoebe and Ernest," each of these
delightful young folk goes to the altar. "To all jaded readers of problem novels, to all weary wayfarers on the
rocky literary road of social pessimism and domestic woe, we recommend
'Phoebe, Ernest, and Cupid' with all our hearts: it is not only
cheerful, it's true."--_N. "Wholesome, merry, absolutely true to life." Gillmore knows twice as much about
college boys as ----, and five times as much about girls." JANEY

Illustrated by Ada C. Williamson. "Being the record of a short interval in the journey thru life and the
struggle with society of a little girl of nine." "Our hearts were captive to 'Phoebe and Ernest,' and now accept 'Janey.'... She is so engaging.... Told so vivaciously and with such good-natured
and pungent asides for grown people."--_Outlook_. "Depicts youthful human nature as one who knows and loves it. Her
'Phoebe and Ernest' studies are deservedly popular, and now, in 'Janey,'
this clever writer has accomplished an equally charming portrait." HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY

PUBLISHERS--NEW YORK

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE HOME BOOK OF VERSE

_American and English_ (1580-1912)

Compiled by Burton E. Stevenson. Collects the best short poetry of the
English language--not only the poetry everybody says is good, but also
the verses that everybody reads. (3742 pages; India paper, 1 vol., 8vo,
complete author, title and first line indices, $7.50 net; carriage 40
cents extra.) The most comprehensive and representative collection of American and
English poetry ever published, including 3,120 unabridged poems from
some 1,100 authors. It brings together in one volume the best short poetry of the English
language from the time of Spencer, with especial attention to American
verse. The copyright deadline has been passed, and some three hundred recent
authors are included, very few of whom appear in any other general
anthology, such as Lionel Johnson, Noyes, Housman, Mrs. Meynell, Yeats,
Dobson, Lang, Watson, Wilde, Francis Thompson, Gilder, Le Gallienne, Van
<DW18>, Woodberry, Riley, etc., etc. The poems are arranged by subject, and the classification is unusually
close and searching. Some of the most comprehensive sections are:
Children's rhymes (300 pages); love poems (800 pages); nature poetry
(400 pages); humorous verse (500 pages); patriotic and historical poems
(600 pages); reflective and descriptive poetry (400 pages). No other
collection contains so many popular favorites and fugitive verses. DELIGHTFUL POCKET ANTHOLOGIES

The following books are uniform, with full gilt flexible covers and
pictured cover linings. Each, cloth, $1.50; leather, $2.50. THE GARLAND OF CHILDHOOD

A little book for all lovers of children. THE VISTA OF ENGLISH VERSE Compiled by Henry S. Pancoast. LETTERS THAT LIVE Compiled by Laura E. Lockwood and Amy R. Kelly. POEMS FOR TRAVELLERS (About "The Continent.") Compiled by Miss Mary R.
J. DuBois. THE OPEN ROAD

A little book for wayfarers. THE FRIENDLY TOWN

A little book for the urbane, compiled by E. V. Lucas. THE POETIC OLD-WORLD Compiled by Miss L. H. Humphrey. Covers Europe, including Spain, Belgium and the British Isles. THE POETIC NEW-WORLD Compiled by Miss Humphrey. HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY

34 WEST 33rd STREET--NEW YORK

------------------------------------------------------------------------

NEW BOOKS PRIMARILY FOR WOMEN

A MONTESSORI MOTHER. By Dorothy Canfield Fisher

A thoroughly competent author who has been most closely associated with
Dr. Montessori tells just what American mothers want to know about this
new system of child training--the general principles underlying it; a
plain description of the apparatus, definite directions for its use,
suggestive hints as to American substitutes and additions, etc., etc. (_Helpfully illustrated._ $1.25 _net, by mail_ $1.35.) By Anne Shannon Monroe

A young woman whose business assets are good sense, good health, and the
ability to use a typewriter goes to Chicago to earn her living. This
story depicts her experiences vividly and truthfully, tho the characters
are fictitious. ($1.30 _net, by mail_ $1.40.) By Mary R. Coolidge

Explains and traces the development of the woman of 1800 into the woman
of to-day. ($1.50 _net, by mail_ $1.62.) By Dorothy Canfield

A novel recounting the struggle of an American wife and mother to call
her soul her own. "One has no hesitation in classing 'The Squirrel-Cage' with the best
American fiction of this or any other season." --_Chicago Record-Herald._
(3rd printing. $1.35 _net, by mail_ $1.45.) HEREDITY IN RELATION TO EUGENICS. By C. B. Davenport

"One of the foremost authorities. tells just what scientific
investigation has established and how far it is possible to control what
the ancients accepted as inevitable."--_N. Y. Times Review._

(With diagrams. 3_rd printing._ $2.00 _net, by mail_ $2.16.) By Helen R. Albee

A frank spiritual autobiography. ($1.35 _net, by mail_ $1.45.) HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY

34 WEST 33rd STREET--NEW YORK

------------------------------------------------------------------------

LEADING AMERICANS

Edited by W. P. Trent, and generally confined to those no longer living. Each $1.75, by mail $1.90. R. M. JOHNSTON'S LEADING AMERICAN SOLDIERS

By the Author of "Napoleon," etc. Washington, Greene, Taylor, Scott, Andrew Jackson, Grant, Sherman,
Sheridan, McClellan, Meade, Lee, "Stonewall" Jackson, Joseph E.
Johnston. much sound originality of treatment, and the
style is very clear." --_Springfield Republican._

JOHN ERSKINE'S LEADING AMERICAN NOVELISTS

Charles Brockden Brown, Cooper, Simms, Hawthorne, Mrs. "He makes his study of these novelists all the more striking because
of their contrasts of style and their varied purpose. Well worth
any amount of time we may care to spend upon them." --_Boston Transcript._

W. M. PAYNE'S LEADING AMERICAN ESSAYISTS

A General Introduction dealing with essay writing in America, and
biographies of Irving, Emerson, Thoreau, and George William Curtis. "It is necessary to know only the name of the author of this work to be
assured of its literary excellence." --_Literary Digest._

LEADING AMERICAN MEN OF SCIENCE

Edited by President David Starr Jordan. Count Rumford and Josiah Willard Gibbs, by E. E. Slosson; Alexander
Wilson and Audubon, by Witmer Stone; Silliman, by Daniel C. Gilman;
Joseph Henry, by Simon Newcomb; Louis Agassiz and Spencer Fullerton
Baird, by Charles F. Holder; Jeffries Wyman, by B. G. Wilder; Asa Gray,
by John M. Coulter; James Dwight Dana, by William North Rice; Marsh, by
Geo. Bird Grinnell; Edward Drinker Cope, by Marcus Benjamin; Simon
Newcomb, by Marcus Benjamin; George Brown Goode, by D. S. Jordan; Henry
Augustus Rowland, by Ira Remsen; William Keith Brooks, by E. A. Andrews. GEORGE ILES'S LEADING AMERICAN INVENTORS

By the author of "Inventors at Work," etc. Colonel John Stevens
(screw-propeller, etc. ); his son, Robert (T-rail, etc. ); Fulton;
Ericsson; Whitney; Blanchard (lathe); McCormick; Howe; Goodyear; Morse;
Tilghman (paper from wood and sand blast); Sholes (typewriter); and
Mergenthaler (linotype). Other Volumes covering Lawyers, Poets, Statesmen, Editors, Explorers,
etc., arranged for. HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY

34 WEST 33rd STREET--NEW YORK

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Julien Benda's THE YOKE OF PITY

The author grips and never lets go of the single theme (which presents
itself more or less acutely to many people)--the duel between a
passionate devotion to a career and the claims of love, pity, and
domestic responsibility. Certainly the novel of the year--the
book which everyone reads and discusses." --_The London Times._ $1.00
net. Victor L. Whitechurch's A DOWNLAND CORNER

By the author of The Canon in Residence. "One of those delightful studies in quaintness which we take to heart
and carry in the pocket." --_New York Times._ $1.20 net. H. H. Bashford's PITY THE POOR BLIND

The story of a young English couple and an Anglican priest. "This novel, whose title is purely metaphorical, has an uncommon
literary quality and interest. its appeal, save to those who also
'having eyes see not,' must be as compelling as its theme is
original." --_Boston Transcript._ $1.35 net. John Maetter's THREE FARMS

An "adventure in contentment" in France, Northwestern Canada and
Indiana. The most remarkable part of
this book is the wonderful atmosphere of content which radiates from
it." --_Boston Transcript._ $1.20 net. Dorothy Canfield's THE SQUIRREL-CAGE

A very human story of the struggle of an American wife and mother to
call her soul her own. "One has no hesitation in classing The Squirrel Cage with the best
American fiction of this or any season." --_Chicago Record-Herald._ $1.35
net. HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY

34 WEST 33rd STREET--NEW YORK

------------------------------------------------------------------------

STANDARD CONTEMPORARY NOVELS

WILLIAM DE MORGAN'S JOSEPH VANCE

The story of a great sacrifice and a lifelong love. PAUL LEICESTER FORD'S THE HON. PETER STIRLING

This famous novel of New York political life has gone through over fifty
impressions. ANTHONY HOPE'S PRISONER OF ZENDA

This romance of adventure has passed through over sixty impressions. ANTHONY HOPE'S RUPERT OF HENTZAU

This story has been printed over a score of times. With illustrations by
C. D. Gibson. ANTHONY HOPE'S DOLLY DIALOGUES

Has passed through over eighteen printings. With illustrations by H. C.
Christy. CHARLES BATTELL LOOMIS'S CHEERFUL AMERICANS

By the author of "Poe's Raven in an Elevator" and "A Holiday Touch." MAY SINCLAIR'S THE DIVINE FIRE

By the author of "The Helpmate," etc. BURTON E. STEVENSON'S MARATHON MYSTERY

This mystery story of a New York apartment house is now in its seventh
printing, has been republished in England and translated into German and
Italian. E. L. VOYNICH'S THE GADFLY

An intense romance of the Italian uprising against the Austrians. DAVID DWIGHT WELLS'S HER LADYSHIP'S ELEPHANT

With cover by Wm. C. N. and A. M. WILLIAMSON'S LIGHTNING CONDUCTOR

Over thirty printings. C. N. and A. M. WILLIAMSON'S THE PRINCESS PASSES

Illustrated by Edward Penfield. Under these circumstances, it is
better to treat them as exceptional, than to attempt to give them a name
which might mislead without conveying any correct information. Maria, was erected in the
beginning of the 13th century (1206? ), but is so unlike most buildings
of that age, that it is usually ascribed to the 6th or 7th. On a close
examination, however, all its details are found to be full of advanced
Romanesque forms. The pillars are rude Corinthian, with a Lombardic
abacus. They are widely spaced, having no vault to support; and the
mouldings of the arches are what we should call Transitional Early
English.

[Illustration: 451. Externally the faade is too plain to be quite pleasing, but this arises
from its depending originally on painting for its decorationsome traces
of which still remain, but the greater part has perished. Its three
doorways are richly and beautifully ornamented with shafts and
sculptured foliage, quite equal in detail to anything of the class to be
found in Italy, and its great circular window would not be thought out
of place at Chartres or Lincoln. Pietro is probably a century later than that of Sta. Maria, and its faade is richer and more eleganta difference arising
more from those details being in this instance carved which in the
earlier church were painted. The design, however, deserves attention for
its historical, perhaps, even more than its artistic claims; for it was
this class of faade that Palladio and the architects of the
cinque-cento period seized upon, and, applying pilasters and pediments
of classical type, converted it into the fashionable churches which are
to be found in every part of Europe. [301]

[Illustration: 453. The difficulty which the Italians never entirely conquered, was how to
amalgamate the sloping lines of the roofs of the aisles with the
horizontal lines of the rest of the faade. The gallery over the central
doorway enabled them very nearly to accomplish it in these Toscanella
churches, and if the same string-courses had been carried all across,
the whole might have been harmonised; but it was just missed, and, what
is strange, more so in the second than in the first example. In the earliest times of Christian architecture, as we have already
seen, the circular form of church was nearly as frequent as that derived
from the Roman basilica. In process of time the latter was found to be
much better adapted to the extended requirements of Christianity. Hence
in the 11th and 12th centuries, when so many of the early churches were
rebuilt and enlarged, most of the old circular buildings disappeared. Enough, however, remain to enable us to trace, though imperfectly, what
their arrangements were. Among those which have been illustrated, perhaps the most interesting is
that known as the church of San Stefano at Bologna, or rather the
circular centre of that congeries of seven churches usually known by
that name. It is one of those numerous churches of which it is impossible to
predicate whether it was originally a baptismal or a sepulchral edifice. In old times it bore both names, and may have had both destinations, but
latterly, at all events, the question has been settled by the compromise
usually adopted in such cases, of dedicating it to the first martyr, to
whom a sepulchral form of building is especially appropriate. Plan of the Duomo, Brescia. Elevation of Duomo at Brescia. Notwithstanding a considerable amount of ancient remains mixed up in the
details, no part of the present church seems older than the Carlovingian
era; while, on the other hand, its extreme irregularity and clumsiness
of construction point to a period before the 11th century. Its general
form is that of an extremely irregular octagon, about 60 ft. in
diameter, in the centre of which stands a circlet of columns, some
coupled, some single, supporting a semicircular dome. The circumscribing
aisle is covered with the usual intersecting ribbed vault of the 10th
century, but the whole is so rude as scarcely to deserve mention except
for its antiquity. The Duomo Vecchio of Brescia is ascribed to the 8th or 9th century, but
this date according to Cattaneo[302] can only be ascribed to an earlier
basilica church, the crypt of which still exists on the east side of the
Duomo. As will be seen from the plan, it is a large church, 125 ft. across over all, and is covered by a dome 65 ft. in diameter internally
supported by eight piers of plain design. The mode in which light is
introduced into the central compartment illustrates the various
tentative expedients by which the architects in that age attempted to
accomplish their object. First, there is a range of small windows in the
dome below the springing of the dome. In the dome itself there are four
circular sides, and, as if the architect felt that he was doing
something unusual and inartistic, he managed externally to confuse these
with the rudiments of the roof gallery. (From Isabelle, difices Circulaires.)
Scale 50 ft. It is not clear whether originally it had or was intended to have an
apse between its two round towerswhere the foundations of some
buildings can still be traced; but these may be the remains of the early
church referred to. Turning from these, we find the round-arched Gothic style completely
developed in the church of San Tomaso in Limine, near Bergamo. From the
annexed plan it will be seen that the circular part is the nave or
entrance, as in Germany and England, in contradistinction to the French
mode of arrangement, where the circular part is always the sanctum, the
rectangular the nave or less holy place. In the centre stand eight pillars, supporting a
vaulted gallery, which forms a triforium or upper storey, and, with the
dome and its little cupola, raise the whole height to about 50 ft. A
small choir with a semicircular niche projects eastward. The dimensions of the building are so small that it hardly deserves
notice, except as a perfect example of the style of the 11th or 12th
century in Lombardy, and for a certain propriety and elegance of design,
in which it is not surpassed, internally at least, by any building of
its age. It is to be regretted that the idea was never carried out (at
any rate no example remains) on such a scale as to enable us to judge of
the effect of such a domical arrangement as is here attempted. The great
defect of all one-storeyed domes is their lowness, both internally and
more especially externally. This method of building a dome in two
storeys would seem calculated to obviate the objection; but though
common in small sepulchral chambers, it has never been tried on a scale
sufficiently large to enable us to judge of its real effect. After this
period the circular shape was so completely superseded by the
rectangular, that no further improvement took place in it. There is perhaps no question of early Christian archology involved in
so much obscurity as that of the introduction and early use of towers. The great monumental pillars of the Romansas, for instance, those of
Trajan and Antoninuswere practically towers; and latterly their tombs
began to assume an aspiring character like that at St. 231), or those at Palmyra and elsewhere in the East, which show a marked
tendency in that direction. But none of these can be looked upon as an
undoubted prototype of the towers attached to the churches of the
Christians. At Ravenna, as early as the age of Justinian, we find a circular tower
attached to St. Apollinare in Classe (Woodcut No. 412), and in the other
churches of that place they seem even then to have been considered
necessary adjuncts. [303] At the same time it is by no means clear that
they were erected as bell-towers; indeed the evidence is tolerably clear
that bells were not used in Christian churches till the time of Pope
Adrian I., some two centuries later. There is, I
think, no trace of their being sepulchral monuments, or that they were
designed or used as tombs; and unless they were, like the _sthambas_ of
the Buddhists, pillars of victory, or towers erected to mark sacred or
remarkable spots, it is difficult to say what they were, or where we are
to look for an analogy. Be this as it may, the oldest circular towers with which we are
acquainted are those of Ravenna; while the last of the series is the
famous leaning one at Pisa, commenced in the year 1174. The gradations
between these two extremes must have been the same that marked the
changes in the architecture of the churches to which they are attached;
but the links are more completely wanting in the case of the towers than
in that of the churches. [304]

[Illustration: 459. (From Gutensohn and
Knapp.)] Apollinare in Classe, above referred to, the most
perfect of those of Ravenna, is a simple brick tower (see Woodcut No. 412), nine storeys in height, the lower windows being narrow single
openings; above there are two, and the three upper storeys are adorned
with four windows of three lights each. In Rome, as far as we know, the first tower attached to a church was
that said to have been built by Pope Adrian I. in front of the atrium of
St. Peters; but there are no examples now existing in Rome which can be
said to be earlier than the 11th century, and that date applies only to
the lower portion of them. In the 12th and 13th centuries they became
common, and we find them attached to the churches of S. Lorenzo without
the walls, S. Croce in Gerusalemme, SS. Giovanni e Paolo, S. Giorgio in
Velabro (13th century), and others. All these are square in plan and
extremely similar in design, no improvement and scarcely any change
having taken place between the first and the last, as if the form were
an old and established one when we find it first adopted. Maria in Cosmedin (Woodcut No. 459) is perhaps one of the best
and most complete. Its dimensions are small, its breadth being little
more than 15 ft., and its height only 110; but notwithstanding this
there is great dignity in the design, and, in a city where buildings are
not generally tall, its height is sufficient to give it prominence
without overpowering other objects,a characteristic which renders these
Roman towers not only beautiful structures in themselves, but
appropriate ornaments to the buildings to which they are attached. The chief interest of these towers is derived from the numerous progeny
to which they gave birth: for though there is scarcely an instance of a
square Romanesque tower beyond the walls of Rome during the period in
which this style flourished, the form was seized upon with avidity by
the Gothic architects in all the countries of Europe; and whether as a
detached campanile (as in Italy), or as an integral part of the building
(as we soon find it employed on this side of the Alps), it forms the
most prominent, and perhaps also the most beautiful, feature in the
aspiring architecture of the Middle Ages. There is certainly no architectural feature which the Gothic architects
can so justly call their own as the towers and spires which in the
Middle Ages were so favourite, so indispensable a part of their churches
and other edifices, becoming in fact as necessary parts of the external
design as the vaults were of the internal decoration of the building. It is true, as before remarked, that we neither know where they were
first invented, nor even where they were first applied to Christian
churchesthose of Rome and Ravenna being evidently not the earliest
examples; nor have they any features which betray their originat least
none have yet been pointed out, though it is not impossible that a
closer examination would bring some such to light. They certainly are as
little classical, in form or details, as anything that can well be
conceived; and belong to an undefined Romanesque style. Those of which we have already spoken are all church-towers_campaniles_
or bell-towers attached to churches. But this exclusive distinction by
no means applies to the Gothic towers. Mark at Venice,
for instance, and the Toraccio at Cremona, are evidently civic
monuments, like the belfries of the Low Countriessymbols of communal
power wholly distinct from the church, their proximity to which seems
only to arise from the fact of all the principal buildings being grouped
together. This is certainly the case with a large class of very ugly
buildings in Italy, such as those attached to the town-halls of Florence
and Siena, or the famous Asinelli and Garisenda towers at Bologna. They
are merely tall square brick towers, with a machicolated balcony at the
top, but possessing no more architectural design than the chimney of a
cotton factory. Originally, when lower, they may have been towers of
defence, but afterwards became mere symbols of power. A third class, and by far the most numerous, of these buildings are
undoubtedly ecclesiastical erections; they are either actually attached
to the churches, or so placed with regard to them as to leave no doubt
on the matter. There is not, however, I believe, in all Italy a single
example of a tower or towers forming, as on this side of the Alps, an
integral part of the design. Sometimes they stand detached, but more generally are connected with
some angle of the building, the favourite position being the western
angle of the southern transept. Occasionally we find one tower placed at
the angle of the faade, but this is seldom the case when the tower and
the church are of the same age. It is so in the cathedral at Lucca, and
San Ambrogio at Milan; in the latter of which a second tower has been
added more recently to balance the older one. It does also happen as in
the instance of Novara, before quoted (Woodcut No. 443), that two towers
are actually parts of the original design; this, however, is certainly
the exception, not the rule. In design the Italian campaniles differ very considerably from those on
this side of the Alps. They never have projecting buttresses, nor assume
that pyramidal form which is so essential and so beautiful a feature in
the Northern examples. In plan the campanile is always square, and
carried up without break or offset to two-thirds at least of its
intended height. This, which is virtually the whole design (for the
spire seems an idea borrowed from the North), is generally solid to a
considerable height, or with only such openings as serve to admit light
to the stairs or inclined planes. Above the solid part one round-headed
window is introduced in each face, and in the next storey two; in the
one above this three, then four, and lastly five, the lights being
merely separated by slight shafts, so that the upper storey is virtually
an open loggia (see Woodcut No. There is no doubt great beauty and
propriety of design in this arrangement; in point of taste it is
unobjectionable, but it wants the vigour and variety of the Northern
tower. So far as we can judge from drawings and such ancient examples as
remain, the original termination was a simple cone in the centre, with a
smaller one at each of the angles. At Verona an octagonal lantern is added, and at Modena and Cremona the
octagon is crowned by a lofty spire, but these hardly come within the
limits of the epoch of which we are now treating. So greatly did the
Italians prefer the round arch, that even in their imitation of the
Northern styles they used the pointed shape only when compelleda
circumstance which makes it extremely difficult, particularly in the
towers, to draw the line between the two styles; for though pointed
arches were no doubt introduced in the 13th and 14th centuries, the
circular-headed shape continued to be employed from the age of the
Romanesque to that of the Renaissance. One of the oldest and certainly the most celebrated of the Gothic towers
of Italy, is that of St. Marks at Venice, commenced in the year 902; it
took the infant republic three centuries to raise it 180 ft., to the
point at which the square basement terminates. On this there must
originally have been an open loggia of some sort, no doubt with a
conical roof. The present superstructure was added in the 16th century;
but though the loggia is a very pleasing feature, it is overpowered by
the solid mass that it surmounts, and by the extremely ugly square
extinguisher that crowns the whole. Its locality and its associations
have earned for it a great deal of undue laudation, but in point of
design no campanile in Italy deserves it less. The base is a mere
unornamented mass of brickwork, slightly fluted, and pierced
unsymmetrically with small windows to light the inclined plane within. Its size, its height, and its apparent solidity are its only merits. These are no doubt important elements in that low class of architectural
excellence of which the Egyptian pyramids are the type; but even in
these elements this edifice must confess itself a pigmy, and inferior to
even a second-class pyramid on the banks of the Nile, while it has none
of the beauty of design and detail displayed by the Giralda of Seville,
or even by other Italian towers in its own neighbourhood. The campanile at Piacenza (Woodcut No. 448) is, perhaps, more like the
original of St. Marks than any other, and certainly displays as little
beauty as any building of this sort can possess. That of San Zenone at Verona is far more pleasing. It is, indeed, as
beautiful both in proportion and details as any of its age, while it
exemplifies at once the beauties and the defects of the style. Among the
first is an elegant simplicity that always is pleasing, but this is
accompanied by a leanness and poverty of effect, when compared with
Northern examples, which must rank in the latter category. Jackson, in his work on Dalmatia and Istria, gives illustrations of
several towers in those countries which, in beauty of design, excel many
of the Italian examples. The Romanesque style would seem to have had a
much longer duration on the east side of the Adriatic than in Italy. Thus the tower of Spalato, a lofty campanile of six storeys in height,
commenced in the beginning of the 13th century and not terminated till
1416 (except the upper octagon and spire), is virtually in the same pure
Romanesque style throughout. Jackson notes also the continued
influence of Roman work of the 3rd century, by which it is surrounded,
and that fragments of ancient material, columns and capitals, have been
used up in its construction. The campaniles of Zara and in the island of
Arbe are both fine examples of Romanesque design. CHAPTER V.

                         BYZANTINE-ROMANESQUE. Cathedrals of NaplesSan Miniato, FlorenceCathedrals of Pisa and
  ZaraCathedrals of Troja, Bari, and BittontoSan Nicolo,
  BariCloisters of St. John LateranBaptistery of Mont St. AngeloSan
  Donato, ZaraChurches in South ItalyCircular BuildingsTowersCivil
  Architecture. The Normans enter Italy                             A.D. 1018
     The Normans conquer Apulia from the Greeks               1043
     The Normans attack the Saracens in Sicily                1061
     Conquest of Sicily completed by Roger de Hauteville      1090
     Roger II. 1101
     William I., surnamed the Wicked                          1153
     William II., surnamed the Good                           1166
     Tancred                                                  1189
     Frederic Hohenstaufen of Germany                         1197
     Conrad                                                   1250
     Conradin                                                 1254
     Charles I., first Angiovine King of Naples               1266
     Ren, last Angiovine King of Naples                      1435


It would be easier to define the limits and character of the styles of
Italian Medival Architecture in the centre and south of Italy by a
negative than a positive title. To call them the non-Gothic styles
would describe them correctly, but would hardly suffice to convey a
distinct idea of their peculiarities. Romanesque, or even Italian
Romanesque, would not be sufficient, because that term fails to take
cognizance of the foreign element found in them. That element is the
Byzantine, derived partly from the continued relations which such cities
as Venice or Pisa maintained during the Middle Ages with the Levant, and
partly from the intercourse which the inhabitants of Magna Gracia kept
up across the Adriatic with the people on its eastern shores. To such a
mixture of styles the term Byzantine-Romanesque would be quite
appropriate; and although there are in Apulia churches, such as Molfetta
and St. Angelo, which look more like Levantine designs than anything to
be found in other parts of Europe (except perhaps such buildings as St. Front, Prigueux, and one or two exceptional buildings in the South of
France), and in a very detailed description of Italian styles it might
be expedient to attempt a further subdivision with other specific terms,
for the present it will probably suffice to describe the various
non-Gothic styles of the centre and southern half of Italy in local
sections without attempting any very minute classification of their
variations. As the Italians had no great national style of their own,
and both in the North and South were principally working under foreign
influences, it is in vain to look for any thread that will conduct the
student straight through the labyrinth of their styles. Italian unity is
the aspiration of the present century; during the Middle Ages it did not
exist either in politics or art. The Old and New Cathedrals at Naples. Although Naples is in the very centre of its province, where we
naturally first look for examples of the style, there are few cities in
Italy which contain so little to interest the architect or the
antiquary. Still she does possess one group of churches, which, by their
juxtaposition, at least serve to illustrate the progress of the style
during the Middle Ages. Restitutashaded
dark in the plan (Woodcut No. 460)may be as old as the 4th or 5th
century, and retains its original plan and arrangement, though much
disfigured in details. The baptistery, a little behind the apse on its
left, is certainly of the date indicated, and retains its mosaics, which
seem to be of the same age. of Anjou commenced the new cathedral at
right angles with the old, his French prejudices being apparently
shocked at the incorrect orientation of the older church. It is a
spacious building, 300 ft. long, arranged, as Italian churches usually
were at that age, with a wooden roof over the nave and intersecting
vaults over the side-aisles. Opposite the entrance of the old cathedral
is a domical chapel of Renaissance design, so that the group contains an
illustration of each of the three ages of Italian art. Section of San Miniato, near Florence. The church of San Miniato (Woodcuts Nos. 461-463), on a hill overlooking
Florence, is one of the earliest (1013), as well as one of the most
perfect, of the Byzantine-Romanesque style. in length by 70 in width, divided longitudinally into aisles, and
transversely into three nearly square compartments by clustered piers
supporting two great arches which run up to the roof. The whole of the
eastern compartment is occupied by a crypt or under-church open to the
nave, above which are the choir and apse, approached by flights of steps
in the aisles. The entire arrangement, together with the division of the
nave into three compartments, is most satisfactory, and the proportions
of the whole are very appropriate. The pillars themselves are so nearly
classical in design that they almost seem to have been taken from some
ancient building, and the architraves and stringcourses are all well
designed and fitted to the places they occupy. The principal ornament of
the interior is an inlaid pattern of simple design, sufficient to
relieve the monotony of the interior, but without producing any
confusion. The exterior depends principally, like the interior, for its
effect on  panelling, but has a range of blind arches running
round the sides and across the front. The faade, however, is very badly
designed: either it was one of the earliest examples, and the architects
had not learned how to combine the sloping roofs of the aisles with the
upper part of the faades, or it has been altered in more modern times;
but for this slight defect it would be difficult to find a church in
Italy containing more of classic elegance, with perfect appropriateness
for the purposes of Christian worship. There must have been several, probably many, buildings in the same style
erected in Tuscany during the first half of the 11th century. Otherwise
it is almost impossible to understand how so complete a design as that
of Pisa Cathedral could have been executed. It was commenced apparently
in 1006, but it was not till 1063, after the plundering of Palermo,
according to Reber,[305] that the means were provided for the
extraordinary richness of the design, the magnificence of which had at
that time no parallel among the ecclesiastical edifices of Italy; the
work was suspended in 1095, and could only be resumed by means of
pecuniary aid given to the undertaking by the Byzantine emperor. After
the consecration of the cathedral in 1103, the interior decorations were
carried on until the 15th century. Internally its design is evidently
based on that of the basilicas of Rome and Ravenna, except that instead
of the range at the latter place of figures in mosaic, it has a splendid
triforium gallery and in plan strongly marked projecting transepts. Its
great merit, however, as a design arises from the fact that the builders
had learned to proportion the parts to one another so as to get greater
magnificence with very much smaller dimensions. The size, for instance,
of the nave of San Paolo fuori le Mure at Rome is 290 ft. by 215; these
dimensions are nearly double those at Pisa, where they are 173 ft. Yet, in consequence of the greater relative height of the nave and
the better spacing of the pillars and proportion of the parts, the
interior of Pisa is more pleasing and more impressive than the Roman
church. Its effect, too, is immensely increased by the truly Medival
projection of the transepts. In no church in Italy is there such poetry
of perspective as in looking anglewise across the intersection, and
seldom anywhere a more satisfactory interior than that of this church. (From Chapuys
Moyen-Age Monumental.)]

The exterior, too, is almost equally pleasing. The side-aisles are
adorned with a range of blind arches running all round, adorned with
parti- marble, inlaid either in courses or in patterns. Above
this is a gallery, representing the triforium, carried all round, and in
the faades formed into an open gallery; a second open gallery
represents the sloping roof of the aisles, a third the clerestory, a
fourth the <DW72>s of the great roof. The difficulty here, as in almost
all Italian designs, is caused by the sloping roofs; but, with this
exception, the whole makes up a rich and varied composition without any
glaring false construction, and expresses with sufficient clearness the
arrangements of the interior. The dome is of later design, and, being
oval in plan, cannot be said to be pleasing in outline. The Italians were evidently delighted with their new style. It was
repeated with very little variation at Lucca, in the church of San
Michele (1188), only that the arcades stood free on the sides as well as
on the front. The faade of San Martino, in the same city, is in the
same style; so is that of the cathedral at Pistoja, and so is Sta. The arrangement was probably suggested by the porticoes of
Pagan temples; and were it not for the awkwardness caused by the sloping
line of the roofs, it might be characterised as one of the most
successful inventions of the age. In some instances, as in the faade of the Cathedral at Zara in Dalmatia
(Woodcut No. Jackson[306] was not begun
before the 13th century, the consecration taking place in 1285, the
difficulties of the design of the faade are to a great extent conquered
by reducing the arcades to mere decorative panelling, and more than this
by separating the design of the centre from that of the aisles by a bold
square pilaster. This is exactly the feature we miss at Pisa and Lucca,
where the want of it imparts a considerable degree of weakness to the
whole design. (From Sir Gardner
Wilkinsons Dalmatia and Montenegro.)]

The plan of the Zara Cathedral (Woodcut No. 466) is that usually adopted
in churches of this class; but it possesses a lady chapel and
baptistery, placed laterally in a somewhat unusual manner. Its
dimensions are small, being only 170 ft. The east end of this church, its doorways and windows, show, as might be
expected from its locality, a greater tendency towards Romanesque art
than can be found on the western shores of the Peninsula, but in
internal arrangements it belongs wholly to the Italian style. The cathedral at Trau, also in Dalmatia, illustrated in Mr. Jacksons
work, is a fine example, which is not only built in one consistent style
throughout, but possesses the still rarer advantage of being completed
outside as well as inside, instead, as Mr. Jackson observes, of
presenting, like so many Italian churches, a rough face of unfinished
brickwork or masonry awaiting in vain the splendid veneer of marble or
sculpture that never comes. The main part of the church was built in
the first half of the 13th century. The floor is of the basilica type,
with nave (five bays, vaulted) and aisles, centre and side apses, and a
magnificent narthex, the full width of nave and aisles, with a sumptuous
portal of pure Romanesque design (1240), which is perhaps finer than any
example in Italy, and is only rivalled in its decorative sculpture by
those of the French portals. Jackson is of opinion that Dalmatian
art took a great departure under Hungarian rule, and followed more in
the direction of the purer Romanesque style than in that of the
Byzantine. The artists were foreigners, invited not only from Germany
but also from France. Villars dHonecourt recounts his having been sent
for, and French influence, Mr. Jackson states, may be detected in
some other churches in Hungary. The portal of the church at Jak, in
Hungary, illustrated in Mr. Jacksons work, is French in character, with
a profusion of orders carved with the zigzag fret and dentil very
similar to the later Norman work, and includes capitals  crochet such
as belong to French 12th-century work. The series of trefoil-headed
niches, with figures in them which rise above the doorway, are French in
character, and remind one of the faade of St. Pre-sous-Vezelay. At
Cattaro, in Dalmatia, and at Veglia, in one of the islands of the
Quarnero, are other examples of fine Romanesque work of the 12th
century. Further south on the mainland of Italy, at Troja, we find a singularly
elegant cathedral church (1093-1115?) Its flanks and apse are perhaps even more elegant than anything in
the neighbourhood of Pisa. So is the lower part of its faade, which is
adorned with a richness and elegance of foliage characteristic of the
province where it is found; and the cornice that crowns the lower storey
is perhaps unmatched by any similar example to be found in Italy, either
for beauty of sculptural decoration or for appropriateness of profile. The upper part of the faade differs, however, considerably from that of
the examples just quoted. A great rose-window, of elegant but
ill-understood tracery, takes the place of the arcades, and, with the
sculptured arch over it, completes all that remains of the original
design. The plain pieces of walling that support the central window are
parts of a modern repair. As a general rule, all the churches in the South of Italy are small. This one at Troja is arranged in plan like that at Pisa, with bold
projecting transepts, but its length is only 167 ft., and the width of
its nave 50, while in the Northern cathedral these dimensions are nearly
double310 ft. by 106and the area four times as great. This is true of
all, however elegant they may bethey are parish churches in dimensions
as compared with their Northern rivals. Many also, as the cathedral at Bari (Woodcut No. 469), have their apses
internal, which detracts very much from the meaning of the design, and
does away with the apsidal terminations, which are perhaps the most
beautiful features in the external design of Italian churches; while
they lack the great traceried windows which go so far to replace the
absence of the apse in English design. The annexed elevation of the east
end at Bari (Woodcut No. 470) gives a fair idea of the general
arrangement of that part in the churches in Apulia. It is novel, and the
two tall towers with a central dome combine with elegant details to make
up a whole which it is impossible not to admire though it will not bear
comparison with the more artistic arrangements of Northern architects. Where the apse[308] is allowed to be seen externally, it is sometimes,
as at San Pellino (Woodcut No. 471), an object of great beauty and
originality, but such examples are rare in the province, and the designs
suffer in proportion. (From a Sketch by
A. J. R. Gawen, Esq.)] In the richer churches, as at Pisa, a blind arcade is carried round the
flanks, sometimes with an open gallery under the eaves, as in German
churches, but this was far from being universally the case; on the
contrary, it would be difficult, as a typical example of the style, to
select one more characteristic than the flank of the church of Caserta
Vecchia (1100-1153) (Woodcut No. The windows are small but
numerous, and mark the number of bays in the interior. The transept is
slightly projected, and ornamented with an arcade at the top, and above
this rises a dome such as is found only in Calabria or Sicily. The tower
was added afterwards, and, though unsymmetrical, assists in relieving a
design which would otherwise run the risk of being monotonous. West Front of the Church of San Nicolo in Bari. (From a Sketch by A. J. R. Gawen, Esq.)] It was, however, on their entrance faades that the architects of
Southern Italy lavished their utmost care. The central doorways are
usually covered with rich hoods, supported by pillars resting on
monsters somewhat like those found in the North of Italy. Above this is
either a gallery or one or two windows, and the whole generally
terminates in a circular rose-window filled with tracery. As exemplified
in the front of Bittonto Cathedral (Woodcut No. 473), such a composition
is not deficient in richness, though hardly pleasing as an architectural
composition. The same arrangement, on about the same scale, occurs at Bari, Altamura,
and Ruvo; and on a somewhat smaller scale in the churches of Galatina,
Brindisi, and Barletta. The great and peculiar beauty of the cathedral
at Bittonto is its south front, one angle of which is shown in the
woodcut; but which becomes richer towards the east, where it is adorned
with a portal of great magnificence and beauty. The richness of its open
gallery (under what was the roof of the side-aisles) is unsurpassed in
Apulia, and probably by anything of the same kind in Italy. View of the Interior of San Nicolo, Bari. The faade of San Nicolo at Bari (1197) is something like the last
mentioned, except that handsome Corinthian columns have been borrowed
from some older building, and add to the richness of the design, though
they hardly can be said to belong to the composition. Internally this
church seems to have displayed some such arrangement as that of San
Miniato (Woodcuts No. Instead, however, of improving upon it,
as might be expected from the time that had elapsed since the previous
one was erected, the Southern architect hardly knew the meaning of what
he was attempting. He grouped together the three pillars next to the
entrance, and threw arches across the nave from them, but these arches
neither support the roof nor aid the construction in any other way. They
do add to the perspective effect of the interior, but it is only by a
theatrical contrivance very rare in the Middle Ages, and by no means to
be admired when found. Most of these Apulian churches possess crypts almost as important as
that of San Miniato, some more so; and the numerous pillars in some of
these give rise to effects of perspective only to be found elsewhere in
such buildings as the Mosque at Cordova, or the cisterns at
Constantinople. As in the annexed example, from the cathedral at
Otranto, it is wonderful what space and what variety may be attained
with small dimensions by the employment of numerous points of support. This was the secret of most of the best effects produced by the Northern
architects; but the Italians never understood it, or practised it,
except in crypts. Perhaps it may have been that they thought it
necessary to sacrifice architectural effect to the exigencies of public
worship. Whether this were the cause or not, the result, as already
pointed out, was fatal to the architectural effect of many of their
designs, especially in the Northern province. In Southern Italy this is seldom the case, but the difference arose from
the fact that the naves of the churches had never vaulted roofs, and
were consequently separated from the aisles by single pillars instead of
composite piers. This took away all temptation to display mechanical
dexterity, and left the architect free to produce the best artistic
effect he was able to design with the materials at his command. Window in the South Side of the Cathedral Church at
Matera. No one who takes the pains to familiarise himself with the architecture
of these Southern Italian churches, can well fail to be impressed with
their beauty. That beauty will be found, however, to arise not so much
from the dimensions or arrangement of their plans, or the form of their
outline, as from the grace and elegance of their details. Every feature
displays the feeling of an elegant and refined people, who demanded
decoration as a necessity, though they were incapable of rising to any
great architectural conception. They excelled as ornamentists, though at
best only indifferent architects. It is impossible to render this evident in such a work as the present;
but besides the examples already given, a window (Woodcut No. 478) from
the cathedral church at Matera (1270) will explain how unlike the style
of decoration is to anything with which we are familiar in the North,
and at the same time how much picturesque effect may be produced by a
repetition of similar details. The church itself has this peculiarity,
that its west front is plain and unimportant, and that all the
decoration is lavished on the south side, which faces the piazza. There
are two entrances on this face, that towards the east being, as usual,
the richer. Above these is a range of richly-ornamented windows, one of
whicha little out of the centreis far more splendid than the rest
(Woodcut No. From this it is said that letters and rescripts from
the Greek patriarch at Constantinople used to be read, and it is perhaps
as elaborate a specimen of the mode of decoration used in these churches
as can be found in the province. Doorway of Church of Pappacoda, Naples. The same exuberance of decoration continued to be employed down to the
latest period of the art, and after Northern forms had been introduced
by the Angiovine dynasty at Naples. The doorway from the church at
Pappacoda (Woodcut No. 479) is a type of many to be found in that city
and elsewhere in the architectural province. True, it is overdone to
such an extent that much of the labour bestowed upon it must be
considered as thrown away; but if a love of art induced people to labour
so lovingly in it, it is hard to refuse them the admiration which their
enthusiasm deserves. Another class of ornamental detail in which this province is especially
rich is that of bronze doors, of which some six or seven examples still
remain. Of these perhaps the finest are those of the cathedral at Trani. They were made in 1160, and for beauty of design, and for the exuberance
and elegance of their ornaments, are unsurpassed by anything of the kind
in Italy, or probably in the world. Another pair of doors of almost
equal beauty, made in 1119, belongs to the cathedral at Troja (Woodcut
No. 468), and a third, which is still in a very perfect state,
constructed at Constantinople, in the year 1076, for the church of Mont
San Angelo; and is consequently contemporary with the doors of Sta. Sophia, Novogorod, and San Zenone, Verona, and so similar in design as
to form an interesting series for comparison. Other churches in the same style as those mentioned above are found at
Canosa, Giovenazzo, Molo, Ostuni, Manduria, and other places in the
province. Those of Brindisi, from which we should expect most, have been
too much modernised to be of value as examples; but there is in the town
a small circular church of great beauty, built apparently by the Knights
Templars, and afterwards possessed by the Knights of St. It is now
in ruins, but many of the frescoes which once adorned its walls still
remain, as well as the marble pillars that supported its roof. Being at
some distance from the harbour, the Knights of St. John built another
small church near the port, which still remains nearly unaltered. Although throughout the Middle Ages Rome went on building large
churches, it was in the debased-Roman style already referred to, fitting
together Roman pillars with classical details of more or less purity,
but hardly, except in their cloisters, deserving the name of a style. Perhaps the most original, as it certainly is one of the most beautiful,
things the Romans did, is the cloister of St. There the
little arcades, supported by twisted columns, and adorned with mosaics,
are as graceful and pleasing as anything of that class found elsewhere;
and as they are encased in a framework of sufficient strength to take
off all appearance of mechanical weakness, their unconstructive forms
are not unpleasing. The entablature, which is the ruling feature in the
design, retains the classical arrangement in almost every detail, and in
such purity as could only be found in Rome in the 13th century, when
this cloister appears to have been erected; but the style never extended
beyond the limits of that city, and thus has little bearing on the
thread of our narrative. The cloister of the Benedictine monastery adjoining the basilica of St. Pauls outside the walls, is another example of the same kind in which
the columns present almost every variety of form; spiral, twisted,
fluted, and sometimes two or three of these combined, many of them, as
well as the entablature, being covered with mosaics. As already remarked, the architects of the southern half of the Italian
peninsula were generally content to adopt the Romanesque plan of
covering their naves with a wooden rooffor when an intersecting vault
is found it is clearly a French or German interpolationbut they often
employed one dome, generally over the altar, and used it as an ornament
both external and internal. The two illustrations already given of the
domes at Bari (Woodcut No. 470) and Caserta Vecchia (Woodcut No. 472)
show the form these usually took in the province. They belong to a type
not unusual in the East, but unknown to the Gothic architects of Europe. When called upon to roof their churches with stone, they almost
invariably adopted the domical in preference to the vaulted form, as at
Molfetta (1162), where they make a pleasing form of roof, not unlike
that of Loches Cathedral (Woodcut No. The great defect of domes
when thus employed is their height, which generally throws the whole of
the building out of proportion; and unless light is introduced through
openings in the drum, or in the dome itself, they are dark and gloomy. This is certainly the case at Molfetta, but otherwise the church seems
well designed and of pleasing proportions. To be successful, domes
should be low and flat internally; and any height required externally
must be given by a false dome, as at St. Marks, or as done by the
Renaissance architects generally. This was not so much felt when the building was square, and covered by
only one dome, like the baptistery or tomb of Mont St. Angelo, where
effect of space on the floor was not aimed at so much as a combination
of external dignity with limited dimensions in plan, and was attained by
the arrangement adopted. As will be observed, the pointed arch, as in
the tower at Gaeta (Woodcut No. 489), is used in the basement, but above
this round arches with balusters for pillars, such as we should call
Saxon, though their age here may be the 12th century. Among the little bits of Orientalism that crop up here and there all
over the province, one of the most pleasing is the little tomb of
Bohemund at Canosa (1111). It is charming to find in Italy an Eastern
Kibleh with its dome, erected to contain the remains of a Christian
king. Though elegant, however, the dome is not fitted to the square, as
it would have been in more experienced hands, and the whole design is
somewhat badly put together. Its bronze doors are among its chiefest
ornaments, and are elegant, though inferior to numerous examples of the
same class in the churches of the province. Many other examples of Byzantine domical forms might be quoted as
existing in Southern Italy. It is not, however, so much in the forms as
in the details that the Eastern influence is felt, and that no less in
the churches which retain the basilican form of Ravenna than in those
which assume the domical form of Constantinople. The buildings of the Southern Province cannot certainly compete with
those of the Northern either in size or in daring mechanical
construction, but in detail they are frequently more beautiful, while
their forms are more national and less constrained. Their great
interest, however, in the eyes of the student, consists in their forming
a link between the Eastern and Western worlds, and thus joining together
two styles which we have hitherto been too much in the habit of
considering as possessing no point of contact. One of the best known, as well as one of the largest examples of this
class of buildings in Italy, is the baptistery at Pisa (seen partially
on the left side of Woodcut No. Internally it is, as nearly as may
be, 100 ft. in diameter, and the walls are about 8 ft. The dome itself, however, is only 60 ft. in diameter, and is
supported on four piers and eight pillars. These serve to separate the
central space from the aisle which runs round it, and which is two
storeys in height, but singularly ill-proportioned and clumsy in detail. The worst part of the design, however, is the dome, if dome it can be
called. Internally it is conical in form, and thrust through an external
hemispherical dome in a manner more clumsy and unpleasing than any other
example of its class. Externally, these defects are to some extent
atoned for by considerable richness and beauty of detail. It had
originally only one range of blind arcades, with three-quarter columns,
surmounted by an open arcade; an arrangement exactly similar to that of
the two lower storeys of the cathedral and the leaning tower (Woodcut
No. A considerable amount of pointed Gothic decoration was
afterwards added, which, though somewhat incongruous, is elegant in
itself, and hides to some extent the original defects of the design. But
the outline of the building and its whole arrangements are so radically
bad, that no amount of ornament can ever redeem them. Taken altogether, the Pisan baptistery is so very peculiar, that it
would be interesting if its design could be traced back to some
undoubted original. That this is possible will hardly be doubted by any
one at all familiar with the subject; meanwhile, the building most like
it that has been illustrated is the little church of San Donato, at
Zara. at the beginning of the 9th century, with materials taken
from ancient buildings, some of them of the best period of Roman
architecture. The two monolithic columns in front of the triple
sanctuary, and which are 30 ft. in height, bear testimony to the size
and importance of the temple they originally adorned, and the great
thickness of the walls and the size of the piers suggest a wealth of
material at the disposal of the builders. The rectangular building on
the south side Mr. Jackson considers to be coeval with the church; and
the chamber over it, which was on the same level and originally opened
on to the gallery round the aisles, formed a second church intended for
the use of the catechumens. The church is so built round that it is
impossible to say what its external appearance may have been. Both from
its resemblance to the Pisan baptistery and its own merits, it is an
interesting addition to our knowledge of those circular churches which
were such favourites with all the Christian architects in the
Carlovingian period. The resemblance in this instance is the more
remarkable, because the faade of the cathedral at Zara (Woodcut No. 467) is in the Pisan style, only slightly modified by local
peculiarities. From what we already know, it seems undoubted that there
was a close connectionarchitecturally, at leastbetween Pisa and Zara. If this were fully investigated, it would probably throw considerable
light on the origin of the Pisan style, which has hitherto seemed so
exceptional in Italy, and also explain how the Byzantine element came to
be so strongly developed in what at first sight appears to be a
Romanesque style of art. Ground and Upper Storey of San Donato, Zara. The typical example of a tower in the Italian style is the celebrated
leaning tower at Pisa, partly seen in Woodcut No. It is, indeed, so
far as we at present know, the only one which carries out that
arrangement of numerous tiers of superimposed arcades which is so
characteristic of the style. The lower storey is well designed as a
solid basement for the superincumbent mass; its walls are 13 ft. in
thickness, and it is adorned with 15 three-quarter columns: its height
being 35 ft. The six storeys above this average 20 ft. in height, and
are each adorned with an open arcade. The whole is crowned by a smaller
circular tower, 27 ft. in height, in which the bells are hung. The
entire height is thus 182 ft. ; the mean diameter of the main portion,
52. There is no doubt that it was originally intended to stand
perpendicular, though the contrary has been asserted; but before the
commencement of the fifth storey the foundations had given way, and the
attempts to readjust the work are plainly traceable in the upper
storeys, though without success. out of the
perpendicular,[309] which, though not sufficient to endanger its
stability, is enough to render it very unsightly. Even without this
defect, however, its design can hardly be commended; an arrangement of
six equal arcades, with horizontal entablatures, is not an expedient
mode of adorning a building, where elevation is the element of success. The introduction of strongly-marked vertical lines, or some variation in
the design of the arcades, would have greatly improved the design: and
so the Italians seem to have thought, for it was never repeated, and the
Pisan tower remains a solitary example of its class. Nothing at all resembling it occurs in the southern parts of the
province, though it must be admitted that they contain very few really
important towers of any sort. Perhaps the earthquakes to which a great portion of the country is
liable may have deterred the architects from indulging in structures of
great altitude; but it must be added that the idea of belfry or tower
did not enter into their municipal arrangements, and their towns are not
consequently illustrated by such towers as those of Venice, Cremona, or
Verona in the north. Of those which do exist that of Gaeta is perhaps as
picturesque as any. It was erected 1276-1290, and is both characteristic
of the style and elegant in outline. As will be observed, the lower
storey has pointed arches, while those above are all round; an
arrangement which, though to our eyes it may appear archologically
wrong, is certainly constructively right, and the effect is very
pleasing, from the height and dignity given to the entrance. The two towers of the cathedral at Bari (Woodcut No. 470) are not so
happy in design as this. They are too tall for their other dimensions,
and want accentuation throughout; while the change from the lower to the
upper storey is abrupt and ill-contrived. The tower at Caserta Vecchia
(Woodcut No. 472) is low and squat in its proportions, and unfortunately
too typical of the towers in this land of earthquakes. As a rule, it may be asserted that the southern province of Italy is
singularly deficient in examples of civil or domestic architecture. Great monastic establishments existed there during the Middle Ages which
must have possessed buildings befitting their magnificence; but these
have either perished and been rebuilt, or have been so restored that
their original forms can hardly be recognised. There are, indeed,
cloisters at Amalfi and Sorrento; much more remarkable, however, for the
beauty of their situation than for their architecture, which is
extremely rude and clumsy. There are no chapter-houses: no halls or
conventual buildings of any sort. In this respect, the province forms a
remarkable contrast with Spain in the same age; though it must be
confessed that the North of Italy is also very deficient in conventual
buildings of the Middle Ages, the most magnificent and beautiful
belonging more to the Renaissance than to the Medival period. At Ravello there is the Casa Ruffolo, a picturesque palace of the 13th
century, still nearly entire: a strange mixture of Gothic and Saracenic
taste, but so exceptional, that it would not be fair to quote it as a
type of any style. It seems to owe its peculiarities more to the taste
of some individual patron or architect rather than to any national taste
or form of design. There are, however, several Hohenstauffen castles of tolerable
preservation, more or less typical of the domestic arts of the day in
which they were erected. One of the best preserved of these is that of
Castel del Monte, erected by Frederick II., 1240-44. It is an octagon in
plan, with octagonal turrets at each angle. across
its extreme breadth, and surrounds a courtyard 57 ft. Both
storeys are vaulted, and all the details throughout are good and
pleasing. The whole is an admixture of Italian taste, superimposed on a
German design; but it will be observed how little removed the
architectural details of the entrance are, even at that early age, from
the style of the Renaissance. This is, indeed, the great characteristic
of the architectural objects in Southern Italy. Though they adopted
Christian forms, they never abandoned the classical feeling in details;
and it is this which mainly renders them worthy of study. Whether
considered in regard to dimensions, outline, or constructive
peculiarities, their churches will not bear a moments comparison with
those of the North; but in elegance of detail they often surpass purely
Gothic buildings to such a degree as to become to some extent as worthy
of study as their more ambitious rivals. Part Section, part Elevation, of Castel del Monte. POINTED ITALIAN GOTHIC. Fresco paintingsChurches at Vercelli, Asti, Verona, and LuccaCathedral
  at SienaSta. Maria, FlorenceChurch at ChiaravalleSt. Petronio,
  BolognaCathedral at MilanCertosa, near PaviaDuomo at Ferrara. Bologna independent                   A.D. 1112
            Countess Matilda at Florence               1115
            Obizzo dEste at Ferrara                   1184
            Enrico Dandolo takes Constantinople        1203
            War between Genoa and Venice               1205
            Azzo dEste at Ferrara                     1208
            Martino della Scala at Verona              1259
            Martino delle Torre at Milan               1260
            Visconti Lord of Milan                     1277
            Taddeo de Pepoli at Bologna                1334
            Conspiracy of Marino Faliero               1355
            Gian Galeazzo Visconti, Duke of Milan      1395
            Verona ceded to Venice                     1409
            Cosmo de Medici                           1434


Before the commencement of the 13th century, the Italians had acquired
such mastery over the details of their round-arched style, and had
worked it into such originality and completeness, that it is surprising
that they should so easily have abandoned it for that form of Pointed
Gothic which they afterwards adopted. It is true the Italians never rose
to the conception of such buildings as the great Rhenish cathedrals,
like those of Spires and Worms, or the old churches at Cologne; nor did
they perhaps even rival the quasi-classical grace and elegance of the
Provenal churches; but at Verona, Modena, and indeed throughout the
North of Italy, they had elaborated a complete round-arched style, all
the details of which were not only appropriate and elegant, but seemed
capable of indefinite development in the direction in which they were
proceeding. They had also before their eyes the Romanesque style of Pisa
and Lucca with all its elegance, and the example of Rome, where the
architects steadily refused to acknowledge the pointed arch during the
whole of the Medival period. Yet in the beginning of the 13th
centurysay 1220, when the cathedrals of Amiens, Salisbury, and Toledo
were designedItaly too was smitten with admiration for the pointed
arch, and set to work to adapt it to her tastes and uses. It would be difficult to account for this, were we not aware how deeply
the feelings that gave rise to the Ghibelline faction were rooted in the
Italian soil. In all the cities, except Rome, the cause of the
Ghibellines was throughout the Middle Ages identified with that of
freedom and local independence, in opposition to that of the Guelfs,
which symbolised the supremacy of the Pope and the clerical party. Knowing how strenuously this was resisted, we naturally expect to find
it expressed in the architecture of the country. Two, indeed, of the
great churches of Italy, Assisi (1228) and Milan (1385), were erected by
Germans in the German style of the day; but these are exceptional. The
form which the pointed-arched style took on its introduction, was that
of adaptation to the Italian style, in a manner which the Italians
thought more consonant with beauty and convenience than that adopted
north of the Alps. The elegance of
the details employed by a refined and cultivated people, and based on
classical traditions, goes far to redeem, in most instances, the defects
of their designs; but they never grasped the true principles of Gothic
art, and the fatal facility of the pointed arch led them more astray
after mechanical clevernesses than even the Germans. Still, it is an
original style, and, however imperfect, is well worthy of study. Before proceeding to describe the style more in detail, it may be well
to point out one of the principal causes which led to the more marked
features of difference between the Gothic architecture of Italy and that
of Germany and France. This was the distaste of the Italians for the
employment of painted glass, or at least their want of appreciation of
its beauties when combined with architecture. It will be explained in a future chapter how all-important painted glass
was to the elaboration of the Gothic style. But for its introduction,
the architecture of France would bear no resemblance to what it was, and
is. In Italy, indeed, the people loved polychromy, but always of the
opaque class. They delighted to cover the walls of their churches with
frescoes and mosaics, to enrich their floors with the most gorgeous
pavements, and to scatter golden stars over the blue ground of their
vaults; but rarely, if ever, did they fill, or design to fill, their
windows with painted glass. Perhaps the glare of an Italian sun may have
tended to render its brilliancy intolerable; but more probably the
absence of stained glass is owing to its incompatibility with
fresco-painting, the effect of which would be entirely destroyed by the
superior brightness of the transparent material. The Italians were not
prepared to relinquish the old and favourite mode of decoration in which
they so excelled. This adherence to the ancient method of ornamentation
enabled them, in the 15th and 16th centuries, to surpass all the world
in the art of painting, but it was fatal to the proper appreciation of
the pointed style, and to its successful introduction into the land. The first effect of this tendency was that the windows in Italian
churches were small, and generally devoid of tracery, with all its
beautiful accompaniments. The walls, too, being consequently solid, were
sufficient, by their own weight, to abut the thrust of the arches: so
that neither projecting or flying buttresses nor pinnacles were needed. The buildings were thus deprived externally of all the aspiring vertical
lines so characteristic of true Gothic. The architects, to relieve the
monotony arising from the want of these features, were forced to recur
to the horizontal cornices of the classical times, and to cover their
walls with a series of panelling which, however beautiful in itself, is
mere ornamentboth unmeaning and inconsistent. Internally, too, having no clerestory to make room for, and no
constructive necessities to meet, they jumped to the conclusion that the
best design is that which covers the greatest space with the least
expenditure of materials, and the least encumbrance of the floor. With
builders this is a golden rule, but with architects it is about the
worst that can possibly be adopted. The Germans were not free from this
fault, but the Italians carried it still further. If on four or five
piers they could support the vault of a whole nave, they never dreamed
of introducing more. A French architect, though superior in constructive
skill, would probably have introduced eight or ten in the same space. An
Italian aimed at carrying the vaults of the side-aisles to the same
height as that of the nave, if he could. A Northern architect knew how
to keep the two in their due proportion, whereby he obtained greater
height and greater width in the same bulk, and an appearance of height
and width greater still, by the contrast between the parts, at the same
time that he gave his building a character of strength and stability
perhaps even more valuable than that of size. In the same manner the Northern architects, while they grouped their
shafts together, kept them so distinct as to allow every one to bear its
proportional part of the load, and perform its allotted task. The
Italians never comprehended this principle, but merely stuck pilasters
back to back, in imitation of the true architects, producing an
unmeaning and ugly pier. The same incongruities occur in every part and
every detail. It is a style copied without understanding, and executed
without feeling. The elegance of the sculptured foliage and other
details sometimes goes far to redeem these faults; for the Italians,
though bad architects, were always beautiful carvers, and, as a Southern
people, were free from the vulgarities sometimes apparent farther north,
and never fell into the wild barbarisms which too often disfigure even
the best buildings on this side of the Alps. Besides, when painting is
joined to sculpture in churches, the architecture may come to occupy a
subordinate position, and thus escape the censure it deserves. Unfortunately there are only two examples of any importance in this
style that retain all their painted decorationsSt. Francis at Assisi,
and the Certosa near Pavia. From this circumstance they are perhaps the
most admired in Italy. In others the spaces left for colour are still
plain and blank. We see the work of the architect unaided by the
painting which was intended to set it off, and we cannot but condemn it
as displaying at once bad taste and ignorance of the true Gothic
feeling. One of the earliest, or perhaps the very first Italian edifice into
which the pointed arch was introduced, is the fine church of St. Andrea
at Vercelli, commenced in the year 1219 by the Cardinal Guala Bicchieri,
and finished in three years. This prelate, having been long legate in
England, brought back with him an English architect called, it is said,
Brigwithe, and entrusted him with the erection of this church in his
native place. (From Ostens
Baukunst in Lombardei.) Scale 100 ft. In plan, it is certainly very like an English church, terminating
squarely towards the east, and with side chapels to the transepts,
arranged very much as we find them at Buildwas, Kirkstall, and other
churches of this class and size, only that here they are polygonal,
which was hardly ever the case in England. But with the plan all
influences of the English architect seem to have ceased, and the
structure is in purely Italian style. Externally the pointed arch
nowhere appears, all the doors and windows being circular-headed; while
internally it is confined to the pier-arches of the nave and the
vaulting of the roof. The faade is flanked at its angles by two tall,
slender, square towers; and the intersection of the nave and transept is
covered by one of those elegant octagonal domes which the Italians knew
so well how to use, and which is in fact the only original feature in
their designs. The external form of this church is interesting, as
displaying the germs of much that two centuries afterwards was so
greatly expanded by a German architect in the design of Milan cathedral. A few years later, in 1229, a church was commenced at Asti, the tower of
which was finished in 1266. This allowed time for a more complete
development of the pointed style, which here prevails not only
internally, but externally. Tall pointed windows appear in the flanks,
and even the doorways assume that form, in their canopies, if not in
their openings. 493) is a later addition, and a
characteristic specimen of the style during the 14th century. This
church is also one of the earliest examples in which those elegant
terra-cotta cornices of small intersecting arches seem to have been
brought to perfection. (From Chapuy, Moyen-ge
Monumental.)]

The most remarkable church of this age is that of St. Francis at Assisi,
commenced in 1228, and finished, in all essentials at least, in 1253. It
is said to have been built by a German named Jacob, or Jacopo. Certainly
no French or English architect would have designed a double church of
this class, though, on the other hand, no Italian could have drawn
details so purely Northern as those of the upper church. In the lower
church there are hardly any mouldings to mark the style, but its
character is certainly rather German than Italian. This church depends
for its magnificence and character much more on painting than on
architecture. In the first place it is small, the upper church being
only 225 ft. width; and though the lower one has
side-aisles which extend the width to 100 ft., yet the upper church is
only 60 ft. in height, and the lower about 30, so that it is far too
small for much architectural magnificence. None of its details are equal
to those of contemporary churches on this side of the Alps. The whole
church is covered with fresco paintings in great variety and of the most
beautiful character, which justly render it one of the most celebrated
and admired of all Italy. On this side of the Alps without its frescoes,
it would hardly attract any attention. It is invaluable as an example of
the extent to which the polychromatic decoration may be profitably
carried, and of the true mode of doing it; and also as an illustration
of the extent to which the Italians allowed a foreign style and mode of
ornamentation to be introduced into their country. One of the purest and most perfect types of an Italian Gothic church is
that of Sta. Anastasia at Verona, commenced apparently in 1260. It is
not large, being only 285 ft. in length externally; but its arrangements
are very complete, and very perfect if looked at from an Italian point
of view. The square of the vault of the nave is the modulus, instead of
that of the aisles, as in true Gothic churches: owing to which the
pier-arches are further apart than a true artist would have placed them;
there are also no buttresses externally, but only pilasters. The
consequence of this is, that the arches have to be tied in with iron
rods at the springing, which internally adds very much to the appearance
of weakness, caused in the first instance by the wide spacing and
general tenuity. These bad effects are aggravated by the absence of a
string-course at the springing of the vault; and by the substitution of
a circular hole for the triforium, and a hexafoiled opening of very
insignificant dimensions for the glorious clerestory windows of Northern
churches. Altogether, though we cannot help being pleased with the
spaciousness and general elegance of design, it is impossible not to
feel how very inferior it is to that of churches on this side the Alps. One Bay, externally and internally, of the Church of
San Martino, Lucca.] The church of San Martino at Lucca, built about a century after Sta. Anastasia (middle of 14th century), presents a strikingly happy
compromise between the two styles. The pier-arches are still too wide23
ft. in the clear; but the defect is remedied to some extent by the
employment of circular instead of pointed arches, and the triforium is
all that can be desired; the clerestory, however, is as insignificant as
it must be where the sun is so brilliant and painted glass inadmissible. It would be easy to point out other defects; but, taking it altogether,
there are few more elegant churches than this, and hardly one in Italy
that so perfectly meets all the exigencies for which it was designed. (From the glises
principales dEurope.) Scale 100 ft. The cathedrals of Siena and Orvieto (the former commenced in 1243, the
latter in 1290) are perhaps, taken altogether, the most successful
specimens of Italian pointed Gothic. They are those at least in which
the system is carried to the greatest extent without either foreign aid
or the application of distinctly foreign details. These two buildings,
moreover, both retain their faades as completed by their first
architects, while the three great churches of this stylethe cathedrals
of Florence, Bologna, and Milanwere in this respect left unfinished,
with many others of the smaller churches of Italy. The church at Siena
illustrates forcibly the tendency of the Italian architects to adhere to
the domical forms of the old Etruscans, which the Romans amplified to
such an extent, and the Byzantines made peculiarly their own. I cannot
but repeat my regret that the Italians alone, of all the Western
Medival builders, showed any predilection for this form of roof. On
this side of the Alps it could have been made the most beautiful of
architectural forms. In Italy there is no instance of more than moderate
successnothing, indeed, to encourage imitation. Even the example now
before us is no exception to these remarks, though one of the boldest
efforts of Italian architects. In plan it ought to have been an octagon,
but that apparently would have made it too large for their skill to
execute, so they met the difficulty by adopting a hexagon, which, though
producing a certain variety of perspective, fits awkwardly with the
lines of columns, and twists the vaults to an unpleasant extent. Still,
a dome of moderate height, and 58 ft. in diameter, covering the centre
of the church, and with sufficient space around to give it dignity, is a
noble and pleasing feature, the merit of which it is impossible to deny. Combined with the rich colouring and gorgeous furniture of the church,
it makes up a whole of great beauty. The circular pier-arches, however,
and the black and white stripes by which the exterior is marked, detract
considerably from the effect of the wholeat least in the eyes of
strangers, though the Italians still consider it a beauty. The faade of
this cathedral is represented in Woodcut No. It consists of three
great portals, the arches of which are equal in size, though the centre
doorway is larger than those at the sides. Above is the invariable
circular window of the Italian architects, and the whole is crowned by
steep triangular gables. Beneath the cathedral, or rather under the
choir, is the ancient baptistery, now the church of St. John the
Baptist; its front is in a much purer style of Gothic than the
cathedral. [310]

[Illustration: 498. Faade of the Cathedral at Siena.] The carved architectural ornaments of the faade are rich and elaborate
in the extreme, though figured sculpture is used to a much less extent
than in Northern portals of the same age. It is also observable that the
strong horizontal lines do not harmonise with the aspiring character of
pointed architecture. The cathedral of Orvieto is smaller and simpler, and less rich in its
decorations, than that at Siena, with the exception of its faade, which
is adorned with sculpture and painting. Indeed the three-gabled front
may be considered the typical one for churches of this class. The
faades intended to have been applied to the churches at Florence,
Bologna, Milan, and elsewhere, were no doubt very similar to that
represented in Woodcut No. As a frontispiece, if elaborately
sculptured and painted, it is not without considerable appropriateness
and even beauty; but, as an architectural object, it is infinitely
inferior to the double-towered faades of the Northern cathedrals, or
even to those with only one great tower in the centre. It has besides
the defect of not expressing what is behind it; the central gable being
always higher than the roof, and the two others merely ornamental
appendages. Indeed, like the Italian Gothic buildings generally, it
depended on painting, sculpture, and carving for its effect, far more
than on architectural design properly so called. Among the greatest and most complete examples of Italian Gothic is the
church of Sta. Maria dei Fiori, the cathedral of Florence, one of the
largest and finest churches produced in the Middle Agesas far as mere
grandeur of conception goes, perhaps the very best, though considerably
marred in execution from defects of style, which are too apparent in
every part. (From Isabelle,
difices Circulaires.) Scale 100 ft. The building of the church was commenced in the year 1294 or 1298 (it is
not quite clear which), from the designs and under the superintendence
of Arnolfo di Lapo, for unfortunately in this style we know the names of
all the architects, and all the churches show traces of the caprice and
of the misdirected efforts of individuals, instead of the combined
national movement which produced such splendid results in France and
England. It is not known how far Arnolfo had carried the building when
he died, in 1310, but probably up to the springing of the vaults. After
this the works proceeded more leisurely, but the nave and smaller domes
of the choir were no doubt completed as we now find them in the first
twenty years of the 14th century. The great octagon remained unfinished,
and, if covered in at all, it was only by a wooden roof of domical
outline externally, which seems to be that represented in the fresco in
the convent of San Marco, till Brunelleschi commenced the present dome
in 1420, and completed it in all essential parts before his death, which
happened in 1444. The building may therefore be considered as
essentially contemporary with the cathedral of Cologne, which it very
nearly equals in size (its area being 84,802 ft., while that of Cologne
is estimated at 91,000), and, as far as mere conception of plan goes,
there can be little doubt but that the Florentine cathedral far
surpasses its German rival. Nothing indeed can be finer than its general
ground-plan. A vast nave leads to an enormous dome, extending into the
triapsal arrangement so common in the early churches of Cologne, and
which was repeated in the last and greatest effort of the Middle Ages,
or rather the first of the new schoolthe great church of St. In the Florentine church all these parts are better subordinated
and proportioned than in any other example, and the mode in which the
effect increases and the whole expands as we approach from the entrance
to the sanctum is unrivalled. Like all inexperienced architects, Arnolfo seems to have
thought that largeness of parts would add to the greatness of the whole,
and thus used only four great arches in the whole length of his nave,
giving the central aisle a width of 55 ft. of that of Cologne, and the height about the same; and
yet, in appearance, the height is about half, and the breadth less than
half, owing to the better proportion of the parts and to the superior
appropriateness in the details on the part of the German cathedral. At
Florence the details are positively ugly. The windows of the side-aisles
are small and misplaced, those of the clerestory mere circular holes. The proportion of the aisles one to another is bad, the vaults
ill-formed, and altogether a colder and less effective design was not
produced in the Middle Ages. The triapsal choir is not so objectionable
as the nave, but there are large plain spaces that now look cold and
flat; the windows are too few and small, and there is a gloom about the
whole which is very unsatisfactory. It is nearly certain that the
original intention was to paint the walls, and not to colour the
windows, so that these defects are hardly chargeable to the original
design, and would not be apparent now were it not that in a moment of
mistaken enthusiasm the Florentines were seized with a desire to imitate
the true style of Gothic art, and rival Northern cathedrals in the glory
of their painted glass. This, in a church whose windows were designed
only of such dimensions as were sufficient to admit the requisite
quantity of white light, was fatal. Notwithstanding the beauty of the
glass itself, which seems to have been executed at Lubeck, 1434, from
Italian designs, it is so completely out of place that it only produces
irritation instead of admiration, and has certainly utterly destroyed
the effect and meaning of the interior it was intended to adorn. Section of Dome and part of Nave of the Cathedral at
Florence. Part of the Flank of Cathedral at Florence.] Dome at Chiaravalle, near Milan. Externally the faade was never finished,[311] and we can only fancy
what was intended from the analogy of Siena and Orvieto. The flanks of
the nave are without buttresses or pinnacles, and, with only a few
insignificant windows, would be painfully flat except for a veneer of
 marbles disposed in panels over the whole surface. For an
interior or a pavement such a mode of decoration is admissible; but it
is so unconstructive, so evidently a mere decoration, that it gives a
weakness to the whole, and most unsatisfactory appearance to so large a
building. This is much less apparent at the east end, where the outline
is so broken, and the main lines of the construction so plainly marked,
that the mere filling in is comparatively unimportant. This is the most
meritorious part of the church, and, so far as it was carried up
according to the original design, is extremely beautiful. Even the
plainness and flatness of the nave serve as a foil to set off the
varying outline of the choir. Above the line of the cornice of the
side-aisles there is nothing that can be said to belong to the original
design except the first division of the drum of the dome, which follows
the lines of the clerestory. It has long been a question what Arnolfo
originally intended, and especially how he meant to cover the great
octagonal space in the centre. All knowledge of his intentions seems to
have been lost within a century after his death: at least, in the
accounts of the proceedings of the commission which resulted in the
adoption of Brunelleschis design for the dome, no reference is made to
any original design as then existing, and no one appears to have known
how Arnolfo intended to finish his work. Judging from the structure as
far as he carried it, and with the knowledge we now possess of the
Italian architecture of that age, we can easily conjecture what his
design for its completion may have been. Internally, it probably
consisted of a dome something like the present, but flatter, springing
from the cornice, 40 ft. lower than the present one, and pierced with
large openings on each of its eight faces. Section of Eastern portion of Church at Chiaravalle. (From Gruners Terra Cotta Architecture in Italy.) Scale 50 ft. Externally, two courses were open to him. The first and most obvious was
to hide the dome entirely under a wooden roof, as is done in St. Georges, Thessalonica (Woodcut No. 305), or in the baptistery in front
of the cathedral, and is done in half the baptisteries in Italyas at
Parma, for instance (Woodcut No. Had he done this, the span of the
dome might have been very much larger, without involving any
constructive difficulties, and the three towers over the choir and
transepts might have sufficed to relieve its external appearance
sufficiently for architectural effect. On the whole, however, I am
rather inclined to believe that something more ambitious than this was
originally proposed, and that the design was more like that of
Chiaravalle near Milan, built in 1221, and one of the most complete and
perfect of this class of dome now existing in Italy. Its external
appearance may be judged of from Woodcut 502, and its constructive
details from the section, Woodcut No. If the basement is sufficiently solidand that at Florence is more than
sufficient for any superstructure of the sortit is evident the
architect can dispose of such masses of masonry, that he can counteract
any thrust or tendency to spread that can exist in any dome of this
sort; and instead of being only 136 ft. across, 150 or 160 might easily
have been attempted. Instead of 375 ft., which is the height of the
present dome from the floor to the top of the cross externally, it might
even with the present diameter have been carried up to at least 500 ft.,
or as high as the church was long,70 to 100 ft. Had this been done, the three smaller semi-domes must have been intended
to be crowned with miniature octagonal spires of the same class with the
great dome, and between these the vast substructures show that it was
intended to carry up four great spires, probably to a height of 400 ft. Had all this been done (and something very like it seems certainly to
have been intended), neither Cologne Cathedral, nor any church in
Europe, ancient or modern, would have been comparable to this great and
glorious apse. As it is, the plain, heavy, simple outlined dome of
Brunelleschi acts like an extinguisher, crushing all the lower part of
the composition, and both internally and externally destroying all
harmony between the parts. It has deprived us of the only chance that
ever existed of witnessing the effect of a great Gothic dome; not indeed
such a dome as might with the same dimensions have been executed on this
side of the Alps, but still in the spirit, and with much of the poetry,
which gives such value to the conceptions of the builders in those days. But for this change of plan, the ambition of the Florentines might have
been in some measure satisfied, whose instructions to the architect
were, that their cathedral should surpass everything that human
industry or human power had conceived of great and beautiful.

About a century later (1390), the Bolognese determined on the erection
of a monster cathedral, which, in so far as size went, would have been
more than double that at Florence. According to the plans that have come
down to us, it was to have been about 800 ft. long and 525 wide across
the transepts; at the intersection was to have been a dome 130 ft. in
diameter, or only 6 ft. less than that at Florence; and the width of
both nave and transepts was to have been 183 ft. : so that the whole
would have covered about 212,000 ft., or nearly the same area as St. Peters at Rome, and three times that of any French cathedral! Of this
vast design, only about one-third (Woodcut No. ft., was
ever carried out; but that fragment is quite sufficient to enable us to
judge of the merits or defects of this style in its state of greatest
perfection. The only other building in the same style on a sufficient
scale to admit of comparison with this is the nave of the cathedral at
Florence just described, but that is nearly as may be only half of its
dimensions, or 36,000 ft. The chapels, too, at
Bologna add practically a fifth aisle, giving great variety and richness
to the perspective. The varied heights and proportions of the central
and side aisles are singularly pleasing, and there being six arches at
Bologna instead of only four as at Florence, and twelve side chapels
where none exist in the other example, go far to redeem the lean
mechanical look which is the great defect of this style. The great
advantage San Petronio has over the Florentine church is in the size and
number of its windows, and these not being filled with stained glass the
whole church has a bright and pleasing effect that contrasts most
favourably with the gloom of its great rival. Notwithstanding this, the
nave of San Petronio cannot be considered as a successful work of art. In the first place it is too mechanically perfect. The area of the
points of support as compared with the voids is, as far as can be made
out from such plans as exist, about one-twelfth, which would be a merit
in a railway station, but something more is wanted in a monumental
building. In the next there is a singular deficiency of either
constructive or constructed ornament. On this side of the Alps an
architect with vaulting shafts, string-courses, galleries, and fifty
other expedients, would have relieved the bareness of the walls. At
Bologna it probably was intended they should be painted, and this never
having been executed may account for most of its apparent defects. In Gothic architecture one of two systems seems indispensable: either
painted glass with strongly-marked carved mouldings over the whole of
the interior, or white glass with flat surfaces suitable for opaque
paintings. Few cathedrals are complete in both respects at the present
day, but in their imperfect state the Northern system has an immense
advantage over the Southern. The architecture of our cathedrals is
complete and beautiful even in ruins. An Italian church without its
 decoration is only a framed canvas without harmony or meaning. Were San Petronio as complete in its  decoration as the Certosa
at Pavia or Monreale at Palermo, it might stand a fair competition with
the best interiors on this side of the Alps. As it is, it is only a
splendid example of ornamental but unornamented construction, and, as
was attempted to be explained in the Introduction, both elements are
wanted for success in architectural design. Section of San Petronio, Bologna. The exterior of the church is in too unfinished a state to enable us to
judge of what its effect might have been if completed, but many of its
details, especially of the faade, are of very great beauty, in many
respects superior to what is to be found on this side of the Alps. Its
central dome, however, never could have been a feature worthy of so vast
a church. In diameter it is equal, or nearly so, to that of Florence,
but the points of support are so small, and so far apart, that it must
have been mainly if not wholly of wood. No such towering structure as
Arnolfos vast substructures show that he intended, could have stood on
the slim supports of the Bolognese church. [312]

[Illustration: 506. (From Chiesi
Principali dEuropa.) Scale 100 ft. The cathedral of Milanat once the most remarkable and one of the
largest and richest of all the churches erected in the Middle Ageswas
commenced in the year 1385, by order of Gian Galeazzo, first Duke of
Milan, and consecrated in 1418, at which date all the essential parts
seem to have been completed, though the central spire was not finished
till about the year 1440, by Brunelleschi. The design is said to have been furnished by a German architect,
Heinrich Arlez von Gemunden, or as the Italians call him, da
Gamondia,a statement which is corroborated by the fact that the
details and many of the forms are essentially Northern; but it is
equally certain that he was not allowed to control the whole, for all
the great features of the church are as thoroughly Italian as the
details are German: it is therefore by no means improbable that Marco da
Campione, as the Italians assert, or some other native artist, was
joined with him or placed over him. In size it is, except Seville, the largest of all Medival cathedrals,
covering 107,782 ft. In material it is the richest, being built wholly
of white marble, which is scarcely the case with any other church, large
or small; and in decoration it is the most gorgeousthe whole of the
exterior is covered with tracery, and the amount of carving and statuary
lavished on its pinnacles and spires is unrivalled in any other building
of Europe. It is also built wholly (with the exception of the faade)
according to one design. Yet, with all these advantages, the appearance
of this wonderful building is not satisfactory to any one who is
familiar with the great edifices on this side of the Alps. Cologne is
certainly more beautiful; Rheims, Chartres, Amiens, and Bourges leave a
far more satisfactory impression on the mind; and even the much smaller
church of St. Ouen will convey far more pleasure to the true artist than
this gorgeous temple. The cause of all this it is easy to understand, since all or nearly all
its defects arise from the introduction of Italian features into a
Gothic building; or rather, perhaps, it should be said, from a German
architect being allowed to ornament an Italian cathedral. Petronio at Bologna as our standard of
comparison, it will be seen that the sections (Woodcuts Nos. 505, 507)
are almost identical both in dimensions and in form, except that at
Milan the external range is a real aisle instead of a series of side
chapels; but, at the same time, it will be perceived that the German
system prevailed in doubling the number of the piers between the nave
and side-aisles. So far, therefore, the German architect saved the
church. The two small clerestories, however, still remain; and although
the design avoids the mullionless little circles of Bologna, there is
only space for small openings, which more resemble the windows of an
attic than of a clerestory. The greater quantity of light being thus
introduced by the tall windows of the outer aisle, the appearance is
that of a building lighted from below, which is fatal to architectural
effect. The model still preserved on the spot shows that the German architect
designed great portals at each end of the transepts. This, however, was
overruled in favour of two small polygonal apses. Instead of the great
octagonal dome which an Italian would have placed upon the intersection
of the whole width of the nave and transepts, German influence has
confined it to the central aisle, which is perhaps more to be regretted
than any other mistake in the building. The choir is neither a French
chevet nor a German or Italian apse, but a compromise between the two, a
French circlet of columns enclosed in a German polygonal termination. This part of the building, with its simple forms and three glorious
windows, is perhaps an improvement on either of the models of which it
is compounded. [313] (From
Wiebeking.) This is the nearest approach to the French chevet arrangement to be
found in all Italy. It is extremely rare in that country to find an
aisle running round the choir, and opening into it, or with the circlet
of apsidal chapels which is so universal in France. The Italian church
is not, in fact, derived from a combination of a circular Eastern church
with a Western rectangular nave, but is a direct copy from the old Roman
basilica. The details of the interior of Milan cathedral are almost wholly German
(Woodcut No. The great capitals of the pillars, with their niches
and statues, are the only compromise between the ordinary German form
and the great deep ugly capitalsfragments, in fact, of classical
entablatureswhich disfigure the cathedrals of Florence and Bologna, and
so many other Italian churches. Had the ornamentation of these been
carried up to the springing of the vault, they would have been
unexceptionable; as it is, with all their richness, their effect is
unmeaning. Externally, the appearance is in outline not unlike that of Sta. Maria
dei Fiori; the apse is rich, varied, and picturesque, and the central
dome (excepting the details) similar, though on a smaller scale, to what
I believe to have been the original design of the Florentine church. The
nave is nearly as flat as at Florence, the clerestory not being visible;
but the forest of pinnacles and flying buttresses and the richness of
the ornamentation go far to hide that defect. The faade was left
unfinished, as was so often the case with the great churches of Italy. Pellegrini was afterwards employed to finish it, and a model of his
design is still preserved. It is fortunate that his plan was not carried
out. The faade was finished, as we now see it, from the designs of
Amati, by order of Napoleon. It is commonplace, as might be expected
from its age, but inoffensive. The doorways are part of Pellegrinis
design, and the Medival forms being placed over those of the
cinque-cento, produce a strangely incongruous effect. For the west front
several original designs are still preserved. One of these, with two
small square towers at the angles, as at Vercelli and elsewhere, was no
doubt the Italian design. 509) is preserved
by Bassi:[314] had this been executed, the faade would have been about
one-third (viz. Had the height of
the towers been in the same proportion, they would have been the tallest
in the world. In that case the effect here, as at Cologne, would have
been to shorten and overpower the rest of the building to a painful
extent. A design midway between the two, with spires rising to the same
height as the central one, or about 360 ft., would perhaps have the
happiest effect. At any rate, the want of some such features is greatly
felt in the building as it stands. The Certosa, near Pavia, was commenced about the same date (1396) as the
cathedral at Milan. It is seldom that we find two buildings in the
Middle Ages so close to one another in date and locality, and yet so
dissimilar. There is no instance of such an occurrence on this side of
the Alps, till modern times; and it shows that in those days the
Italians were nearly as devoid of any distinct principles of
architecture as we have since become. View of the Certosa, near Pavia. The great difference between Pavia and Milan is that the former shows no
trace of foreign influence. Petronio, and
by no means so complete or consistent in design. Nothing, in fact, can
be more painful than the disproportion of the parts, the bad drawing of
the details, the malformation of the vaults, and the meanness of the
windows; though all these defects are completely hidden by the most
gorgeous colouring, and by furniture of such richness as to be almost
unrivalled. So attractive are these two features to the majority of
spectators, and so easily understood, that nine visitors out of ten are
delighted with the Certosa, and entirely forget its miserable
architecture in the richness and brilliancy of its decorations. Externally the architecture is better than in the interior. From its
proximity to Pavia, it retains its beautiful old galleries under the
roof. Its circular apses, with their galleries, give to this church, for
the age to which it belongs, a peculiar character, harmonising well with
the circular-headed form, which nearly all the windows and openings
present. Even in the interior there are far more circular than pointed
arches. The most beautiful and wonderful part of the building is the faade. This was begun in 1473, and is one of the best specimens in Italy of the
Renaissance style. It would hardly, therefore, be appropriate to mention
it here, were it not that the dome over the intersection of the nave and
transepts is of the same age and style, but reproduces so exactly
(except in details) what we fancy the Medival Italian Gothic dome to
have been, that it may be considered as a feature of the earlier ages. 502, it will be seen how like it is to that of
Chiaravalle in outline. It is less tall, however, and, if translated
into the details of the great church at Florence, would fit perfectly on
the basement there prepared for such a feature. Like many other churches in Northern Italy, the principal parts of the
Certosa are built in brick, and the ornamental details executed in
terra-cotta. Some of the latter, especially in the cloisters, are as
beautiful as any executed in stone in any part of Italy during the
Middle Ages; and their perfect preservation shows how suitable is the
material for such purposes. It may not be appropriate for large details
or monumental purposes, but for the minor parts and smaller details,
when used as the Italians in the Middle Ages used it, terra-cotta is as
legitimate as any material anywhere used for building purposes; and in
situations like the alluvial plains of the Po, where stone is with
difficulty obtainable, its employment was not only judicious but most
fortunate in its results. It would be a tedious and unprofitable task to attempt to particularise
all the churches which were erected in this style in Italy, as hardly
one of them possesses a single title to admiration beyond the very
vulgar one of size. To this Santa Croce, at Florence, adds its
association with the great men who lie buried beneath it, and Sta. Maria
Novella can plead the circumstanceexceptional in that cityof
possessing a faade;[315] but neither of these has anything to redeem
its innate ugliness in the eyes of an architect. There are two great churches of this period at Venice, the San Giovanni
e Paolo (1246-1420) and the Frari (1250); they are large and richly
ornamented fabrics, but are both entirely destitute of architectural
merit. (From Hopes Architecture.)
Scale 50 ft. A much more beautiful building is the cathedral at Como, the details of
which are so elegant and so unobtrusively used as in great measure to
make up for the bad arrangement and awkward form of the whole. In design
it is, however, inferior to that of the Duomo at Ferrara (Woodcut No. The latter does not display the richness of the faades of Siena
or Orvieto, nor the elegance of that last named; but among the few
Italian faades which exist, it stands pre-eminent for sober propriety
of design and the good proportions of all its parts. The repose caused
by the solidity of the lower portions, and the gradual increase of
ornament and lightness as we ascend, all combine to render it harmonious
and pleasing. It is true it wants the aspiring character and bold relief
of Northern faades; but these do not belong to the style, and it must
suffice if we meet in this style with a moderate amount of variety,
undisturbed by any very prominent instances of bad taste. The true type of an Italian faade is well illustrated in the view of
St. Francesco at Brescia (Woodcut No. 512), which may be considered the
germ of all that followed. Whether the church had three aisles or five,
the true Italian faade in the age of pointed architecture was always a
modification or extension of this idea, though introduced with more or
less Gothic feeling according to the circumstances of its erection. At Florence there is a house or warehouse, converted into a church,Or
(horreum) San Michele, which has attracted a good deal of attention, but
more on account of its curious ornaments than for beauty of designwhich
latter it does not, and indeed can hardly be expected to, possess. Maria della Spina at Pisa owes its celebrity to
the richness of its niches and canopies, and to the sculpture which they
contain. In this the Italians were always at home, and probably always
surpassed the Northern nations. It was far otherwise with architecture,
properly so called. This, in the age of the pointed style, was in Italy
so cold and unmeaning, that we do not wonder at the readiness with which
the Italians returned to the classical models. They are to be forgiven
in this, but we cannot so easily forgive _our_ forefathers, who
abandoned a style far more beautiful than that of Italy to copy one
which they had themselves infinitely surpassed; and this only because
the Italians, unable either to comSprehend or imitate the true
principles of pointed art, were forced to abandon its practice. Unfortunately for us, they had in this respect in that age sufficient
influence to set the fashion to all Europe. (From Streets
Brick and Marble in the Middle Ages.)]

Of late work in Dalmatia the most remarkable is the Cathedral of
Sebenico (described in Mr. Jacksons work), built entirely in stone and
marble, and without any brick or timber in its construction. It is a
cruciform building, covered over by a waggon-vault of stone, visible
both inside and outside. It was commenced from the design of Messer
Ambrosia, a Venetian architect, in 1435, to whom may be attributed the
nave and aisles up to the string-course above nave arches. The work was
continued after 1441 by another architect, Messer Giorgio, also from
Venice, who died in 1475, leaving the building still incomplete. The
style of the work is late Venetian Gothic, influenced in its later
portions by the Renaissance revival. The cloisters of the Badia at
Curzola, and of the Dominican and Franciscan convents at Ragusa, are
also beautiful specimens of late Italian Gothic. ----------------------------

          LONDON: PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS LIMITED,
                   STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING CROSS. Footnote 1:

  The first volume was published in 1865; the second in 1867. Footnote 2:

  Mmoire sur les Fouilles excuts au Madrasen, Constantine, 1873. Footnote 3:

  Monumentos Arquitectonicos de Espaa. Folio. Madrid, 1860, _et
  seqq._

Footnote 4:

  Parcerisa, Recuerdos y Bellezas de Espaa. Folio. Footnote 5:

  Gothic Architecture in Spain, by G. E. Street. Footnote 6:

  Denkmler der Kunst des Mittelalters in Unter Italien, by H. W.
  Schulz. Footnote 7:

  Syrie Centrale, by Count M. De Vog. Footnote 8:

  Byzantine Architecture, by Chev. Footnote 9:

  Mission to the Court of Ava in 1855, by Colonel Yule. Footnote 10:

  Travels in Siam and Cambodia, by Henri Mouhot. Footnote 11:

  The number of illustrations in the chapters of the Handbook comprised
  in this first volume of the History was 441. They now stand at 536
  (1874); and in the second volume the ratio of increase will probably
  be even greater. Footnote 12:

  It may be suggested that the glory of a French clerestory filled with
  stained glass made up for all these defects, and it may be true that
  it did so; but in that case the architecture was sacrificed to the
  sister art of painting, and is not the less bad in itself because it
  enabled that art to display its charms with so much brilliancy. Footnote 13:

  The numbers in the table must be taken only as approximative, except
  2, 4, 6, and 7, which are borrowed from Gwilts Public Buildings of
  London.

Footnote 14:

  The Isis-headed or Typhonian capitals cannot be quoted as an exception
  to this rule: they are affixes, and never appear to be doing the work
  of the pillar. Footnote 15:

  See woodcuts further on. Footnote 16:

  Max Mller, who is the _facile princeps_ of the linguistic school in
  this countryin an inaugural lecture which he delivered when, it was
  understood, he was appointed to a chair in the Strasburg
  Universitygave up all that has hitherto been contended for by his
  followers. He admitted that language, though an invaluable aid, did
  not suffice for the purposes of the investigation, and that the
  results obtained by its means were not always to be depended upon. Footnote 17:

  The term Persistent Varieties has recently been introduced, instead
  of race, in ethnological nomenclature, and, if scientific accuracy
  is aimed at, is no doubt an improvement. It is an advantage to have a
  term which does not even in appearance prejudge any of the questions
  between the monogenists and polygenists, and leaves undecided all the
  questions how the variations of mankind arose. But it sounds pedantic;
  and race may be understood as meaning the same thing. Footnote 18:

  The whole of this subject has been carefully gone into by the Author
  in a work entitled Rude Stone Monuments published in 1872, to which
  the reader is referred. Footnote 19:

  All round the shores of the Mediterranean are found the traces of an
  art which has hitherto been a stumbling-block to antiquarians. Egyptian cartouches and ornaments in Assyria, which are not Egyptian;
  sarcophagi at Tyre, of Egyptian form, but with Phnician inscriptions,
  and made for Tyrian kings; Greek ornaments in Syria, which are not
  Greek; Roman frescoes or ornaments, and architectural details at
  Carthage, and all over Northern Africa, which however are not Roman. In short, a copying art something like our own, imitating everything,
  understanding nothing. Franks for the
  suggestion that all this art may be Phnician, in other words,
  Semitic, and I believe he is right. Footnote 20:

  Had there been no Pelasgi in Greece, there probably would have been no
  Architecture of the Grecian period. Footnote 21:

  The derivation of the two words Heathen and Pagan seems to indicate
  the relative importance of these two terms very much in the degree it
  is here wished to express. Heathen is generally understood to be
  derived from , a nation or people; and Pagan from _Pagus,
  Pagani_, a village, or villagers. Both are used here not as terms of
  reproach, but as indicative of their being non-Christian, which is
  what it is wished to express, and was the original intention of the
  term. Footnote 22:

  Rude Stone Monuments, 1 vol. Footnote 23:

  The above scheme of Egyptian Chronology was published by me in the
  True Principles of Beauty in Art, in 1849; and the data on which it
  was based were detailed in the Appendix to that work. As there seems
  to be nothing in the subsequent researches or discoveries which at all
  invalidates the reasoning on which the table was founded, it is here
  reproduced in an abridged form as originally set forth. Footnote 24:

  Syncellus, Chron. Dindorff, Bonn, 1829. Footnote 25:

  Josephus contra Apion, i. Footnote 26:

  Vyse, Operations on the Pyramids at Gizeh in 1837, vol. Footnote 27:

  At Wady Meghara, in the Sinaitic peninsula, a king of the 4th dynasty
  is represented as slaying an Asiatic enemy. It is the only sign of
  strife which has yet been discovered belonging to this ancient
  kingdom. Footnote 28:

  By a singular coincidence, China has been suffering from a Hyksos
  domination of Tartar conquerors, precisely as Egypt did after the
  period of the Pyramid builders, and, strange to say, for about the
  same periodfive centuries. Had the Taepings been successful, we
  should have witnessed in China the exact counterpart of what took
  place in Egypt when the 1st native kings of the 18th dynasty expelled
  the hated race. H. Vyse, Operations carried on the Pyramids of Gizeh in 1837.
  Lond. Footnote 30:

  This will be best understood by looking at the section (Woodcut 7), in
  which it will be seen that the so-called coping or casing-stones were
  not simply triangular blocks, filling up the angles formed by the
  receding steps, and which might have been easily displaced, but stones
  from 7 to 10 feet in depth, which could not have been supported unless
  the work had been commenced at the bottom. On the other hand, it is
  difficult to understand how the casing-stones for the upper portion
  could have been raised up the sloping portion completed. It is
  probable, therefore, that the casing was commenced at the angles and
  was carried up in vertical planes, thus leaving a causeway of steps in
  the middle of each face, which diminished in width as the work
  proceeded; this causeway, a few feet wide only, on each face being
  then encased from the top downwards after the apex blocks had been
  laid.ED. Footnote 31:

  The Pyramids and Temples of Gizeh by W. M. Flinders Petrie. Footnote 32:

  On the north side the paving is carried under the lowest course. Footnote 33:

  Except the spires of Cologne Cathedral. Footnote 34:

  They are situated in latitude 30 N.

Footnote 35:

  Pyramids and Temples of Gizeh, p. 117: All the chambers of this pyramid are
  entirely hewn in the rock.

Footnote 37:

  Medum, by M. Flinders Petrie. D. Nutt, London, 1892. Footnote 38:

  Diodorus, i. Footnote 39:

  M. Mariettes discoveries in these tombs were only in progress at the
  time of his death: but his manuscript notes and drawings of the
  hieroglyphics and figures have since been published in facsimile under
  the title of Les Mastabas de lAncienne Empire Paris 1889. They are,
  however, incomplete; some of the plates referred to could not be
  found, and M. Maspero, who edited the work, has unfortunately given no
  preface of his own, which might have rendered them more intelligible. At present no sufficient data exist to enable others to realise and
  verify the extraordinary revelation it presents to us. It is 2000
  years older, and infinitely more varied and vivid, than the Assyrian
  pictures which recently excited so much interest. Footnote 40:

  The false door is a niche in the side of the mastaba, the back of
  which is carved in imitation of a wooden door. Footnote 41:

  Lucian, De Syria Dea, ed. 451, alludes to the
  fact of the old temples of the Egyptians having no images. Footnote 42:

  The roof slabs are gone, but the lower portions of the slits are still
  uninjured. Footnote 43:

  The plan and particulars relating to this temple are taken from Mr. W.
  M. Petries work before referred to. Footnote 44:

  The tablet discovered at Gizeh, in which Khufu, the builder of the
  Great Pyramid, is recorded to have made some repairs to the Sphinx, is
  stated by Mr. Petrie to be a forgery of the 20th dynasty, and his
  reasons are given in section 118 of his work. Footnote 45:

  Lepsius, Denkmaler, Abt. Footnote 46:

  Syncellus, p. Footnote 47:

  Hawara, Biahmun, and Arsinoe by W. M. Flinders Petrie, 1889. Footnote 48:

  Kahun, Garob, and Hawara, by W. M. Flinders Petrie, 1890. Footnote 49:

  Illahun, Kahun, and Gurob, by W. M. Flinders Petrie, 1891. Footnote 50:

  _Ibid._

Footnote 51:

  The researches of Mr. Petrie at Kahun have shown that originally this
  form of column was in wood, which would account for the base on which,
  in Egyptian work, it is always placed. Footnote 52:

  In a tomb of the 4th dynasty found at Sakkara is a wall decoration in
  which the lotus column is used in a frieze, examples of it being
  carved in low relief to separate the figures in a procession (see
  plate 10, Voyage dans la Haute gypte, by F. A. F. Mariette. The polygonal or Proto-Doric column has also been found as a
  hieroglyph in an inscription of the 4th dynasty. This carries back the
  date of the two columns to a period some twelve centuries prior to the
  example at Beni-Hasan. Footnote 53:

  Revue Archologique, vol. Footnote 54:

  518 years: Josephus contra Apion., I. Footnote 55:

  Layard, Nineveh and Babylon, 281. Footnote 56:

  Tacitus, Ann. Footnote 57:

  Revue Archologique, vol. Footnote 58:

  Now in Sir John Soanes Museum, in Lincolns-Inn-Fields. Footnote 59:

  Egyptian Archology, by G. Maspero, translated from the French by
  Amelia B. Edwards. Footnote 60:

  The information regarding these temples is principally derived from
  Hoskinss Travels in Ethiopia, which is the best and most accurate
  work yet published on the subject. Footnote 61:

  Herodotus. Footnote 62:

  Woodcuts 982 and 1091 in the first edition of this History. Footnote 63:

  Published in the Rheinischer Museum vol. Footnote 64:

  Josephus contra Apion, i. Footnote 65:

  If the Greeks traded to Naucratis as early as the 1st Olympiad. Footnote 66:

  When the Handbook of Architecture was published in 1855, there
  existed no data from which these affinities could be traced. It is to
  the explorations of Sir Henry Rawlinson and Messrs. Taylor and Loftus
  that we owe what we now know on the subject; but even that is only an
  instalment. Footnote 67:

  The chronology here given is based on the various papers communicated
  by Sir Henry Rawlinson to the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society,
  vol. x. et seq., and to the Athenum journal. The whole has been
  abstracted and condensed in his brothers Five Great Monarchies of
  the Ancient world; from which work the tables here given are taken in
  an abridged form. Footnote 68:

  Loftus, Chalda and Babylonia, p. Footnote 69:

  Journal R. A. S., vol. Footnote 70:

  Journal R. A. S., vol. p. i, et seq., Sir H. Rawlinsons paper,
  from which all the information here given regarding the Birs is
  obtained. Footnote 71:

  Flandin and Coste, Voyage en Perse, vol. Footnote 72:

  I have ventured to restore the roof of the cella with a sikra (ziggur
  or ziggurah, according to Rawlinsons Five Ancient Monarchies, vol. 395, et passim), from finding similar roofs at Susa, Bagdad,
  Keffeli, &c. They are certainly indigenous, and borrowed from some
  older type, whether exactly what is represented here is not clear, it
  must be confessed. It is offered as a suggestion, the reason for which
  will be given when we come to speak of Buddhist or Saracenic
  architecture. Footnote 73:

  Rich gives its dimensions: On the north, 600 feet; south, 657; east,
  546; and west, 408. But it is so ruinous that only an average guess
  can be made at its original dimensions. George Smith, in the
  Athenum of February 1876, wrote a letter giving an account of a
  tablet of the Temple of Belus at Babylon he had deciphered, which
  constitutes the only description found giving the dimensions thereof. The bottom stage was 300 feet square and 110 feet high, the second,
  with raking sides, 260 feet square and 60 feet high, the third 200
  feet square and 20 feet high, the fourth, fifth, and sixth each 20
  feet high and 170, 140, and 110 feet respectively. The top stage,
  which was the sanctuary, was 80  70 feet and 50 feet high, the whole
  height being thus 300 feet, the same as the width of the base. W.
  R. Lethaby, in his work on Architecture, Mysticism, and Myth, gives
  as a frontispiece a restoration according to these dimensions, the
  appearance of which is more impressive and probably approaches more
  closely to the actual proportions of a ziggurat than any previously
  published, excepting that at Khorsabad, with which in general
  proportion it coincides.ED.] Footnote 74:

  Strabo, xvi. Footnote 75:

  There is a slight discrepancy in the measures owing to the absence of
  fractions in the calculation. Footnote 76:

  Loftus, Chalda and Babylonia, p. Footnote 77:

  This chapter and that next following may be regarded as, in all
  essential respects an abridgment or condensation of the information
  contained in a work published by the author in 1851, entitled, The
  Palaces of Nineveh and Persepolis Restored, the only real difference
  being that the more perfect decipherment of the inscriptions since
  that work was published has caused some of the palaces and buildings
  to be ascribed to different kings and dynasties from those to whom
  they were then assigned, and proved their dates to be more modern than
  was suspected, for the oldest at least. The order of their succession,
  however, remains the same, and so consequently do all the
  architectural inferences drawn from it. Those readers who may desire
  further information on the subject are referred to the work alluded
  to. Footnote 78:

  Published in 1862, in the Athenum journal, No. Footnote 79:

  This plan, with all the particulars here mentioned, are taken from
  Layards work, which is the only authority on the subject, so that it
  is not necessary to refer to him on every point. The plan is reduced
  to the usual scale of 100 ft. to 1 inch, for easy comparison with the
  dimensions of all the other edifices quoted throughout this work. Footnote 80:

  The whole of the information regarding Khorsabad is taken from M.
  Bottas great work on the subject, and its continuation, Ninive et
  lAssyrie, by M. Victor Place. Footnote 81:

  These particulars are all borrowed from M. Places great work, Ninive
  et lAssyrie, folio. Footnote 82:

  Space will not admit of my entering into all the reasons for this
  restoration here. If any one wishes for further information on the
  subject, I must refer him to my Palaces of Nineveh and Persepolis
  Restored, published in 1851. Nothing has occurred during the
  twenty-three years that have elapsed since that work was published
  that has at all shaken my views of the correctness of the data on
  which these restorations were based. On the contrary, every subsequent
  research has served only more and more to convince me of their general
  correctness, and I cannot now suggest any improvement even in details. [It should be noted that the authors theory as to the covering over
  of the Assyrian halls with a flat roof carried on columns has never
  been accepted by foreign archologists, and no trace has ever been
  found of the foundations which would be required to carry such
  columns. M. Place, who conducted the excavations at Khorsabad, and
  Messrs. Perrot & Chipiez, who, among others, have devoted much time
  and research to the subject, are of opinion that the halls were
  vaulted. It would be difficult now to determine the possibility of
  building vaults of thirty feet span in crude or unburnt brick, because
  we have no means of testing the resistance to crushing which such
  bricks might afford. The brick voussoirs found by M. Place in the
  arches of the town gates had been prepared in special moulds, and so
  completely dried that liquid clay had been used to cement them
  together. In some of the large halls, far away from the walls, and in
  some cases in the centre of the rooms, huge blocks of hard clay were
  found with their lower surface curved and covered with a layer of
  stucco; these masses were sometimes many metres long, one to two
  metres wide, nearly a metre thick. According to M. Place they formed
  part of a barrel vault covering the halls, and their size would
  account for the immense thickness of the walls constructed to carry
  them and resist their thrust, as well as for the peculiar shape of the
  halls; that is, their length as compared with their breadth. The
  sculptured slabs would seem to have been carved to be seen by a high
  side-light, which suggests openings of some kind, just above the
  springing of the vault, and above the flat roof of the smaller halls
  round.ED.] Footnote 83:

  These gateways are extremely interesting to the Biblical student,
  inasmuch as they are the only examples which enable us to understand
  the gateways of the Temple at Jerusalem as described by Ezekiel. Their
  dimensions are nearly the same, but the arrangement of the side
  chambers and of gates generally are almost identical. These gates had
  been built 100 years at least before Ezekiel wrote. Footnote 84:

  Layards excavations here furnish us with what has not been found or
  has been overlooked elsewhere, _e.g._, a ramp or winding staircase
  leading to the upper storey (Nineveh and Babylon, 461). As explained
  above, I believe the tops of the walls, which are equal to the floor
  space below, formed such a storey. This ramp at Koyunjik would just
  suffice to lead to them, and goes far to prove the theory. If it was
  similarly situated at Khorsabad it would be in the part fallen away. Footnote 85:

  [This assumption is speculative, no trace of such dwarf columns having
  been found; to raise a solid wall thirteen feet thick to carry a
  gallery seems unlikely.ED.] Footnote 86:

  This faade, as I read it, is identical with the one I erected at the
  Crystal Palace as a representation of an Assyrian faade, long before
  this slab was exhumed. Footnote 87:

  See Rawlinson, Ancient Monarchies, vol. Footnote 88:

  It is called tomb by Strabo, lib. xvi., and Diodorus, xvii. 112, 3;
  temple, Herodotus, i. Footnote 89:

  Texier shows columns on the fourth side. Weld Blundell in 1892 found a column with fluted base and Doric
  capital, but it did not apparently belong to the palace. Footnote 91:

  [It follows from what has already been pointed out in a note
  respecting the roofs of the Assyrian palaces; if, as is contended by
  French archologists, the great halls were vaulted, Mr. Fergussons
  theory respecting the origin of the Persian columns partly falls to
  the ground; in that case it would seem more probable that the Persians
  owed their columnar architecture to prototypes of wooden posts,
  covered with metal plates, such as are described as existing in the
  Median palaces of Ecbatana, where Cyrus, the first Persian monarch,
  passed so many years of his life.ED.] Footnote 92:

  The woodcuts in this chapter, except the restorations, are taken from
  Flandin and Costes Voyage en Perse, except where the contrary is
  mentioned. Footnote 93:

  It is curious that neither Ker Porter, nor Texier, nor Flandin and
  Coste, though measuring this building on the spot, could make out its
  plan. Yet nothing can well be more certain, once it is pointed out. Footnote 94:

  Palaces of Nineveh and Persepolis Restored, p. [The prayer platform or talar represented on the tomb of Darius is
  extremely unlike any constructional feature such as an upper storey,
  and may have been placed there only to give dignity and importance to
  the figure of the king: the hall of the Palace of Darius could easily
  have been lighted by clerestory windows over the roofs of the smaller
  chambers on each side.ED.] Footnote 95:

  It is very strange that this similarity, like the plan of the square
  halls, should hitherto have escaped observation. Had any one looked at
  the matter as a whole we should have been spared some restorations
  which are too absurd even to merit exposure. [The restorations referred to are those in which the columns of the
  Great Hall and of the porticoes are shown as isolated features
  standing on the platforms. The authors of these designs would appear
  to have been misled by Messrs. Flandin and Costes plan, in which the
  drains are shown as if they ran under the line of the wall proposed by
  Mr. Fergusson, the enclosing wall of the Great Hall. Weld
  Blundells researches (1891), however, have shown that the main drain
  really lies under the hall, and between the enclosure wall and the
  first row of columns, and that the vertical rain-water shafts which
  were built into the wall communicated direct with this main drain. These shafts, cut in stone, in some cases rise above the level of the
  platform, which show that they were not intended to carry off the
  surface water from the platform. Weld Blundell discovered also the
  traces of the foundation of walls at the angles where shown by Mr. It would seem that in course of time the platforms have
  become coated with so hard and uniform a covering as to suggest its
  being the natural surface; when once broken through, however, the
  evidences of foundations of various walls are abundant.ED.] Footnote 96:

  M. Dieulafoys work on the Acropolis of Susa has just (1893) appeared,
  but, so far as the palace is concerned, his discoveries do not add
  much to our knowledge. He appears to have arrived at the conclusion
  that the great hall (which in plan resembles that of the palace of
  XerxesWoodcut 94) was not enclosed on the south side, but was left
  open to the court in the same way as the great reception halls of the
  later Parthian and Sassanian kings at Al Hadhr, Firouzabad, and
  Ctesiphon. Footnote 97:

  It is now generally considered that these two buildings were tombs;
  the projecting bosses, as shown on woodcut, are in reality sinkings,
  and were probably decorative only.ED. Footnote 98:

  M. Dieulafoy claims to have traced the plan of a temple at Susa which
  consisted of a sanctuary the roof of which was supported by four
  columns, with a portico-in-antis in front, and a large open court,
  measuring about 50 ft. by 40 ft., in the middle of which was placed
  the fire-altar. The whole building was enclosed with a corridor or
  passage, with entrances so arranged that no one could see inside the
  temple from without.ED. Flinders Petries latest excavations at Medum have resulted in the
  discovery of small brick arches over a passage in the sepulchral pit
  of Rahotep of the 4th dynasty. Footnote 100:

  Wilkinsons Egypt and Thebes, pp. Footnote 101:

  Manners and Customs of the Egyptians, vol. Footnote 102:

  1 Kings vii. Josephus, B. J. viii. Footnote 103:

  Josephus, Ant. Footnote 104:

  The details of this restoration are given in the Dictionary of the
  Bible, _sub voce_ Temple, and repeated in my work entitled The
  Holy Sepulchre and the Temple at Jerusalem. Murray, 1865. Footnote 105:

  Speakers Commentary on the Bible, vol. 520; note on verse
  15, chap. Footnote 106:

  For a restoration of this screen see Tree and Serpent Worship,
  Appendix i., p. Footnote 107:

  Since the article on the Temple in Smiths Dictionary of the Bible
  was written, from which most of the woodcuts in this chapter are
  taken, I have had occasion to go over the subject more than once, and
  from recent explorations and recently discovered analogies have, I
  believe, been able to settle, within very narrow limits of doubt, all
  the outstanding questions with reference to this celebrated building. I have in consequence written and published a monograph of the Temple,
  but have deemed it more expedient to leave the illustrations here as
  they are. Footnote 108:

  2 Chronicles xx. Footnote 109:

  Hecateus of Abdera, in Mllers Fragments, ii. Footnote 110:

  Josephus, Ant. Footnote 111:

  Josephus, B. J. v. Footnote 112:

  Dawkins and Wood, The Ruins of Palmyra, Lond. Footnote 113:

  Texier, Armnie et la Perse, vol. Footnote 114:

  Texier, Asie Mineure, pl. Footnote 115:

  Herodotus, i. Footnote 116:

  Lydischen Knigsgrber, I. F. M. Olfers, Berlin, 1859. Footnote 117:

  Toward the centre of the monument two large stones were found leaning
  at an angle the one against the other, and forming a sort of tent,
  like in Woodcut 124, under which was presently discovered a small
  statue of Minerva seated on a chariot with four horses, and an urn of
  metal filled with ashes, charcoal, and burnt bones. This urn, which is
  now in the possession of the Comte de Choiseul, is enriched in
  sculpture with a vine branch, from which is suspended bunches of
  grapes done with exquisite art.Description of the Plain of Troy,
  translated by Dalzel, Edin. If this is so, this is no doubt the vessel mentioned, Iliad, xvi. 92; Od., xxiv. and why has not the fact of its existence been more insisted upon? Footnote 118:

  One of the most interesting facts brought to light in Dr. Schliemanns
  excavations is that between the age of the Ilium Vetus of Homer,
  rich in metals and in arts, and the Ilium Novum of Strabo, a people
  ignorant of use of the metals, and using only bone and stone
  implements, inhabited the mound at Hissarlik which covered both these
  cities. This discovery is sufficient to upset the once fashionable
  Danish theory of the three agesStone, Bronze, and Ironbut,
  unfortunately, adds nothing to our knowledge of architecture. These
  people, whoever they were, built nothing, and must consequently be
  content to remain in the longa nocte of those who neglect the Master
  Art. Footnote 119:

  Fergussons History of Indian and Eastern Architecture. John Murray,
  London 1876, page 108 et seq. Footnote 120:

  This tomb is considered by M. Renan (Mission de Phnicie, Paris 1864)
  to be of Phnician origin, who remarks generally on their work:
  Phnician tombs are generally excavated in the solid rock; their
  architecture is the carved rock without columns; they obtained all
  they could out of the solid rock, leaving it as they found it, with
  more or less attempt to make it graceful; the fact that it was worked
  before being transported suggests that as it left the quarry so it
  remained, no sound of hammer or saw being heard during its erection.
  There is another tomb at Marathos also attributed to the Phnicians,
  which is partly cut out of the rock and partially built in large
  blocks of masonry. Footnote 121:

  In reality the monument stands exactly over the centre of the rock-cut
  sepulchre. The section-line must, therefore, be understood to be
  carried back about 10 feet from the face of the monument. Footnote 122:

  Josephus, Ant. Footnote 123:

  Beules excavations have proved that the outer gate of the Acropolis
  was in front, not at the side, as here shown. Acropole dAthnes.
  Paris, vol. Footnote 124:

  For details of this see Btticher, Baumkultus der Hellenen. Berlin,
  1856. Footnote 125:

  Pausanias, ix. Footnote 126:

  It appears that on the back of the stones laid in horizontal courses
  were others of great size piled on the top. Footnote 127:

  The same scroll exists at New Grange in Ireland, in the Island of Gozo
  near Malta, and generally wherever chambered tumuli are found. Footnote 128:

  A cast of these is to be found in the South Kensington Museum. Footnote 129:

  These ant (parastades) or responds were destined in the first case to
  protect the angles of the wall, and in the second case to support the
  beams carried by them and the columns between, the sun-dried brick
  wall being not to be relied on; in the later Greek temples the walls
  were built in stone and marble, and the parastades became therefore no
  longer constructional necessities, being retained only as decorative
  features, of which so many others are found in the style. Footnote 130:

  Pausanias, vi. Footnote 131:

  The dimensions are 94 feet by 45, covering consequently only 4230
  feet. Footnote 132:

  This refers only to the columns and ant; the lower portion of the
  walls, 3 feet 6 inches high, were in stone; above this clay bricks
  were employed in building the walls, and it was to the disintegration
  of these that we owe the preservation of the Hermes of Praxiteles,
  which was found embedded in a thick layer of clay. At first it was
  thought that this clay had been washed down from the neighbouring
  <DW72>s of the hill of Kronos. Footnote 133:

  M. J. Thacher Clarke, who directed the American expedition in 1881, is
  now occupied with a monograph on the subject, and a report by him was
  published in 1882. Footnote 134:

  A proto-Ionic capital of early date was found in 1882 on the summit of
  Mount Chigri, in the Troad, by Mr. J. Thacher Clarke, and is described
  in the American Journal of Archology, Baltimore. Another
  example ascribed to Phnician artists was found at Trapeza in Cyprus,
  and is now in the Louvre; both are of the same type as that which is
  represented in the ivory carvings from the north-western palace of
  Nimroud, now in the British Museum, so that the Asiatic origin of the
  order is thus confirmed. Footnote 135:

  Pausanias, viii. Footnote 137:

  [The earliest example in stone at Benihasan is of less diameter than
  the columns at Kalabscheh, so that it is difficult to draw this
  distinction; we have already shown also (p. 115 note) that wooden
  shafts of the twelfth dynasty have been found at Kahun, and this and
  the existence of the base proves their wooden origin. If therefore the
  Greek Doric column was derived originally from Egypt, as Mr. Fergusson
  believed, then its earlier wooden parentage must be accepted. Further
  evidence on this subject however has been afforded by the discoveries
  at Olympia, and the references in consequence made to Greek authors;
  all these show without doubt that the columns of the temple of Hera
  were originally in wood, and were gradually replaced by stone. The
  theory that the pillars in Egypt or early Greece were built in
  brickwork or rubble masonry is not borne out by the discoveries at
  Tiryns, for the walls of the palace there, in rubble and clay mortar,
  were of such weak construction that posts of timber were required to
  carry the epistyle or beam, either isolated as columns or built up
  against the wall as ant. Fergussons theory that a pillar, originally copied from the
  wooden post, is slenderer at first, and gradually departs from the
  wood form as the style advances, is borne out by the evidence of the
  Egypt lotus column; this, as found in the rock-cut tombs of Benihasan,
  is of very small diameter, and quite unequal to carry the weight of
  any stone superstructure; whereas afterwards in the temples at Thebes
  it assumes a proportion nearer that of the earliest Greek Doric
  example at Corinth.ED.] Footnote 138:

  These facts have all been fully elucidated by Mr. Penrose in his
  beautiful work containing the results of his researches on the
  Parthenon and other temples of Greece, published by the Dilettanti
  Society. Footnote 139:

  For measurements we depend on Penrose, Principles of Athenian
  Architecture, &c., fol. ; and Cockerell, The Temples of Egina and
  Bass, Lond. The details of the system were first publicly
  announced by Watkiss Lloyd, in a paper read to the Institute of
  British Architects in 1859; afterwards in an appendix to Mr. Cockerells work, and in several minor publications. Footnote 140:

  The pyramid-building kings of Lower Egypt seem to have had some
  distinct ideas of a system of definite proportions in architectural
  building, and to have put it into practice in the pyramid, and
  possibly elsewhere, but it has not yet been sought for in the other
  buildings of that age. At times I cannot help suspecting more affinity to have existed
  between the inhabitants of Lower Egypt and those of Greece than is at
  first sight apparent. Footnote 141:

  It was called Zoophorus (_life_ or _figure bearer_). Footnote 142:

  [The reasons which induced the late Mr. Fergusson to suggest an
  opaion, or clerestory, were fully set forth in the True Principles
  of Beauty in Art, in 1849. A paper on the same subject was
  communicated by him to the Royal Institute of British Architects in
  1861, and published in their Transactions for that year. Since his
  death, however, Mr. Penroses discovery that the Temple of Jupiter
  Olympius at Athens was really octastyle has thrown a new light on the
  question of hypthral temples; and, as Dr. Dorpfield remarks in his
  essay on the Hypthral Temple (communicated to the R. I. B. A. on
  Dec. 19): The words of Vitruvius have now received quite another
  interpretation, through the excavation of the Olympieion at Athens, to
  that which they have had up to the present. The most important proof
  of the hypthral lighting of the temples of antiquity has now turned
  into a proof against the same; and he concludes his arguments by
  stating: After it has been shown by the excavations that the
  Olympieion at Athens is the sole example of a great hypthral temple
  mentioned by Vitruvius, we can answer this much-vexed question of the
  lighting of the temples of antiquity in this waythat a few great
  dipteral hypthral temples existed, but that the Greek and Roman
  temples had as a rule no light from above, and were only lighted from
  the door.ED.] Footnote 143:

  See Woodcuts Nos. Footnote 144:

  Vitruvius, lib. Footnote 145:

  Boeckh, Corpus Inscript. Footnote 146:

  Attica, xxvi. Footnote 147:

  Historia, viii, 41. Footnote 148:

  Among the many attempts made to restore the interior of this temple,
  the last and most elaborate is that by the late E. Beul, Acropole
  dAthnes, 1854, vol. ; but it is also one of the worst. Indeed it is quite painful to see how the author twists his
  authorities to meet a preconceived theory. Without going into it,
  there is one objection which seems fatal to the whole. Like most antiquaries when in difficulties for lighting Greek temples,
  he takes off the roof and makes the Temple of Pandrosus an open
  courtyard, in which he plants the olive. This is so opposed to the
  whole spirit of Greek art as to be inadmissible on general grounds,
  but in this instance it introduces the further absurdity that the
  Greeks opened three windows in the west wall of the temple to light
  this courtyard which was already open to the sky! The mode of lighting
  a temple by vertical windows is so exceptional that it would not have
  been introduced here had any other means existed of lighting the
  interior, and consequently the combination shown by M. Beul seems
  simply impossible. Footnote 149:

  Universo Templo longitudo est ccccxxv. Column
  centum viginti septem a singulis regibus fact, lx. pedum altitudine:
  ex iis xxxvi. clat, una a Scopa.H. Wood places two in the pronaos and two in the posticum, thus
  reducing the depth of the opisthodomus; beyond the pronaos he places a
  vestibule and omits the staircases as shown on plan 159. Fergusson returned to the subject again, and published in the
  Transactions of the Institute (session 1882-83) a revised plan, to
  which we refer our readers.ED.] Footnote 151:

  The finial ornament is triangular in plan, and there are three scrolls
  on the roof with mortices in them, showing that something must have
  stood on them to support the projecting angles. Dolphins and various
  other objects have been suggested. My own conviction is that they were
  winged genii, most probably in bronze, and gilt like the neckings of
  the capitals. Dorpfield is of opinion that in the Greek theatres of the best
  period there was no proscenium, or raised stage, and that the actors
  played their parts in the orchestra on the same level as the chorus. Professor Middleton also points out that in the earliest Greek
  theatres built in the 5th and 4th centuries B.C. the orchestra was a
  complete circle, the space being gradually diminished by the bringing
  forward of the stage.ED.] Footnote 153:

  It will not be necessary to enter here into all the details of this
  restoration. They will be found in a separate work published by me on
  the subject, to which the reader is referred. [The student should also
  refer to the restoration suggested by M. Pullan in the work published
  by him and Sir Charles Newton (Discoveries at Halicarnassus, 1862). In the arrangement and design of the podium it accords better with
  other examples of Greek tombs than Mr. The three columns
  as shown at the angle of Mr. Fergussons peristyle would be quite
  repugnant to any student of Greek architecture.ED.] Footnote 155:

  The figures given in the text are all Greek feet: the difference
  between them and English feet, being only 1 per cent., is hardly
  perceptible in these dimensions, without descending to minute
  fractions, and disturbing the comparison with Plinys text. Footnote 156:

  The circumstance of Asoka, the Buddhist king of India B.C. 250, having
  formed an alliance with Megas of Cyrene for the succour of his
  co-religionists in the dominions of the latter, points to such a
  conclusion even if nothing else did.Journal Asiatic Society of
  Bengal, vii. 261; J. R. A. S. xii. Footnote 157:

  Beechys Journey to Cyrene, p. 444; see also Smith and Porcher, pl. Footnote 158:

  Vitruvius, iv. Footnote 159:

  Dionysius, iv. Footnote 160:

  For more detail, see The True Principles of Beauty in Art, p. Footnote 161:

  The Etruscan and Roman origin of the circular temple is now known to
  be erroneous, as remains of large circular temples have been
  discovered at Epidaurus and Olympia. Footnote 162:

  Even in more modern times I know of no building showing a trace of
  these forms except the tomb of Theodoric at Ravenna. This, however, is
  Etruscan both in form and detail, as will be seen farther on. Hist. xxxvi. Footnote 164:

  A diagram is given in The True Principles of Beauty in Art p. 459,
  which shows at least that there is no difficulty in designing a
  monument in perfect accordance with the text. Whether the latter is to
  be depended upon or not is another matter. Footnote 165:

  These dimensions, with all those that follow, unless otherwise
  specified, are taken from Taylor and Cresys Architectural
  Antiquities of Rome, London, 1821. They seem more to be depended upon
  than any others I am acquainted with. Footnote 166:

  These two temples, like almost all the others of Rome, have recently
  been renamed by the Roman or rather German antiquaries. The Jupiter
  Tonans is now the Temple of Saturn, and the Jupiter Stator is decreed
  to have been the Temple of Castor and Pollux. The names by which they
  are currently known has been adhered to, as the architecture is of
  more importance here than the archology. Footnote 167:

  Laborde, Monumens de la France, vol. M. AVRELIVS ANTONINVS PIVS FELIX AVG. PANTHEVM VETVSTATE CORRVPTVM CVM OMNI CVLTV RESTITVERVNT. Isabelle, difices Circulaires, p. Footnote 169:

  When the first edition of this work was written I believed the rotunda
  to have been added to the portico by Severus; and if this were so it
  would get over many of the difficulties arising from its size and the
  character of its brickwork. My personal examination, however, has
  forced me very unwillingly to give up this hypothesis. It certainly
  is, however, very astonishing that such a vault should have been
  attempted at so early an age. [There seems to be some probability that Mr. Fergussons first belief
  was correct, and that the Rotunda was built by Hadrian, bricks with
  the stamp of his period having been found in the casing and in the
  bond courses in the solid concrete both of the drum and in the dome. The discovery is due to M. Chedanne, one of the Grand Prix students
  in the Villa Medici, who had selected the subject for his Envoi de
  Rome, and was allowed to superintend certain repairs and restorations
  which were required in the Pantheon. It would seem that the portico
  erected by Agrippa preceded a temple with cella of the ordinary form,
  the pavement of which has been found nearly seven feet below the floor
  of the present church. From this it follows that when the Rotunda was
  erected in the first half of the second century, the portico, which is
  undoubtedly of Agrippas time, must have been taken down and rebuilt
  on to it, and this explains Mr. Fergussons reasons for insisting that
  the portico was built on to the Rotunda. The theory as to the Pantheon
  forming part of Agrippas bath is thus disposed of. Independently of
  that, however, Prof. Middleton has pointed out that the discoveries
  made in 1882, by the removal of the block of houses at the back,
  showed that there was no connection whatever between the two
  buildings. Traces exist of the original marble lining, and of cornices
  which were continued round the dome, showing that originally the
  complete circuit was exposed to view. Middleton
  states, if further proof were wanting to contradict the theory that
  the Pantheon was over the Calidarum or Laconicum of the bath, this is
  supplied by the fact that there is no trace of any hypocaust under the
  floor, but merely an ancient drain to carry away the rain-water that
  fell through the opening in the dome. The Pantheon, too, is on the
  north side of the Therma very improbable position for the Laconicum,
  or hot room, which was usually placed on the sunny side of the
  buildings.ED.] Footnote 170:

  The bronze plates which were removed by Pope Urban VIII. in 1626 to
  make cannon, and also for the great Baldachino in St. Peters, were
  taken from the portico; the coffers of the interior of the dome were
  decorated, according to Prof. Middleton, with mouldings in stucco
  painted and gilt. Footnote 171:

  This building is commonly called a temple, though it is not known to
  what deity it was dedicated. My own impression is that it was a tomb,
  or at least a funereal monument of some sort. Footnote 172:

  Owing to a misreading of Vitruviuss statement respecting the temple
  it had always been classed as decastyle. Penroses researches
  published in the Transactions of the Royal Institute of British
  Architects, vol. Footnote 173:

  See The True Principles of Beauty in Art, where the reasons for this
  arrangement will be found stated at length. [See note on page
  272.ED.] Footnote 174:

  Canina, in his restoration, shows a flat roof with coffers, so there
  is probably no exact authority for its form, though it seems to be
  generally agreed that the centre was not hypthral. Footnote 175:

  This basilica is generally represented as having an apse at either
  end; but there is no authority whatever for this, and general analogy
  would lead us rather to infer that it was not the case. Middleton, however, is of opinion that an apse existed at both ends,
  and shows the same in his restoration of the plan of Trajans
  form.The Remains of Ancient Rome, by J. H. Middleton, Fig. Footnote 176:

  One of the pillars of this basilica remained _in situ_ till the year
  1614, when it was removed by Carlo Maderno, by order of Paul V., and
  re-erected in the piazza of St. M. Maggiore, where it now stands as a
  monumental column, supporting a statue of the Virgin. The column, with
  its base and capital, is as nearly as may be 60 ft. in height; the
  whole monument, as it now stands, 140 ft. Footnote 177:

  As it was sunk slightly below the pavement of the peristyle, and
  drains leading from it were traced by Mr. Ashpitel, it was probably
  hypthral. Footnote 178:

  The theatres of Curio and Scaurus were in timber, except the
  proscenium of the latter, which was partly decorated with marble and
  mosaics. The Theatre of Pompey, B.C. 54, was in stone, and parts of it
  still exist (Prof. The Theatre of Marcellus was begun by
  Julius Csar, but not completed till 13 B.C., when it was opened by
  Augustus. It was subsequently restored after a fire by Vespasian, but
  the purity and simplicity of the architecture, and the refinement of
  the details, in comparison with those of the Colosseum, 70-80 A.D.,
  are in favour of the earlier date assigned to it. Middleton
  quotes another theatre, that of Cornelius Balbus (13 B.C. ), built to
  the north-west of the Theatre of Marcellus. Footnote 179:

  According to Prof. Middleton the Amphitheatre of Sutrium is of Roman
  origin, and but little earlier than the Colosseum at Rome. There is
  really no evidence, he says (p. 76), that amphitheatres were built
  by the Etruscans; and there can be little doubt that they were purely
  Roman inventions.

Footnote 180:

  At the Crystal Palace it has always been found necessary to allow 6
  sq. Footnote 181:

  Considerable difference of opinion seems to exist as to the extent of
  the velaria which sheltered the arena; this was supported by masts
  fixed outside the upper part of the walls, resting on brackets, 14 ft. below the cornice, which was cut away to allow the mast to fit close
  against the wall. M. Grme suggests, in his well-known picture of the
  Roman gladiators, that the velaria extended over a portion of the
  arena only. Middleton states, The awning did not, as has been
  sometimes supposed, cover the whole amphitheatre, a thing which would
  have been practically impossible, owing to the enormous strain of so
  long a bearing, far beyond what any ropes could bear. It simply sloped
  down over the spectators in the cavea, leaving the whole central arena
  uncovered. In case of rain, however, this might have been
  inconvenient, and it would not have protected the spectators from the
  sun, supposing that the performances lasted the whole day. Besides,
  there is no reason why the masts should have been carried so high
  above the wall, as shown in the restoration in Prof. Middletons book,
  p. Alma Tadema is of opinion that the velarium extended over
  the whole arena, and was suspended on a principle similar to that of a
  suspension bridge, the ridge, or highest portion lying between the
  foci of the ellipse. This accounts in a much more satisfactory way for
  the height of the masts, and would afford facilities for the draining
  off of the rain on to the top of the gallery round. Footnote 182:

  Maffei, Verona Illustrata, vol. Footnote 183:

  See note on p. Footnote 184:

  These baths have been carefully measured by M. Blouet, who has also
  published a restoration of them. This is, on the whole, certainly the
  best account we have of any of these establishments. Footnote 185:

  According to Prof. Middleton this magnificent hall appears to have
  been what Spartianus calls the _cella soliaris_, the ceiling of which
  he says was formed of interlaced bars of gilt bronze. When the
  excavations in this hall were being made, many tons of fragments of
  iron girders were found. Aitchison)
  compound girders, formed of two T bars riveted together, and then
  cased in bronze. A sort of lattice-work ceiling had been formed with
  these bronze-cased girders, the panels being probably filled in with
  concrete made of light pumice-stone, worked with fine stucco reliefs,
  painted and gilt. Middleton is of opinion that the central part
  over the swimming-bath was left open for the admission of light. In
  the upper part of the walls deep sinkings to receive the ends of the
  great girders which supported the ceiling are clearly visible. Georges Hall at Liverpool is the most exact copy in modern times
  of a part of these baths. The Hall itself is a reproduction both in
  scale and design of the central hall of Caracallas baths, but
  improved in detail and design, having five bays instead of only three. With the two courts at each end, it makes up a suite of apartments
  very similar to those found in the Roman examples. The whole building,
  however, is less than one-fourth of the size of the central mass of a
  Roman bath, and therefore gives but little idea of the magnificence of
  the whole. Footnote 187:

  The left-hand wing of this arch has since been restored by M.
  Viollet-le-Duc, and the right-hand wing cleared of the square building
  in front of it. Footnote 188:

  These two buildings are described further on (p. 544) as Christian
  edifices. Footnote 189:

  Professor Middleton states: This building appears to be a nymphum,
  or a part of some baths of about the time of Gallienus (263-268
  A.D. ). It was known in the Middle Ages as the Terme de Gallucio.
  The site of the real Temple of Minerva Medica was discovered in 1887
  (according to the same authority) between the new Via Macchiavelli and
  the Via Buonarroti, about 7 ft. Footnote 191:

  M. de Saulcy has recently attempted to prove that these tombs are
  those of the kings of Judah from David downwards. Their architecture
  is undoubtedly as late as the Christian era, and the cover of the
  sarcophagus which is now in the Louvre under the title of that of
  David is probably of the same date as these tombs, or if anything more
  modern. Footnote 192:

  Voyage dans la Marmarique, la Cyrnaique, &c. Didot, Paris, 1827-29. Footnote 193:

  Though the dates of all these tombs at Cyrene are so uncertain, there
  seems little doubt that if any one thoroughly versed in the style were
  to visit the place, he could fix the age of all of them with
  approximate correctness. The one difficulty is, that a chronometric
  scale taken from the buildings at Rome, or even in Syria, will not
  suffice. Local peculiarities must be taken into account and allowed
  for, and this requires both time and judgment. Footnote 194:

  Le Tombeau de la Chrtienne, par A. Berbrugger, Alger. 1867, from
  which the above particulars are taken. Footnote 195:

  It is understood that it too has been explored, but no account of the
  result has yet reached this country, and such rumours as have reached
  are too vague to be quoted. Footnote 196:

  De Situ Orbis, I. vi. Footnote 197:

  For plan of same, see Prof. Middletons Ancient Rome, 1891. Footnote 198:

  By an oversight this difference is not expressed in the woodcut. Footnote 200:

  These are well epitomised by Gibbon, Book xlvi. Footnote 201:

  Journal of the Royal Geographical Society, ix. Footnote 202:

  The sixth great Oriental monarchy; or the geography, history and
  antiquities of Parthia, &c., 1873. Footnote 203:

  These inscriptions were all copied by Consul Taylor, and brought home
  to this country. I never could learn, however, that they were
  translated. I feel certain they were never published, and cannot find
  out what has become of them. Footnote 204:

  These are expedients for filling up the corners of square lower
  storeys on which it is intended to place a circular superstructure. They somewhat resemble very large brackets or great coves placed in an
  angle. Examples of them are shown on page 434 when speaking of
  Byzantine architecture, and others will be found in the chapter on
  Mahomedan Architecture in India, in vol. Footnote 205:

  These three buildings probably date as near as may be one century from
  each other, thus

                          Serbistan         A.D. 350
                          Firouzabad             450
                          Ctesiphon              550

                    To which we may now add

                          Mashita                620

  A bare skeleton, which it will require much time and labour to clothe
  with flesh and restore to life. Footnote 206:

  The Land of Moab, by H. B. Tristram, M. A., &c. Murray, 1873. As all
  the information respecting the palace is contained in that book, pp. 195 to 215, all the illustrations here used are taken from it, it will
  not be necessary to refer to it again. For further information on the
  subject the reader is referred to that work. Footnote 207:

  Rich, Residence in Koordistan, ii. Footnote 208:

  The plan made by Dr. Tristrams party, which is all we yet have, was
  only a hurried sketch, and cannot be depended upon for minute details. Footnote 209:

  Flandin and Coste, vol. Footnote 210:

  Texier and Pullan. Byzantine Architecture. 4to. Footnote 211:

  Ruskin, Stones of Venice, vol. Footnote 212:

  Lart Antique de la Perse, by Marcel Dieulafoy. Footnote 213:

  In the Museum at Pesth are a number of objects of Egyptian art, said
  to have been found in this quarter. Is it too much to assume the
  pre-existence of a Phnician or Egyptian colony here before the Roman
  times? Footnote 214:

  As a matter of fact, 12th century would be more exact; nearly all the
  chief problems of pointed arch construction in intersecting vaulting
  having been worked out before the close of that century. Footnote 215:

  [The domical construction of the vaults of the two great cisterns
  erected by Constantine, the Binbirderek, or thousand-and-one columns,
  and the Yeri Batan Sera, both in Constantinople, suggests that there
  already existed in the East a method of vaulting entirely different
  from that which obtained in Rome, and which may have been a
  traditional method handed down even from Assyrian times.ED.] Footnote 216:

  Syrie Centrale: Architecture civile et religieuse du I^{er} au
  VII^{me} Sicle. Par le Comte Melchior de Vog.

Footnote 217:

  Byzantine Architecture, by Texier and Pullan. Footnote 218:

  De Vog, glises de la Terre Sainte, p. Footnote 219:

  For a careful analytical description of the church, see Professor
  Willis, Architectural History of the Holy Sepulchre, London, 1849. Footnote 220:

  The particulars for these churches are taken from Texier and Pullans
  splendid work on Byzantine architecture published by Day, 1864. Footnote 221:

  Another very small church, that of Moudjeleia, though under 50 ft. square, seems to have adopted the same hypthral arrangement. Footnote 222:

  A great deal of very irrelevant matter has been written about these
  giant cities of Bashan, as if their age were a matter of doubt. There is nothing in the Hauran which can by any possibility date
  before the time of Roman supremacy in the country. The very earliest
  now existing are probably subsequent to the destruction of Jerusalem
  by Titus. Footnote 223:

  The constructive dimensions of the porch at Chillambaram (p. History of Indian and Eastern Architecture, 1876.) are very similar to
  those of this church: both have flat stone roofs, but in the Indian,
  though a much more modern example, there is no arch. Footnote 224:

  These are all given in colours in Texier and Pullans beautiful work
  on Byzantine architecture, from which all the particulars regarding
  this church are taken. Footnote 225:

  A wayside retreat or shelter. Footnote 226:

  A restoration of the church from Procopiuss description, De
  dificiis, lib. iv., will be found in Hbsch, Altchristliche
  Baukunst, pls. iii., in chapter on Indian Saracenic Architecture. Footnote 228:

  The Renaissance dome which fits best to the church on which it is
  placed is that of Sta. Maria at Florence; but, strange to say, it is
  neither the one originally designed for the place, nor probably at all
  like it. All the others were erected as designed by the architects who
  built the churches, and none fit so well. Footnote 229:

  [The apses on each side of central apse are said to be additions to
  the original structure. The triple apses in Greek churches are found,
  according to Dr. Freshfield (Archologia, vol. 44), only in churches
  erected subsequent to Justin II. Sergius at Bosra the side apses have been added afterwards.ED.] Footnote 230:

  Strictly speaking, circular with flattened sides, for the pendentive
  has a longer radius than half the diagonal of the square. Footnote 231:

  The two eastern cupolas have been raised in Arab times, and a
  cylindrical drum inserted with windows pierced in them to give more
  light to the interior. Footnote 232:

  There are numerous examples of this class of structure in North Syria,
  but whether they are memorials or tombs is not known. See Reisen
  Kleinasien und Nord Syria by Karl Humann and Otto Puchstein. Footnote 233:

  [This rule cannot be made a hard and fast one. Procopius states that
  in the central dome of the Church of the Apostles, Constantinople,
  the circular building standing above the arches is pierced with
  windows, and the spherical dome which over-arches it seems to be
  suspended in the air. In the church of St. Sergius at Constantinople
  the walls of the octagon, which are pierced with windows, are carried
  up to the vault, and in the church of Sta. Sophia at Thessalonica the
  windows are pierced in an upright dome cylindrical internally. In all
  these cases, however, there is a marked distinction between these
  examples and those of the lofty cylindrical drums which were employed
  in the Neo-Byzantine churches. Fergussons rule, therefore, with
  these exceptions, may be taken as absolute.ED.] Footnote 234:

  They are found in the Mustaphapacha mosque at Constantinople dating
  from 430 A.D., but rebuilt in the 13th century. Footnote 235:

  [It is now considered that the Church of the Holy Apostles was the
  original model. This church, rebuilt by Justinian, was pulled down in
  1464 A.D. to furnish a site for his mosque.ED.] Footnote 236:

  [This work has lately been undertaken by Messrs. Barnsley and Schultz,
  who are preparing their drawings for publication, and hope to follow
  up the task with a survey of the more important churches in Mount
  Athos.ED.] Footnote 237:

  Die Kunst in den Athos Kirchen, Leipzig, 1890. Footnote 238:

  Athos; or, the Mountain of the Monks, by Athelstan Riley, M.A.,
  1887. Footnote 239:

  See the photogravure of the interior of the Catholicon at Dochiariu. Footnote 240:

  glises Byzantines en Grce.

Footnote 241:

  Expdition scientifique de la More.

Footnote 242:

  There would seem however to have been a revival in the 11th century,
  possibly a reflex of that which was taking place in West Europe. And
  it was during this period that the churches of St. Luke in Phoeis, the
  church at Daphn and the churches of St. Footnote 243:

  C. Texier, Armnie et la Perse. 2 vols. Footnote 244:

  Dubois de Montpereux, Voyage autour du Caucase. 6 vols. Paris,
  1839, 1841. Footnote 245:

  Brosset, Voyage Archologique dans la Georgie et lArmnie. St. Footnote 246:

  D. Grimm, Monuments dArchitecture en Georgie et Armnie. St. Footnote 247:

  Texier gives three dates to this church. In the Byzantine
  Architecture, p. 174, it is said to be of the 7th, and at p. 4, of
  the 9th century. In the LArmnie et la Perse, at p. 120, the date
  is given as 1243. Footnote 248:

  Flandin and Coste, Voyage en Perse, pls. Footnote 249:

  Texier and Pullan, Byzantine Architecture, pp. Footnote 250:

  I am a little doubtful regarding the scales of these two buildings. They are correctly reduced from M. Brossets plates. But are these to
  be depended upon? Footnote 251:

  Even if it should be asserted that this is no proof that the
  inhabitants of these countries were Buddhists in those days, it seems
  tolerably certain that they were tree-worshippers, which is very
  nearly the same thing. Procopius tells us that even in his day these
  barbarians worshipped forests and groves, and in their barbarous
  simplicity placed the trees among their gods. (De Bello Gotico,
  Bonn, 1833, ii. Footnote 252:

  The principal part of the information regarding these excavations is
  to be found in the work of Dubois de Montpereux, _passim_. Footnote 253:

  [See paper by Mr. Simpson in R. I. B. A. Transactions, vol. vii.,
  1891.ED.] Footnote 254:

  All the plans and information regarding the churches at Kief are
  obtained from a Russian work devoted to the subject, procured for me
  on the spot by Mr. Footnote 255:

  The first bay, as shown on plan (Woodcut No. 382), is the narthex; the
  five domes come beyond it. Footnote 256:

  The particulars and illustrations of this church are taken from a
  paper by Heinrich Keissenberger, in the Jahrbuch der K. K. Commission
  fr Enthaltung der Baudenkmale, 1860. A model of it, full size, was
  exhibited at the Paris Exhibition of 1867. Footnote 257:

  [It has been assumed that the Roman basilicas were taken possession of
  by the early Christians for their own religious services, but as Mr. G. G. Scott points out in his Essay on the History of English Church
  Architecture, there is no well-authenticated instance of the
  conversion of any Pagan basilica into a Christian church, whilst there
  are abundant examples of Pagan temples converted into Christian
  sanctuaries (see Texier and Pullans Byzantine Architecture, pp. Scott observes, on the face of it
  improbable, if we reflect that the conversion of the government to
  Christianity had no tendency to render the existing basilicas less
  necessary for legal business, after the peace of the church, than they
  had been before that event. Christianity, unfortunately, could not
  abolish the litigious instincts of our nature, and after fifteen
  centuries of the gospel the legal profession still flourishes. The
  buildings which were rendered useless by the official recognition of
  the new faith were not the basilicas but the temples, the fact being
  that the class of building known as a basilica (a term never used by
  either the writers or architects of Byzantine times), with its wide
  central nave and aisles with galleries over them lighted by clerestory
  or side windows, and covered with a timber roof, constituted the
  simplest and most economical building of large size which could be
  constructed to hold a vast assembly of worshippers; especially as the
  only features which can be looked upon as having any architectural
  pretensions, viz., the columns and their capitals, could be taken
  wholesale from temples and other Roman buildings. The semicircular
  apse, which alone in the Roman basilica served as a court of law,
  became the tribune for the bishop and presbyters. Scott is even inclined to assign an earlier and more independent
  origin for the basilican form. According to his theory the germ of the
  Christian basilica was a simple oblong aisleless room divided by a
  cross arch, beyond which lay an altar detached from the wall. This
  germ was developed by the addition of side aisles, and sometimes an
  aisle returned across the entrance, and over these upper aisles were
  next constructed and transepts added, together with the oratories or
  chapels in various parts of the building. Butler, in his work on
  The Ancient Coptic Churches of Egypt, accepts this theory, as the
  churches of Egypt are rich in evidence that favours it. At the same
  time, the first great basilica erected by Constantine, viz., the
  Vatican (St. Peters), and the Lateran, (St. John Lateran), are of too
  great importance to warrant the suggestion that their origin should be
  sought for in the very small though possibly earlier examples in Egypt
  or the East.ED.] Footnote 258:

  This probably refers to its foundation, for M. Cattaneo, in his work
  Larchitecture en Italie, 1890, judging by its ornamental detail,
  places the church in the second half of the seventh century. Footnote 259:

  Antiquits, vol. Footnote 260:

  _Eodem_, vol. Alfred J. Butlers work, already referred to, has thrown
  considerable light on the subject, though, as he was unable to visit
  any of the Coptic churches up the Nile, we are still left in doubt as
  to the age of the convent near Siout and other buildings. From
  comparison of the plans and descriptions given in Denon, Curzon and
  Pococke of these buildings, with those in Cairo and Old Cairo, Mr. Butler ascribes them to the fourth century, that which in fact is
  claimed for them as having been founded by Sta. On this
  subject he says, p. 365: Were there no more of evidence besides to
  determine the truth of this tradition, the plan of the Haikal (the
  central of the three chapels in a Coptic church) would decide it
  beyond question. The persistence with which certain churches are
  ascribed to Sta. Helena by a people utterly ignorant of history and
  architecture is in itself remarkable, and it is still more remarkable
  to find that these churches are always marked by a particular form of
  Haikal. Indeed, so regular is the coincidence, that a deep apsidal
  haikal with recesses all round it and columns close against the wall
  may be almost infallibly dated from the age of Sta. Helena.

Footnote 262:

  The older church has been so altered and ruined by the subsequent
  rebuildings that it is extremely difficult to make out its history. It
  seems, however, to have been built originally above the site of an old
  Mithraic temple, which has recently been cleared out, and probably
  before the time of Gregory the Great. It was apparently rebuilt, or
  nearly so, by Adrian I., 772, and burnt by Robert Guiscard, 1084. The
  upper church seems to have been erected by Paschal, 1099-1118. The
  question is, to what age do the frescoes found on the walls of the
  older church belong? Some of the heads and single figures may, I
  fancy, be anterior even to the time of Adrian; but the bulk of the
  paintings seem certainly to have been added between his age and 1084,
  and nearer the latter than the former date. If it had not been
  entirely ruined in 1084 Paschal would not have so completely
  obliterated it a century afterwards. A considerable quantity of the
  materials of the old church were used in the new, which tends further
  to confuse the chronology. Footnote 263:

  Gutensohn and Knapp, Die Basiliken des Christlichen Roms.

Footnote 264:

  Cicero de Legg., ii. 24; Festus, s. v.; Smiths Dictionary of
  Classical Antiquities.

Footnote 265:

  The dates here given generally refer to the building now existing or
  known, and not always to the original foundation. G. G. Scott, in his work before referred to (p. 506), after
  giving a full quotation from Eusebius of Constantines basilica at
  Jerusalem, in which he points out that the orientation of primitive
  times is the reverse of that which has become general in later times,
  continues his enquiry into the evidence afforded by the numerous early
  basilicas in Rome itself. Of about fifty churches of early date, in
  forty of them the sanctuary is placed at the western end, and of the
  remaining ten (one of which is the great church of St. Paolo fuori le
  Mura), there are only seven which appear to have retained their
  original form, and which have an eastward sanctuary. The exact orientation of the sanctuary in each case has been added to
  the list.ED.] Footnote 266:

  Il Vaticano discritto da Pistolesi, vol. Footnote 267:

  The new church which superseded this one is described in the History
  of the Modern Styles of Architecture, vol. Footnote 268:

  It should be observed that the dosseret is first found in Italy in the
  Church of St. Stefano Rotondo, built 468-482, and is there of similar
  design to examples in Thessalonica. Footnote 269:

  Larchitecture en Italie du vie au xi^e sicle. Venice, 1891. Footnote 270:

  Altchristlichen Kirchen nach Baudenkmalen und alteren
  Beschreibungen, von D. Hubsch. Footnote 271:

  These piers were built in the 12th century, taking the place of the
  columns of the original Basilican church of the 9th century, and the
  arches date from the same period (Cattaneo). Footnote 272:

  It is now called S. Martino in Cielo dOro, from its having been
  decided in the twelfth century that the other church in Classe
  possessed the true body of the saint to which both churches were
  dedicated. Footnote 273:

  A. F. von Quast, Die Altchristlichen Bauwerke von Ravenna.

Footnote 274:

  The basilica Pudenziana at Rome has similar arcades externally. Footnote 275:

  The twenty-four marble columns are said to have been brought over from
  Constantinople, but they were probably obtained from Greek quarries. Footnote 276:

  [The narthex as shown in Woodcut No. 409 is of much later date than
  the church, and has been partially rebuilt on two or three occasions. It is now (1892) being taken down, and the removal of the central
  portion has uncovered the triple window which originally lighted the
  nave.ED.] Footnote 277:

  La basilica di San Marco in Venezia, by Cattaneo, continued by
  Boito. Footnote 278:

  Probably owing to its having been utilized to receive the relics of
  St. Footnote 279:

  This church, built by Justinian, no longer exists, having been pulled
  down in 1464 by Mohammed II. From the
  description of it, however, given by Procopius, the plan was similar
  to that adopted in St. Mark, being that of a Greek Cross with central
  and four other domes. Procopius speaks of the church being surrounded
  within by columns placed both above and below, probably referring to
  galleries similar to those in St. Marks the columns exist in one storey only, and the main wall is
  carried up at the back of the aisles to give increased size inside. Footnote 280:

  Originally, according to M. Cattaneo, his was the vestibule to the
  atrium from the south, but it is now blocked up by an altar. Footnote 281:

  [They are shown in the mosaic of the doorway of St. Alipe, executed at
  the end of the 13th century, as also the filling in of the great west
  window.ED.] Footnote 282:

  Dalmatia, the Quarnero and Istria, by T. G. Jackson, M.A. Footnote 283:

  In support of this statement he points out that twice during Christian
  times it had been found necessary to raise the floor of the church. The nave floor, which in 1857 was two steps below that of the aisles,
  was raised in 1881 to the same level; but two feet nine inches below
  the nave floor before it was raised there existed, according to Prof. Eitelberger, another mosaic pavement, which must have been the floor
  of the first basilica erected, and which was pulled down by Bishop
  Euphrasius in 543. This lower pavement extended also under the three
  chapels of the confessio, which suggests that these are part of the
  first basilica. Footnote 284:

  The same polygonal form is found in the apses of St. Apollinare in Classe, St. Apollinare in Nuovo, St. Vitale, all in Ravenna, and St. Footnote 285:

  The apses of two churches, of the 4th and 6th century respectively, in
  the island of Paros, are similarly fitted with marble seats: in the
  6th century church there are eight rows, so that the apse looks like a
  small amphitheatre. Footnote 286:

  That is on the supposition that the word kirk is derived from the
  Latin word circus, circular, as the French term it, cirque. My
  own conviction is that this is certainly the case. The word is only
  used by the Barbarians as applied to a form of buildings they derived
  from the Romans. Why the Germans should employ  , when
  neither the Greeks nor the Latins used that name, is a mystery which
  those who insist on these very improbable names have as yet failed to
  explain. Footnote 287:

  The Tholos at Epidaurus seems to be an exception to this rule. Footnote 288:

  Isabelle, difices Circulaires, plates 26 and 27. Footnote 289:

  M. Cattaneo states that it was built by Pope St. Footnote 290:

  Above the capitals are impost blocks or dosserets, the earliest known
  examples of that feature in Italy. Footnote 291:

  [The Vaults over the outer aisle of St. Stefano Rotondo were built
  with hollow pots, the remains of which can still be traced in the
  outer walls of the 2nd aisle. Middleton points out also the existence of rings of earthen pots
  in the vault of the tomb of Sta. 227), and also in
  the vaults of the Circus of Maxentius, on the Via Appia.ED.] Footnote 292:

  In this building they now show a sarcophagus of ancient date, said to
  be that of Galla Placidia, daughter of Theodosius. She, however, was
  certainly buried at Ravenna; but it may be of her time, and in these
  ages it is impossible to distinguish between baptisteries and tombs. Footnote 293:

  Frederick Von Osten, Bauwerke in der Lombardei. Darmstadt, 1852. Footnote 294:

  By an oversight of the engraver, the vault of the nave, which ought to
  be made hexapartite, is drawn as quadripartite. [The nave was so
  completely restored in the 14th century as to render doubtful the
  original existence of a vault.ED.] Footnote 295:

  tude de lArchitecture Lombarde, par F. de Dartein. Footnote 296:

  These are incorrectly shown on woodcut. The central pier is nearly 4
  feet wide and carried a transverse rib of the same size and of two
  orders. Footnote 297:

  Ferrario, Monumenti Sacri e Profani dell I. R. Basilica di S.
  Ambrogio, Milan, 1824. Footnote 298:

  Quid dicamus columnarum junceam proceritatem? Moles illas
  sublimissimas quasi quibusdam erectis hastilibus contineri substanti
  qualitate concavis canalibus excavatas vel magis ipsas stimes esse
  transfusas. Ceris judices factum quod metallis durissimis videas
  expolitum. Marmorum juncturas venas dicas esse genitales, ubi dum
  falluntur oculi laus probatur crevisse miraculis. In the above,
  _metallum_ does not seem to mean metal as we now use the word, but any
  hard substance dug out of the ground. (Cassiodorus, Variorum, lib. Footnote 300:

  The Land of Moab, by Dr. Tristram (Murray, 1873), pp. 376 _et seqq._
  [The small triangular marble panels referred to in Murano are of a
  very elementary character in their carving, and have scarcely the
  importance attached to them by Mr. Besides, the same wall
  decoration in brickwork is found in the apse of St. Fosca, Torcello
  (c. 1008), where, however, the triangular recesses are simply covered
  with stucco and painted; being closer to the eye in Murano, they
  filled the spaces with incised marble slabs: in other words, it seems
  more probable that the slabs were made for the triangular panels than
  the converse, which is suggested by Mr. Footnote 301:

  The typical example of this class is the San Giorgio at Venice, though
  it is not by any means the one most like St. Pietro; many attempts
  were made before it became so essentially classical as this (see
  Woodcut No. I. in the History of Modern Architecture). Footnote 302:

  From the boldness of the construction, M. Cattaneo is induced to place
  the erection of the building at the end of the 11th or beginning of
  the 12th century. Footnote 303:

  The four square towers of San Lorenzo, Milan, and the circular
  campanile by the side of the cathedral of Ravenna, are the earliest
  examples known, the latter dating from the commencement of the 5th
  century. Footnote 304:

  [The tower of St. Satiro at Milan (879 A.D. ), is considered by
  Cattaneo to be the most ancient campanile known in which the wall
  surface is broken up with flat pilasters or vertical bands in relief,
  and divided into storeys by horizontal string courses, with ranges of
  small blind arches below, carried on corbels, and may be regarded as
  the prototype of the most characteristic Lombard towers.ED.] Footnote 305:

  History of Medieval Art, by Dr. F. M. Reber, translated by J. T.
  Clarke. Footnote 306:

  Dalmatia, the Quarnero and Istria, by T. G. Jackson, A.R.A. Footnote 307:

  Schultz, Denkmler der Kunst der Mittelalters in Unter-Italien.
  Folio, 1860. Footnote 308:

  The polygonal form given to the apse externally shows the direct
  influence of Byzantine art. Footnote 309:

  The cornice projects 1 ft. 10 in., and consequently overhangs the base
  by 13 ft. Footnote 310:

  The present cathedral is only a portion, viz. the transept of a much
  vaster edifice which was never completed; but the beautiful unfinished
  south front and portions of the gigantic nave and aisles still exist
  on the western side of the present cathedral, and the drawings of it
  are preserved in the archives of the Duomo. Footnote 311:

  [Since this was written the faade has been completed to harmonize
  with the rest, but not in accordance with the original design, if we
  may judge by the painting in Sta. Maria Novella, which shows side
  gablets similar to those of the cathedral of Siena.ED.] Footnote 312:

  If we may trust Wiebeking, the first two bays of the nave from the
  front were vaulted in 1588, but the work was suspended till 1647, and
  completed only in 1659. Yet no difference can be perceived in the
  details of the design. Footnote 313:

  The plan and section being taken from two different writers, there is
  a slight discrepancy between the scales. I believe the plan to be the
  more correct of the two, though I have no means of being quite certain
  on the point. Footnote 314:

  Dispareri dArchitettura.

Footnote 315:

  Within the last few years a faade has been added to Sta. Croce, but
  about which the less said the better. Transcribers Notes


This book often uses inconsistent spelling, particularly with respect to
accents. These were left as printed unless the author showed a clear
preference for one form. Some presumed printers errors have been corrected, including
normalizing punctuation. Page number references in the Table of Contents
were corrected where errors were found. Further corrections are listed
below with the original text (top) and the corrected text (bottom). every pains has been taken
               every pain has been taken p. xxii

               progres
               progress p. 48

               cotemporary
               contemporary p. 50

               formula
               formul p. 77

               Sedinag
               Sedinga Illustration 27.

               longed ceased
               long ceased p. 219

               Nor is is
               Nor is it p. 247

               ines
               lines p. 372

               Roumeia
               Roumea  p. 372

               Nimes
               Nmes p. 385

               Voge
               Vog p. 423

               neo-Byzantine
               Neo-Byzantine p. 455

               iconicon
               icon p. 460

               orginally
               originally p. 538

               turned the
               turned to the p. 558

               100 ft. to
               100 ft. Illustration 467 (missing number added)

               next
               next to p. Nec cuncti provinci sic sunt idiot,
   Quin sciant plus cteris regni sui mores,
   Quos relinquant posteris hii qui sunt priores. Qui reguntur legibus magis ipsas sciunt;
   Quorum sunt in usibus plus periti fiunt;
   Et quia res agitur sua, plus curabunt,
   Et quo pax adquiritur sibi procurabunt.

(2) On the renewal of the Laws of Eadward by William, see Norman
Conquest, iv. It should be marked that the
Laws of Eadward were again confirmed by Henry the First (see Stubbs,
90-99), and, as the Great Charter grew out of the Charter of Henry
the First produced by Archbishop Stephen Langton in 1213, the descent
of the Charter from the Laws of Eadward is very simple. See Roger of
Wendover, iii. The Primate there distinctly says that
he had made John swear to renew the Laws of Eadward. Audistis quomodo,
tempore quo apud Wintoniam Regem absolvi, ipsum jurare compulerim, quod
leges iniquas destrueret et leges bonas, videlicet leges Eadwardi,
revocaret et in regno faceret ab omnibus observari. It must be
remembered that the phrase of the Laws of Eadward or of any other King
does not really mean a code of laws of that Kings drawing up, but
simply the way of administering the Law, and the general political
condition, which existed in that Kings reign. This is all that would
be meant by the renewal of the Laws of Eadward in Williams time. It
simply meant that William was to rule as his English predecessors had
ruled before him. But, by the time of John, men had no doubt begun to
look on the now canonized Eadward as a lawgiver, and to fancy that
there was an actual code of laws of his to be put in force. On the various confirmations of the Great Charter, see Hallam, Middle
Ages, ii. When they were told that there was no precedent
for declaring the throne vacant, they produced from among the records
of the Tower a roll of parchment, near three hundred years old, on
which, in quaint characters and barbarous Latin, it was recorded that
the Estates of the Realm had declared vacant the throne of a perfidious
and tyrannical Plantagenet. See more at large in the debate of the
Conference between the Houses, ii. (4) See Kemble, Saxons in England, ii. This, it will be
remembered, is admitted by Professor Stubbs. See above, note 48 to
Chapter I. (6) I have collected these passages in my History of the Norman
Conquest, i. (7) On the acclamations of the Assembly, see note 19 to Chapter I. I
suspect that in all early assemblies, and not in that of Sparta only,
     (Thuc. We still retain the custom in
the cry of Aye and No, from which the actual vote is a mere appeal,
just like the division ordered by Stheneladas when he professed not to
know on which side the shout was. 100, and History of Federal Government, i. In this case the Chronicler, under
the year 1086, distinguishes two classes in the Assembly, his witan
and ealle a landsittende men e ahtes wron ofer eall Engleland.
These landsittende men were evidently the forerunners of the libere
tenentes, who, whether their holdings were great or small, kept their
place in the early Parliaments. 140-146, where will be
found many passages showing the still abiding traces of the popular
constitution of the Assembly. (10) The practice of summoning particular persons can be traced up to
very early times. 202, for instances in the reign of
thelstan. On its use in later times, see Hallam, ii. 254-260; and on
the irregularity in the way of summoning the spiritual peers, ii. The bearing of these precedents on the question of life peerages
will be seen by any one who goes through Sir T. E. Mays summary,
Constitutional History, i. (11) Sismondi, Histoire des Franais, v. 289: Ce roi, le plus absolu
entre ceux qui ont port la couronne de France, le moins occup du
bien de ses peuples, le moins consciencieux dans son observation des
droits tablis avant lui, est cependant le restaurateur des assembles
populaires de la France, et lauteur de la reprsentation des communes
dans les tats gnraux. See Historical Essays, 45. (12) See the history of Stephen Martel in Sismondi, Histoire des
Franais, vol. ix., and the account of the dominion of
the Butchers, vii. 259, and more at large in Thierrys History of the
Tiers-tat, capp. (13) The Parliament of Paris, though it had its use as some small check
on the mere despotism of the Crown, can hardly come under the head of
free institutions. France, as France, under the old state of things,
cannot be said to have kept any free institutions at all; the only
traces of freedom were to be found in the local Estates which still met
in several of the provinces. See De Tocqueville, Ancien Rgime, 347. (14) The thirteenth century was the time when most of the existing
states and nations of Europe took something like their present form and
constitution. The great powers which had hitherto, in name at least,
divided the Christian and Mahometan world, the Eastern and Western
Empires and the Eastern and Western Caliphates, may now be looked on
as practically coming to an end. England, France, and Spain began to
take something like their present shape, and to show the beginnings of
the characteristic position and policy of each. The chief languages of
Western Europe grew into something like their modern form. In short,
the character of this age as a time of beginnings and endings might be
traced out in detail through the most part of Europe and Asia. Pauli does not scruple to give him this title in his admirable
monograph, _Simon von Montfort Graf von Leicester, der Schpfer des
Hauses der Gemeinen_. The career of the Earl should be studied in this
work, and in Mr. Blaauws Barons War.

(16)                Numquam libertas gratior exstat
      Quam sub rege pio.Claudian, ii. England owes her escape from such calamities
to an event which her historians have generally represented as
disastrous. Her interest was so directly opposed to the interest of her
rulers that she had no hope but in their errors and misfortunes. The
talents and even the virtues of her six first French Kings were a curse
to her. The follies and vices of the seventh were her salvation....
England, which, since the battle of Hastings, had been ruled generally
by wise statesmen, always by brave soldiers, fell under the dominion
of a trifler and a coward. The Norman nobles were compelled to make
their election between the island and the continent. Shut up by the sea
with the people whom they had hitherto oppressed and despised, they
gradually came to regard England as their country, and the English as
their countrymen. The two races so long hostile, soon found that they
had common interests and common enemies. Both were alike aggrieved by
the tyranny of a bad King. Both were alike indignant at the favour
shown by the court to the natives of Poitou and Aquitaine. The great
grandsons of those who had fought under William and the great grandsons
of those who had fought under Harold began to draw near to each other
in friendship; and the first pledge of their reconciliation was the
Great Charter, won by their united exertions, and framed for their
common benefit.

(18) I have tried to work out the gradual character of the transfer of
lands and offices under William in various parts of the fourth volume
of my History of the Norman Conquest; see especially p. The popular notion of a general scramble for everything gives a most
false view of Williams whole character and position. (20) This is distinctly asserted in the Dialogus de Scaccario (i. 10),
under Henry the Second: Jam cohabitantibus Anglicis et Normannis,
et alterutrum uxores ducentibus vel nubentibus, sic permixt sunt
nationes, ut vix discerni possit hodie, de liberis loquor, quis
Anglicus quis Normannus sit genere; exceptis duntaxat ascriptitiis qui
villani dicuntur, quibus non est liberum obstantibus dominis suis a sui
stats conditione discedere.

(21) The Angevin family are commonly known as the Plantagenets; but
that name was never used as a surname till the fifteenth century. The name is sometimes convenient, but it is not a really correct
description, like Tudor and Stewart, both of which were real surnames,
borne by the two families before they came to the Crown. In the
almanacks the Angevins are called The Saxon line restored, a name
which gives a false idea, though there can be no doubt that Henry the
Second was fully aware of the advantages to be drawn from his remote
female descent from the Old-English Kings. The point to be borne in
mind is that the accession of Henry is the beginning of a distinct
dynasty which could not be called either Norman or English in any but
the most indirect way. (22) I do not remember anything in any of the writers of Henry the
Seconds time to justify the popular notions about Normans and
Saxons as two distinct and hostile bodies. Nor do we as yet hear many
complaints of favour being shown to absolute foreigners in preference
to either, though it is certain that many high preferments, especially
in the Church, were held by men who were not English in either sense. The peculiar position of Henry the Second was something like that of
the Emperor Charles the Fifth, that of a prince ruling over a great
number of distinct states without being nationally identified with any
of them. Henry ruled over England, Normandy, and Aquitaine, but he was
neither English, Norman, nor Gascon. (23) That is the greater, the continental, part of the Duchy. The
insular part of Normandy, the Channel Islands, was not lost, and it
still remains attached to the English Crown, not as part of the United
Kingdom, but as a separate dependency. 310, 367; and on the appointment of
Bishops and Abbots, i. (25) See the Ordinance in Norman Conquest, iv. Stubbs, Select
Charters, 81. (27) It should be remembered that the clerical immunities which were
claimed in this age were by no means confined to those whom we should
now call clergymen, but that they also took in that large class of
persons who held smaller ecclesiastical offices without being what we
should call in holy orders. The Church also claimed jurisdiction in
the causes of widows and orphans, and in various cases where questions
of perjury, breach of faith, and the like were concerned. Thus John
Bishop of Poitiers writes to Archbishop Thomas (Giles, Sanctus Thomas,
vi. 238) complaining that the Kings officers had forbidden him to hear
the causes of widows and orphans, and also to hear causes in matters
of usury: prohibentes ne ad querelas viduarum vel orphanorum vel
clericorum aliquem parochianorum meorum in causam trahere prsumerem
super quacumque possessione immobili, donec ministeriales regis, vel
dominorum ad quorum feudum res controversi pertineret, in facienda
justitia eis defecissent. Deinde ne super accusatione fnoris
quemquam audirem. This gives a special force to the acclamations
with which Thomas was greeted on his return as the father of the
orphans and the judge of the widows: Videres mox pauperum turbam
qu convenerat in occursum, hos succinctos ut prvenirent et patrem
suum applicantem exciperent, et benedictionem prriperent, alios vero
humi se humiliter prosternentes, ejulantes hos, plorantes illos pr
gaudio, et omnes conclamantes, Benedictus qui venit in nomine Domini,
pater orphanorum et judex viduarum! et pauperes quidem sic. Herbert
of Bosham, Giles, Sanctus Thomas, vii. See more in
Historical Essays, 99. (28) On the cruel punishments inflicted in the Kings courts Herbert
of Bosham is very emphatic in more than one passage. 101) as a merit of the Bishops courts that in them no mutilations
were inflicted. Men were punished there absque omni mutilatione
vel deformatione membrorum. But he by no means claims freedom from
mutilation as a mere clerical privilege; he distinctly condemns it in
any case. Adeo etiam quod ordinis privilegium excludat cauterium: quam
tamen pnam communiter inter homines etiam jus forense damnat: ne
videlicet in homine Dei imago deformetur. (vii. A most curious
story illustrative of the barbarous jurisprudence of the time will be
found in Benedicts Miracula Sancti Thom, 184. (29) One of the Constitutions of Clarendon forbade villains to be
ordained without the consent of their lords. Filii rusticorum non
debent ordinari absque assensu domini de cujus terra nati dignoscuntur
(Stubbs, Select Charters, 134). On the principles of feudal law nothing
can be said against this, as the lord had a property in his villain
which he would lose by the villains ordination. The prohibition
is noticed in some remarkable lines of the earliest biographer of
Thomas, Garnier of Pont-Sainte-Maxence (La Vie de Saint Thomas le
Martyr, Paris, 1859, p. 89), where he strongly asserts the equality of
gentleman and villain before God:

  Fils  vilains ne fust en nul liu ordenez
   Sanz lotrei sun seigneur de cui terre il fu nez. Et deus  sun servise nus a tuz apelez! Mielz valt filz  vilain qui est preux e senez,
   Que ne feit gentilz hum failliz et debutez.

Thomas himself was not the son of a villain, but his birth was such
that the King could sneer at him as plebeius quidam clericus.

(30) We are not inclined to find fault with such an appointment as
that of Stephen Langton; still his forced election at the bidding
of Innocent was a distinct breach of the rights of the King, of the
Convent of Christ Church, and of the English nation generally. See the
account of his election in Roger of Wendover, iii. 314; Hooks Archbishops, ii. (31) See the Bulls and Letters by which Innocent professed to annul the
Great Charter in Roger of Wendover, iii. 323, 327; the excommunication
of the Barons in iii. 336; and the suspension of the Archbishop in iii. (32) There is a separate treatise on the Miracles of Simon of Montfort,
printed along with Rishangers Chronicle by the Camden Society, 1840. (33) I think I may safely say that the only royalist chronicler of the
reign of Henry the Third is Thomas Wykes, the Austin Canon of Osney. There is also one poem on the royalist side, to balance many on the
side of the Barons, among the Political Songs published by the Camden
Society, 1839, page 128. Letters to Earl Simon and his Countess Eleanor form a considerable part
of the letters of Robert Grosseteste, published by Mr. Luard for the
Master of the Rolls. Matthew Paris also (879, Wats) speaks of him as
episcopus Lincolniensis Robertus, cui comes tamquam patri confessori
exstitit familiarissimus. This however was in the earlier part of
Simons career, before the war had broken out. The share of Bishop
Walter of Cantilupe, who was present at Evesham and absolved the Earl
and his followers, will be found in most of the Chronicles of the time. It comes out well in the riming Chronicle of Robert of Gloucester (ii. 558):

  e bissop Water of Wurcetre asoiled hom alle pere
   And prechede hom, at hii adde of de e lasse fere.

This writer says of the battle of Evesham:

  Suich was e morre of Eivesham (vor bataile non it was).

(34) This letter, addressed in 1247 to Pope Innocent the Fourth, will
be found in Matthew Paris (721, Wats). It is written in the name of
universitas cleri et populi per provinciam Cantuariensem constituti,
and it ends, quia communitas nostra sigillum non habet, prsentes
literas signo communitatis civitatis Londinensis vestr sanctitati
mittimus consignatas. Another letter in the same form follows to the
Cardinals. There are two earlier letters in 1245 and 1246 (Matthew
Paris, 666, 700), the former from the magnates et universitas regni
Angli, the other in the name of Richard Earl of Cornwall (afterwards
King of the Romans), Simon Earl of Leicester, and other Earls, et alii
totius regni Angli Barones, proceres, et magnates, et nobiles portuum
maris habitatores, necnon et clerus et populus universus. The distinct
mention of the Cinque Ports, whose representatives in Parliament are
still called Baronsthe nobiles of the lettershould be noticed. (35) The writer of the Gesta Stephani(3) distinctly attributes the
election of Stephen to the citizens of London: Majores igitur natu,
consultuque quique provectiores, concilium coegere, deque regni
statu, pro arbitrio suo, utilia in commune providentes, ad regem
eligendum unanimiter conspiravere. He then goes on with the details
of the election. He is borne out by the Chronicle 1135: Stephne de
Blais com to Lundene and te Lundenisce folc him underfeng; and by
William of Malmesbury, Historia Novella, i. 11: A Londoniensibus et
Wintoniensibus in Regem exceptus est. So again when the Legate, Henry
Bishop of Winchester, holds a council for the election of the Empress
Matilda, the citizens of London were summoned, and it is distinctly
said that they held the rank of nobles or barons: Londonienses
(qui sunt quasi optimates, pro magnitudine civitatis, in Anglia).
Londonienses, qui prcipui habebantur in Anglia, sicut proceres
(Historia Novella, iii. All this is exactly like the earlier
elections of Kings before the Conquest. (36) The words of the Charter 12-14 (Stubbs, 290) are: Nullum
scutagium vel auxilium ponatur in regno nostro, nisi per commune
consilium regni nostri, nisi ad corpus nostrum redimendum, etc.....
Et ad habendum commune consilium regni, de auxilio assidendo aliter
quam in tribus casibus prdictis, vel de scutagio assidendo, summoneri
faciemus archiepiscopos, episcopos, abbates, comites, et majores
barones, sigillatim per litteras nostras; et prterea faciemus
summoneri in generali, per vicecomites et ballivos nostros, omnes
illos qui de nobis tenent in capite. This is exactly like the entry
in the Chronicle (1123), describing the summoning of a Witenagemt by
Henry the First: Da sone rfter sende se kyng hise write ofer eal
Englalande, and bed hise biscopes and hise abbates and hise eignes
ealle et hi scolden cumen to his gewitenemot on Candelmesse deig to
Gleawceastre him togeanes; and hi swa diden.

(37) These first glimmerings of parliamentary representation were
carefully traced out by Hallam (Middle Ages, ii. They can
now be more fully studied in the work of Professor Stubbs. On the
summons in 1213 of four men for each shire besides milites et barones
(quatuor discretos homines de comitatu tuo illuc venire facias),
the Professor remarks (278): It is the first writ in which the four
discreet men of the county appear as representatives; the first
instance of the summoning of the folkmoot to a general assembly by the
machinery already used for judicial purposes.

(38) On this subject the eighth chapter of Sir Francis Palgraves
English Commonwealth should be studied. (39) For the whole career of Simon I must again refer generally to
Pauli and Blaauw. The great writ itself, dated at Worcester, December
14th, 1264, will be found in Rymers Fdera, i. It has often
been noticed how small is the number of Earls and other lay Barons, and
how unusually large the number of churchmen, who are summoned to this
Parliament. The whole list will be found in Rymer. The parts of the
writ which concern us stand thus:

Item mandatum est singulis vicecomitibus per Angliam; quod venire
faciant duos milites de legalioribus, probioribus et discretioribus
militibus singulorum comitatuum, ad Regem London in octab prdictis,
in form supradict. Item in form prdict scribitur civibus Ebor, civibus Lincoln,
et cteris burgis Angli; quod mittant in form prdict duos de
discretioribus, legalioribus, et probioribus, tam civibus, quam
burgensibus suis. Item in form prdict mandatum est baronibus, et probis hominibus
Quinque Portuum.

This is often regarded as the origin of popular representation; but it
is not in any sense entitled to that praise. The novelty was simply the
assembling the representatives of the towns in conjunction with those
of the counties; this was now done for the first time for the purpose
of the national council. Stubbs, 401. (40) The account of this most remarkable trial, held on June 11th,
1252, is given in a letter from Simons intimate friend the famous
Franciscan Adam Marsh (de Marisco) to Bishop Robert Grosseteste. Brewers Monumenta Franciscana, p. 122,
and there is an English translation in the Appendix to Mrs. Greens
Life of Countess Eleanor, English Princesses, ii. Simons
witnesses, knights and citizens, come muniti litteris patentibus
communitatis Burdegalensis, in qu quasi totum robur Vasconi ad
distringendum hostiles et fideles protegendum consistere dignoscitur,
setting forth how good Simons government was in every way, and how
those who brought charges against him did it only because his strict
justice had put a check on their misdoings. We may compare the words of
the great poetical manifesto (Political Songs, 76). Seductorem nominant S. atque fallacem,
   Facta sed examinant probantque veracem.

(41) For the Londoners at Lewes let us take the account of an enemy. Thomas Wykes (148) tells us how the Earl set out, glorians in virtute
sua congregata baronum multitudine copiosa, Londoniensium innumerabili
agmine circumcinctus, quia legitur stultorum infinitus est numerus.
Presently we read how the Londoniensium innumera multitudo, bellorum
ignara, were put to flight by the Lord Edward very much after the
manner of Prince Rupert. (42) On the religious reverence paid to Earl Waltheof, see Norman
Conquest, ii. I have there referred to the office of Thomas of
Lancaster, which will be found in Political Songs, 268. Some of the
pieces are what we should think most daring parodies of parts of the
Church Service, but we may be sure that what was intended was reverence
and not irreverence. There is another parody of the same kind in honour
of Earl Thomas, a little earlier back in the volume, p. It was a
matter of course that Thomas of Lancaster should be likened to Thomas
of Canterbury. Gaude, Thoma, ducum decus, lucerna Lancastri,
   Qui per necem imitaris Thomam Cantuari;
   Cujus caput conculcatur pacem ob ecclesi,
   Atque tuum detruncatur causa pacis Angli. (43) Let us take a Latin, a French, and an English specimen of the
poems in which Simons death was lamented and his intercession implored. Salve, Symon Montis Fortis,
     Totius flos militi,
   Durus pnas passus mortis,
     Protector gentis Angli. Sunt de sanctis inaudita
   Cunctis passis in hac vita,
     Quemquam passum talia;
   Manus, pedes, amputari,
   Caput, corpus, vulnerari,
     Abscidi virilia. Sis pro nobis intercessor
   Apud Deum, qui defensor
     In terris exstiteras.(Political Songs, 124.) The French poem which follows directly in the collection is too long to
copy in full. This is perhaps the most remarkable stanza, in which we
again find the comparison with Thomas of Canterbury:

  Ms par sa mort, le cuens Mountfort conquist la victorie,
   Come ly martyr de Caunterbyr, finist sa vie;
   Ne voleit pas li bon Thomas qe perist seinte Eglise,
   Le cuens auxi se combati, e morust sauntz feyntise. Ore est ocys la flur de pris, qe taunt savoit de guerre,
   Ly quens Montfort, sa dure mort molt emplorra la terre.

In this poem there is not, as in the Latin one, any direct prayer to
the martyred Earl, but in the last stanza we read:

  Sire Simoun ly prodhom, e sa compagnie,
   En joie vont en ciel amount, en pardurable vie.

The only English piece on these wars belongs to an earlier date,
namely, the satirical poem against King Richard, how the one English
Augustus

  Makede him a castel of a mulne post;

but we get verses on Simons death in the Chronicle of Robert of
Gloucester (ii. 559):

  & sir Simond was aslawe, & is folk al to grounde,
   More murre are nas in so lute stounde. Vor ere was werst Simond de Mountfort aslawe, alas! & sir Henri is sone, at so gentil knizt was. *       *       *       *       *

   & among alle oere mest reue it was ido,
   at sir Simon e olde man demembred was so.

He then goes on with the details of the dismemberment, of which a
picture may be seen opposite p. Blaauws book, and then goes
on with the lines which I have before quoted:

  Suich was e morre of Eivesham (vor bataile non it was),
   And er wi Jesu Crist wel vuele ipaied was,
   As he ssewede bitokninge grisliche and gode,
   As it vel of him sulue, o he deide on e rode,
   at oru al e middelerd derk hede er was inou.

(44) On the occasional and irregular summoning of the borough members
between 1265 and 1295 see Hallam, Middle Ages, ii. 160, 165, and
more fully in Stubbs, Select Charters, 420, 427, where the gradual
developement of parliamentary representation is treated as it has
never been treated before, with a full citation of the authorities. The language in which the chroniclers speak of the constitution of the
early Parliaments of Edward is as vague as that in which our ancient
Gemts are described. Sometimes they speak only of proceres and the
like; sometimes they distinctly mention the popular element. Curiously
enough, the official language is sometimes more popular than that of
the annalists. Thus the Winchester Annals, recording the Statute of
Westminster in 1273, call the Assembly which passed it a communis
convocatio omnium magnatum regni, though it incidentally implies the
presence of other persons, quamplures de regno qui aliqua feoda de
corona regia tenuerunt. But the preamble of the Statute itself records
the assentement des erceveskes, eveskes, abbes, priurs, contes,
barons, et _la communaute de la tere_ ileokes somons. So in the later
Parliament of the same year the Annals speak only of the communis
consensus archiepiscoporum, comitum, et baronum, while the official
description is prlati, comites, barones, et alii de regno nostro.
But in an earlier Assembly, that held in 1273, before Edward had come
back to England, the same Winchester Annals tell us how convenerunt
archiepiscopi et episcopi, comites et barones, et _de quolibet comitatu
quatuor milites et de qualibet civitate quatuor_. This and the
summons to the Parliament of 1285, which sat in judgement on David
of Wales (Stubbs, 453, 457), seem the most distinct cases of borough
representation earlier than 1295, since which time the summoning of the
borough members has gone on regularly. Stubbs
remarks on the Assemblies of the transitionary period in pp. 465, 469
should be specially studied. (45) The history of the resistance of these two Earls to King Edward,
which led to the great Confirmation of the Charters in 1297, will be
found in all the histories of the time, old and new. See also Stubbs,
431, 479. I feel no difficulty in reconciling respect for Edward with
respect for the men who withstood him. The case is well put by Stubbs,
34, 35. (46) The exact value of the document commonly known as the statute De
Tallagio non concedendo is discussed by Professor Stubbs, p. It
is perhaps safest to look on it, like many of the earlier collections
of laws, not indeed as an actual statute, but as good evidence of a
principle which, from the time of the Confirmation of the Charters, has
been universally received. The words are

Nullum tallagium vel auxilium per nos vel hredes nostros de cetero in
regno nostro imponatur seu levetur, sine voluntate et assensu communi
archiepiscoporum, episcoporum et aliorum prlatorum, comitum, baronum,
militum, burgensium, et aliorum liberorum hominum in regno nostro.
This, it will be seen, is the same provision which I have already
quoted (see above, Note 36) from the Great Charter of John, but which
was left out in the Charter in the form in which it was confirmed by
Henry the Third. See Stubbs, 330, 332, 336. (47) I have said this before in Historical Essays, p. On the
strongly marked legal character of Edwards age, and especially of
Edwards own mind, see Stubbs, 417. (48) The great statute of treason of 25 Edward the Third (see the
Revised Edition of the Statutes, i. 185) secures the life of the King,
his wife, and his eldest son, and the chastity of his wife, his eldest
daughter, and his eldest sons wife. But the personal privilege goes no
further. As the Law of England knows no classes of men except peers and
commoners, it follows that the younger children of the Kingthe eldest
is born Duke of Cornwallare, in strictness of speech, commoners,
unless they are personally raised to the peerage. I am not aware that
either case has ever arisen, but I conceive that there is nothing to
hinder a Kings son, not being a peer, from voting at an election, or
from being chosen to the House of Commons, and I conceive that, if
he committed a crime, he would be tried by a jury. Mere precedence
and titles have nothing to do with the matter, though probably a good
deal of confusion arises from the very modern fashionone might almost
say the modern vulgarismof calling all the children of the King or
Queen Princes and Princesses. As late as the time of George the
Second uncourtly Englishmen were still found who eschewed the foreign
innovation, and who spoke of the Lady Caroline and the Lady Emily, as
their fathers had done before them. Another modern vulgarism is that of using the word royalroyal
visit, royal marriage, and so forthwhen there is no royalty in the
case, the person spoken of being a subject, perhaps a commoner. (49) On the parliamentary position of the clergy see Hallam, Middle
Ages, ii. And as far as the reign of Edward the First is
concerned, see the series of summonses in Stubbs, 442. (50) On this important constitutional change, which was made in
1664, without any Act of Parliament, but by a mere verbal agreement
between Archbishop Sheldon and Lord Chancellor Clarendon, see Hallam,
Constitutional History, ii. (51) This is true on the whole, especially at the beginning of the
institution of the States General, though there were also _roturiers_
who were the immediate burgesses of the King. See Thierry, History
of the Tiers Etat, i. It is in that work that the
history of that branch of the States General should be studied. (52) The question of one or two Chambers in an ordinary monarchy or
commonwealth is altogether different from the same question under a
Federal system. In England or France the question between one or two
Chambers in the Legislature is simply a question in which of the two
ways the Legislature is likely to do its work best. But in a Federal
constitution, like that of Switzerland or the United States, the two
Chambers are absolutely necessary. The double sovereignty, that of
the whole nation and that of the independent and equal States which
have joined together to form it, can be rightly represented only
by having two Chambers, one of them, the _Nationalrath_ or House
of Representatives, directly representing the nation as such, and
the other, the _Stnderath_ or Senate, representing the separate
sovereignty of the Cantons. In the debates early in 1872 as to the
revision of the Swiss Federal Constitution, a proposal made in the
_Nationalrath_ for the abolition of the _Stnderath_ was thrown out by
a large majority. (53) On the old Constitution of Sweden, see Laings Tour in Sweden. (54) This common mistake and its cause are fully explained by Hallam,
Middle Ages, ii. (55) The two Houses had contended violently in 1675, concerning the
appellate jurisdiction of the Lords; they had contended, with not less
violence, in 1704, upon the jurisdiction of the Commons in matters of
election; they had quarrelled rudely, in 1770, while insisting upon
the exclusion of strangers. But upon general measures of public policy
their differences had been rare and unimportant. Mays Constitutional
History, i. The writer goes on to show why differences between the
two Houses on important points have become more common in very recent
times. (56) The share of the Witan in early times in the appointment of
Bishops, Ealdormen, and other great officers, need hardly be dwelled
upon. For a debate in a Witenagemt of Eadward the Confessor on a
question of peace or war, see Norman Conquest, ii. For the like
under Henry the Third, see the account in Matthew Paris, in the year
1242 which will be found in Stubbs, 359. The state of the case under
Edward the Third is discussed by Hallam, Middle Ages, ii. But the most remarkable passage of all is one in the
great poetical manifesto which I have several times quoted: it is there
(Political Songs, 96) made one of the charges against Henry the Third
that he wished to keep the appointment of the great officers of state
in his own hands. The passage is long, but it is well worth quoting at
length. Rex cum suis voluit ita liber esse;
   Et sic esse debuit, fuitque necesse
   Aut esse desineret rex, privatus jure
   Regis, nisi faceret quidquid vellet; cur
   Non esse magnatibus regni quos prferret
   Suis comitatibus, vel quibus conferret
   Castrorum custodiam, vel quem exhibere
   Populo justitiam vellet, et habere
   Regni cancellarium thesaurariumque. Suum ad arbitrium voluit quemcumque,
   Et consiliarios de quacumque gente,
   Et ministros varios se prcipiente,
   Non intromittentibus se de factis regis
   Angli baronibus, vim habente legis
   Principis imperio, et quod imperaret
   Suomet arbitrio singulos ligaret.

(57) Take for example the Act passed after Edward the Fourths success
at Towton. Among other things, poor Henry the Sixth
is not only branded as an usurper, but is charged with personally
stirring up the movement in the North, which led to the battle of
Wakefield and the death of Richard Duke of York. The seid Henry
Usurpour, late called Kyng Henry the Sixt, contynuyng in his olde
rancour & malice, usyng the fraude & malicious disceit & dissimulacion
ayenst trouth & conscience, that accorde not with the honoure of eny
Cristen Prynce,... with all subtill ymaginacions & disceitfull weyes
& meanes to hym possible, intended & covertely laboured, excited &
procured the fynal destruction, murdre & deth of the seid Richard Duc,
and of his Sonnes, that is to sey, of oure seid nowe Soverayne Lord
Kyng Edward the fourth, then Erle of Marche, & of the noble Lord Edmund
Erle of Ruthlande; & for th execution of his dampnable & malicious
purpose, by writing & other messages, mowed, excited, & stured therunto
the Duks of Excestr & Somerset, & other lordes beyng then in the North
parties of this Reame.

(58) This statute was passed in 8 Henry VI. The complaint
which it makes is well worth notice, and shows the reactionary
tendencies of the time. The county elections had been made by very
great, outrageous, and excessive number of people dwelling within the
same counties, of which most part was people of small substance, and
of no value, whereof every of them pretended a voice equivalent, as to
such elections to be made, with the most worthy knights and esquires
dwelling within the same counties. To hinder the manslaughters,
riots, batteries, and divisions, which were likely to take placeit is
not said that they had taken placeno one is to be allowed to vote who
has not free land or tenement to the value of forty shillings by the
year at the least above all charges. It is also provided that both the
electors and the elected are to be actually resident in the county. Item come lez eleccions dez Chivalers des Countees esluz a venir as
parlements du Roi en plusours Countees Dengleterre, ore tarde ount
este faitz par trop graunde & excessive nombre dez gents demurrantz
deinz mesmes les Countes, dount la greindre partie estoit par gentz
sinon de petit avoir ou de null valu, dount chescun pretende davoir
voice equivalent quant a tielx eleccions faire ove les plius valantz
chivalers ou esquiers demurrantz deins mesmes les Countes; dount
homicides riotes bateries & devisions entre les gentiles & autres
gentz de mesmes les Countees verisemblablement sourdront & seront, si
covenable remedie ne soit purveu en celle partie: Notre seigneur le
Roy considerant les premisses ad pourveu & ordene par auctorite de cest
parlement que les Chivalers des Countes deins le Roialme Dengleterre,
a esliers a venir a les parlementz en apres atenirs, soient esluz
en chescun Counte par gentz demurrantz & receantz en icelles dount
chescun ait frank tenement a le valu de xl s. par an al meins outre les
reprises; & que ceux qui seront ensy esluz soient demurrantz & receantz
deins mesmes les Countes. Revised Statutes, i. The necessity of residence in the case of either electors or
representatives was repealed by 14 Geo. The statute goes on to give the Sheriff power to examine the electors
on oath as to the amount of their property. It also gives the Judges of
Assize a power foreshadowing that of our present Election Judges, that
of inquiring into false returns made by the Sheriff. Another statute of the same kind was passed later in the same reign,
23 Henry VI. 1444-5, from which it appears that the knights of
the shire were ceasing to be in all cases knights in the strict sense,
and that it was beginning to be found needful to fence them about with
oligarchic restrictions. Issint que lez Chivalers dez Counteez pour le parlement en aprs a
esliers so ent notablez Chivalers dez mesmez lez Counteez pour lez
queux ils serront issint esluz, ou autrement tielx notablez Esquiers
gentils homez del Nativite dez mesmez lez Counteez comme soient ablez
destre Chivalers; et null home destre tiel Chivaler que estoise en la
degree de vadlet et desouth. Revised Statutes, i. Every enactment of this kind bears witness to the growth of the power
of the Commons, and to the endeavours of the people to make their
representation really popular. (59) Take for instance the account given by the chronicler Hall (p. 253) of the election of Edward the Fourth. After the lordes had considered and weyghed his title and declaracion,
they determined by authoritie of the sayd counsaill, for as much as
kyng Henry, contrary to his othe, honor and agreement, had violated
and infringed, the order taken and enacted in the last Parliament,
and also, because he was insufficient to rule the Realme, & inutile
to the common wealth, & publique profite of the pore people, he was
therefore by the aforesayed authoritie, depriued & deiected of all
kyngly honor, & regall souereigntie. And incontinent, Edward erle of
Marche, sonne and heyre to Richard duke of Yorke, was by the lordes in
the sayd counsaill assembled, named, elected, & admitted, for kyng &
gouernour of the realme; on which day, the people of the erles parte,
beyng in their muster in sainct Ihons felde, & a great number of the
substanciall citezens there assembled, to behold their order: sodaynly
the lord Fawconbridge, which toke the musters, wisely declared to
the multitude, the offences & breaches of the late agremente done &
perpetrated by kyng Henry the vi. & demaunded of the people, whether
they woulde haue the sayd kyng Henry to rule & reigne any lenger ouer
them: To whome they with a whole voyce, aunswered, nay, nay. Then
he asked them, if they would serue, loue, & obey the erle of March
as their earthly prince & souereign lord. To which question they
aunswered, yea, yea, crieng, king Edward, with many great showtes and
clappyng of handes.... The erle,... as kyng, rode to the church of
sainct Paule, and there offered. And after _Te deum_ song, with great
solempnitie, he was conueyed to Westmynster, and there set in the
hawle, with the scepter royall in his hand, where to all the people
which there in a great number were assembled, his title and clayme
to the croune of England, was declared by, ii. maner of ways: the
firste, as sonne and heyre to duke Richard his father, right enheritor
to the same; the second, by aucthoritie of Parliament and forfeiture
committed by, kyng Henry. Wherupon it was agayne demaunded of the
commons, if they would admitte, and take the sayd erle as their prince
and souereigne lord, which al with one voice cried, yea, yea.... On
the morow he was proclaymed kyng by the name of kyng Edward the iiij. throughout the citie.

This was in Lent 1461, before the battle of Towton. Edward was crowned
June 29th in the same year. The same chronicler describes the election
or acknowledgement of Richard the Third, p. (60) One special sign of the advance of the power of Parliament in the
fifteenth century was the practice of bringing in bills in the form
of Statutes ready made. Hitherto the Acts of the Commons had taken
the form of petitions, and it was sometimes found that, after the
Parliament had broken up, the petitions had been fraudulently modified. They now brought in bills, which the King accepted or rejected as they
stood. The knight of the shire was the connecting link
between the baron and the shopkeeper. On the same benches on which
sate the goldsmiths, drapers, and grocers who had been returned to
Parliament by the commercial towns, sate also members who, in any other
country, would have been called noblemen, hereditary lords of manors,
entitled to hold courts and to bear coat armour, and able to trace
back an honourable descent through many generations. Some of them were
younger sons and brothers of great lords. Others could boast even of
royal blood. At length the eldest son of an Earl of Bedford, called
in courtesy by the second title of his father, offered himself as a
candidate for a seat in the House of Commons, and his example was
followed by others. Seated in that house, the heirs of the grandees of
the realm naturally became as zealous for its privileges as any of the
humble burgesses with whom they were mingled.

Hallam remarks (ii. 250) that it is in the reign of Edward the Fourth
that we first find borough members bearing the title of Esquire, and
he goes on to refer to the Paston Letters as showing how important
a seat in Parliament was then held, and as showing also the undue
influences which were already brought to bear upon the electors. Since
Hallams time, the authenticity of the Paston Letters has been called
in question, but it has, I think, been fully established. Some of the
entries are very curious indeed. 96), without any date of
the year, the Duchess of Norfolk writes to John Paston, Esquire, to
use his influence at a county election on behalf of some creatures of
the Dukes: It is thought right necessarie for divers causes  my
Lord have at this tyme in the plement suche psones as longe unto him
and be of his menyall Svaunts wherin we conceyve yo good will and
diligence shal be right expedient. The persons to be thus chosen for
the convenience of the Duke are described as our right wel-belovid
Cossin and Svaunts John Howard and Syr Roger Chambirlayn. This is
followed by a letter from the Earl of Oxford in 1455, much to the same
effect. 98, we have a letter addressed to the Bailiff of Maldon,
recommending the election of Sir John Paston on behalf of a certain
great lady not named. Ryght trusty frend I comand me to yow preyg yow to call to yo
mynd that lyek as ye and I comonyd of it were necessary for my Lady
and you all hyr Sernts and tents to have thys plement as for
n of the Burgeys of the towne of Maldon syche a man of worchep
and of wytt as wer towardys my seyd Lady and also syche on as is in
favor of the Kyng and of the Lords of hys consayll nyghe abought hys
psone. Sertyfyg yow that my seid Lady for her parte and syche as
be of hyr consayll be most agreeabyll that bothe ye and all syche as
be hyr fermors and tentys and wellwyllers shold geve your voyse to a
worchepfull knyght and on of my Ladys consayll S John Paston whyche
standys gretly in favore w my Lord Chamberleyn and what my seyd Lord
Chamberleyn may do w the Kyng and w all the Lordys of Inglond I
trowe it be not unknowyn to you most of eny on man alyve. Wherefor by
the meenys of the seyd S John Paston to my seyd Lord Chamberleyn
bothe my Lady and ye of the towne kowd not have a meeter man to be for
yow in the perlement to have yo needys sped at all seasons. Wherefor
I prey yow labor all syche as be my Ladys serntts tennts and
wellwyllers to geve ther voyseys to the seyd S John Paston and that
ye fayle not to sped my Ladys intent in thys mater as ye entend to do
hyr as gret a plesur as if ye gave hyr an C [100_l._] And God have
yow in hys kepg. Wretyn at Fysheley the xx day of Septebyr.J. ARBLASTER.

(62) On the effects of the reign of Charles the Fifth in Spain and
his overthrow of the liberties of Castile, see the general view in
Robertson, iii. 434, though in his narrative (ii. 186) he glorifies
the Kings clemency. See also the first chapter of the sixth book
of Prescotts Philip the Second, and on the suppression of the
constitution of Aragon by Philip, Watson, Philip the Second, iii. The last meeting of the French States-General before the final meeting
in 1789 was that in 1614, during the minority of Lewis the Thirteenth. (63) The legal character of Williams despotism I have tried to set
forth almost throughout the whole of my fourth volume. 8, 617; but it is plain to everyone who has the slightest knowledge
of Domesday. Nothing can show more utter ignorance of the real
character of the man and his times than the idea of William being a
mere rude man of war, as I have seen him called. (64) On the true aspect of the reign of Henry the Eighth I have said
something in the Fortnightly Review, September 1871. (65) Both these forms of undue influence on the part of the Crown
are set forth by Hallam, Constitutional History, i. It will not be pretended, he says, that the wretched villages,
which corruption and perjury still hardly keep from famine [this was
written before the Reform Bill, in 1827], were seats of commerce and
industry in the sixteenth century. But the county of Cornwall was more
immediately subject to a coercive influence, through the indefinite and
oppressive jurisdiction of the stannary court. Similar motives, if we
could discover the secrets of those governments, doubtless operated in
most other cases.

In the same page the historian, speaking of the different boroughs and
counties which received the franchise in the sixteenth century, says,
It might be possible to trace the reason, why the county of Durham was
passed over. And he suggests, The attachment of those northern parts
to popery seems as likely as any other. The reason for the omission
of Durham was doubtless that the Bishoprick had not wholly lost the
character of a separate principality. It was under Charles the Second
that Durham city and county, as well as Newark, first sent members to
Parliament. Durham was enfranchised by Act of Parliament, as Chester
city and countyhitherto kept distinct as being a Palatinatewere by
34 & 35 Hen. Newark was
enfranchised by a Royal Charter, the last case of that kind of exercise
of the prerogative. (66) I do not know what was the exact state of Old Sarum in 1265 or
in 1295, but earlier in the thirteenth century it was still the chief
dwelling-place both of the Earl and of the Bishop. But in the reign
of Edward the Third it had so greatly decayed that the stones of the
Cathedral were used for the completion of the new one which had arisen
in the plain. (67) On the relations between Queen Elizabeth and her Parliaments,
and especially for the bold bearing of the two Wentworths, Peter and
Paul, see the fifth chapter of Hallams Constitutional History, largely
grounded on the Journals of Sir Simonds DEwes. The frontispiece to
DEwes book (London, 1682) gives a lively picture of a Parliament of
those days. (68) On the relations between the Crown and the House of Commons under
James the First, see the sixth chapter of Hallams Constitutional
History, and the fifth chapter of Gardners History of England from
1603 to 1616. (1) This was the famous motion made by Sir Robert Peel against the
Ministry of Lord Melbourne, and carried by a majority of one, June 4,
1841. See Mays Constitutional History, i. Irvings Annals of our
Times, 86. (2) This of course leaves to the Ministry the power of appealing to the
country by a dissolution of Parliament; but, if the new Parliament also
declares against them, it is plain that they have nothing to do but to
resign office. In the case of 1841 Lord Melbourne dissolved Parliament,
and, on the meeting of the new Parliament, an amendment to the address
was carried by a majority of ninety-one, August 28, 1841. (3) This is well set forth by Sir John Fortescue, De Laudibus Legum
Angli, cap. 36: Neque Rex ibidem, per se aut ministros suos,
tallegia, subsidia, aut quvis onera alia, imponit legiis suis, aut
leges eorum mutat, vel novas condit, sine concessione vel assensu
totius regni sui in parliamento suo expresso.

(4) How very recent the establishment of these principles is will be
seen by anyone who studies the history of the reign of George the Third
in the work of Sir T. E. May. Pitt, as is well known, kept office
in defiance of repeated votes of the House of Commons, and at last, by
a dissolution at a well-chosen moment, showed that the country was on
his side. Such conduct would not be deemed constitutional now, but the
wide difference between the constitution of the House of Commons then
and now should be borne in mind. (5) Though the command of the Sovereign would be no excuse for any
illegal act, and though the advisers of any illegal act are themselves
responsible for it, yet there would seem to be no way provided for
punishing an illegal act done by the Sovereign in his own person. The
Sovereign may therefore be said to be personally irresponsible. (6) See Macaulay, iv. It should not be forgotten that writers like
Blackstone and De Lolme say nothing about the Cabinet. Serjeant Stephen
supplies the omission, ii. (7) The lowly outward position of the really ruling assembly comes out
in some degree at the opening of every session of Parliament. But it is
far more marked in the grotesque, and probably antiquated, ceremonies
of a Conference of the two Houses. This comes out most curiously of all
in the Conference between the two Houses of the Convention in 1688. (8) See Note 56, Chapter ii. (9) See Macaulay, iv. (10) Ministers or Ministry were the words always used at the
time of the Reform Bill in 1831-1832. It would be curious to trace
at what time the present mode of speech came into vogue, either in
parliamentary debates or in common speech. Another still later change marks a step toward the recognition of the
Cabinet. It has long been held that a Secretary of State must always
accompany the Sovereign everywhere. It is now beginning to be held that
any member of the Cabinet will do as well as a Secretary of State. But
if any member of the Cabinet, why not any Privy Councillor? Cayley moved for a Select Committee to
consider the duties of the Member leading the Government business in
this House, and the expediency of attaching office and salary thereto.
The motion was withdrawn, after being opposed by Sir Charles Wood
(now Viscount Halifax), Mr. Walpole, and Lord John Russell (now Earl
Russell). Sir Charles Wood described the post of Leader of the House
as an office that does not exist, and the duties of which cannot be
defined. Mr. Walpole spoke of it as a position totally unknown to the
constitution of the country. Yet I presume that everybody practically
knew that Lord John Russell was Leader of the House, though nobody
could give a legal definition of his position. Walpole and Lord John Russell on the nature of
ministerial responsibility. Walpole said that members were apt to
talk gravely of ministerial responsibility; but responsibility there is
none, except by virtue of the office that a Minister holds, or possibly
by the fact of his being a Privy Councillor. A Minister is responsible
for the acts done by him; a Privy Councillor for advice given by him in
that capacity. Until the reign of Charles the Second, Privy Councillors
always signed the advice they gave; and to this day the Cabinet is not
a body recognised by law. As a Privy Councillor, a person is under
little or no responsibility for the acts advised by him, on account of
the difficulty of proof. Lord John Russell asked the House to pause
before it gave assent to the constitutional doctrines laid down by Mr. He unduly restricted the responsibility of Ministers.... I
hold, continued Lord John, that it is not really for the business the
Minister transacts in performing the particular duties of his office,
but it is for any advice which he has given, and which he may be
proved, before a Committee of this House, or at the bar of the House of
Lords, to have given, that he is responsible, and for which he suffers
the penalties that may ensue from impeachment.

It is plain that both Mr. Walpole and Lord Russell were here speaking
of real legal responsibility, such responsibility as might be enforced
by impeachment or other legal process, not of the vaguer kind of
responsibility which is commonly meant when we speak of Ministers being
responsible to the House of Commons. This last is enforced, not by
legal process, but by such motions as that of Sir Robert Peel in 1841,
or that of the Marquess of Hartington in June 1859. I have made my extracts from the Spectator newspaper of February 11,
1854. (12) We read (Anglia Sacra, i. 335) of thelric, Bishop of the
South-Saxons at the time of the Conquest, as vir antiquissimus et
legum terr sapientissimus. So Adelelm, the first Norman Abbot of
Abingdon, found much benefit from the legal knowledge of certain of his
English monks (Chronicon Monasterii de Abingdon, ii. 2), quibus tanta
secularium facundia et prteritorum memoria eventorum inerat, ut cteri
circumquaque facile eorum sententiam ratam fuisse, quam edicerent,
approbarent. The writer adds, Sed et alii plures de Anglis causidici
per id tempus in abbatia ista habebantur quorum collationi nemo sapiens
refragabatur. But knowledge of the law was not an exclusively clerical
accomplishment; for among the grounds for the election of King Harold
himself, we find (de Inventione Sanct Crucis Walthamensis, p. 25,
Stubbs) that one was quia non erat eo prudentior in terra, armis
strenuus magis, legum terr sagacior. See Norman Conquest, ii. (13) On the growth of the lawyers theory of the royal prerogative, and
its utter lack of historical standing-ground, I must refer once for all
to Allens Inquiry into the Rise and Growth of the Royal Prerogative in
England. (15) The history of this memorable revolution will be found in
Lingard, iii. 392-405, and the legal points are brought out by Hallam,
Middle Ages, ii. He remarks that In this revolution of 1399
there was as remarkable an attention shown to the formalities of the
constitution, allowance made for the men and the times, as in that
of 1688; and, speaking of the device by which the same Parliament
was brought together again, he adds, In this contrivance, more than
in all the rest, we may trace the hand of lawyers. The official
version entered on the rolls of Parliament by command of Henry will
be found in Walsingham, ii. Some care seems to be used to
avoid using the name of Parliament in the account of the actual
proceedings. It is said just before, Rex perductus est Londonias,
conservandus in Turri usque ad Parliamentum proximo celebrandum.
And the writs are said to have been sent ad personas regni qui de
jure debeant interesse Parliamento. But when they have come together
(quibus convenientibus) care seems to be taken to give the Assembly
no particular name, till, in the Act of Richards deposition, the
actors are described as pares et proceres regni Angli spirituales
et temporales, et ejus regni communitates, omnes status ejusdem regni
reprsentantes; and in the Act of Henrys election they are described
as domini tam spirituales quam temporales, et omnes regni status. In
the Act of deposition Richards resignation of the Crown is recorded,
as well as his particular crimes and his general unfitness to wear it,
all which are classed together as reasons for his deposition. The
actual formula of deposition runs thus:propter prmissa, et eorum
prtextu, ab omni dignitate et honore regiis, _si quid dignitatis et
honoris hujusmodi in eo remanserit_, merito deponendum pronunciamus,
decernimus, et declaramus; et etiam simili cautela deponimus. They
then declare the throne to be vacant (ut constabat de prmissis,
et eorum occasione, regnum Angli, cum pertinentiis suis, vacare). Henry then makes his challenge, setting forth that strange mixture of
titles which is commented on in most narratives of the event, and the
Estates, without saying which of Henrys arguments they accept, grant
the kingdom to him (concesserunt unanimiter ut Dux prfatus super eos
regnaret). A more distinct case of deposition and election can hardly
be found; only in the words which I have put in italics there seems a
sort of anxiety to complete, by the act of deposition, any possible
defect in Richards doubtless unwilling abdication. The French narrative by a partisan of Richard (Lystoire de la Traison
et Mort du Roy Richart Dengleterre, p. 68) gives, in some respects, a
different account. The Assembly is called a Parliament, and the Duke
of Lancaster is made to seat himself on the throne at once. Then Sir
Thomas Percy cria Veez Henry de Lencastre Roy Dengleterre. Adonc
crierent tous les seigneurs prelaz et _le commun de Londres_, Ouy Ouy
nous voulons que Henry duc de Lencastre soit nostre Roy et nul autre.
For le commun de Londres there are other readings, le commun, le
commun Dangleterre et de Londres, and tout le commun et conseil de
Londres.

(16) It should be remembered that Charles the First was not deposed,
but was executed being King. He was called King both in the indictment
at his trial and in the warrant of his beheading. (17) Monk raised this point in 1660. 612) remarks that at this particular moment there
was no court to influence, no interference of the military to control
the elections. The Convention may therefore be supposed to have been
more freely elected than most Parliaments. (19) The Long Parliament had dissolved itself, and had decreed the
election of its successor. 733) the Long Parliament is declared and adjudged to be fully
dissolved and determined; but it is not said when it was dissolved and
determined. 5; Hallams Constitutional History,
ii. 21, where the whole matter is discussed, and it is remarked that
the next Parliament never gave their predecessors any other name in
the Journals than the late assembly.

(20) See Norman Conquest, i. (21) See the discussion on the famous vote of the Convention Parliament
in Hallam, Constitutional History, ii. Hallam remarks that the word forfeiture might better have answered
this purpose than abdication or desertion, and he adds, they
proceeded not by the stated rules of the English government, but by
the general rights of mankind. They looked not so much to Magna Charta
as the original compact of society, and rejected Coke and Hale for
Hooker and Harrington. My position is that there is no need to go to
what Hallam calls higher constitutional laws for the justification
of the doings of the Convention, but that they were fully justified
by the precedents of English History from the eighth century to the
fourteenth. The Scottish Estates, it should be remembered, did not shrink from
using the word forfeited. Macaulay, iii. (22) See the Act 1 William and Mary for removing and preventing all
Questions and Disputes concerning the Assembling and Sitting of this
Present Parliament (Revised Statutes, ii. It decrees That the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons convened at Westminster the
two and twentieth day of January, in the year of our Lord one thousand
six hundred eighty-eight, and there sitting on the thirteenth day of
February following, are the two Houses of Parliament, and so shall be
and are hereby declared enacted and adjudged to be to all intents,
constructions, and purposes whatsoever, notwithstanding any fault of
writ or writs of summons, or any defect of form or default whatsoever,
as if they had been summoned according to the usual form. The whole
history of the question is given in Macaulay, iii. The whole
matter is summed up in the words (iii. 27), It was answered that the
royal writ was mere matter of form, and that to expose the substance
of our laws and liberties to serious hazard for the sake of a form
would be the most senseless superstition. Wherever the Sovereign, the
Peers spiritual and temporal, and the Representatives freely chosen by
the constituent bodies of the realm were met together, there was the
essence of a Parliament. In earlier times it might perhaps have been
held that there might be the essence of a Parliament even without the
Sovereign. A paper had been circulated, in which the
logic of a small sharp pettifogger was employed to prove that writs,
issued in the joint names of William and Mary, ceased to be of force
as soon as William reigned alone. But this paltry cavil had completely
failed. It had not even been mentioned in the Lower House, and had been
mentioned in the Upper only to be contemptuously overruled. From my
point of view the cavil is certainly paltry, but it is hard to see that
it is more paltry than the others. (24) This is by the Acts 7 and 8 Will. See Stephens Commentaries, ii. Blackstones
reasoning runs thus: This dissolution formerly happened immediately
upon the death of the reigning sovereign; for he being considered in
law as the head of the parliament (caput principium, et finis), that
failing, the whole body was held to be extinct. But the calling a new
parliament immediately on the inauguration of the successor being found
inconvenient, and dangers being apprehended from having no parliament
in being, in case of a disputed succession, it was enacted, etc. By
the Reform Act of 1867 the whole tradition of the lawyers was swept
away. (25) I have said something on this head in Norman Conquest, i. 94,
but the whole thing should be studied in Allens great section on the
Tenure of Landed Property; Royal Prerogative, 125-155. It is to Allen
that the honour belongs of showing what _bookland_ and _folkland_
really were. (26) I have given a few examples in Norman Conquest, i. Endless
examples will be found in Kembles Codex Diplomaticus. (27) See the complaints on this head as late as the time of William
the Third, in Macaulay, iv. On the Acts by which the power of the
Crown in this matter is restrained, see Stephens Commentaries, ii. See also Mays Constitutional History, i. (29) This is discussed in full by Allen, Royal Prerogative, 143-145. The great example is the will of King lfred. 249; Allen, 154-155, who remarks: By a singular
revolution of policy there was a recurrence in the late reign to the
ancient policy of the Anglo-Saxons. The crown lands were virtually
restored to the public, while the King obtained the right of acquiring
landed property by purchase, and of bequeathing it by will like a
private person.

(31) Edward the First was the earliest King whose reign is dated from
a time earlier than his coronation. He was out of the kingdom at his
fathers death, and his right was acknowledged without opposition. But
even in this case there was an interregnum. The regnal years of Edward
the First are not reckoned from the day of his fathers death, but
from the day of his funeral, when Edward was acknowledged King, and
when the prelates and nobles swore allegiance to him. See the account
in the Worcester Annals, Annales Monastici, iv. 462, and the documents
in Rymer, i. part ii. See also the remarks of Allen, 46, 47. The
doctrine that there can be no interregnum seems to have been put into
shape to please James the First, and it was of course altogether upset
by the great vote of 1688. Now of course there is no interregnum; not
indeed from any mysterious prerogative of the Crown, but simply because
the Act of Settlement has entailed the Crown in a particular way. (32) On this see Norman Conquest, i. See the same
question discussed in quite another part of the world in Herodotus,
vii. (33) The helpless way in which Blackstone himself wrote was perhaps
pardonable in the dark times in which he lived. But it is really too
bad when lawyer after lawyer, in successive editions, gives again to
the world the astounding rubbish which in Blackstones day passed
for early constitutional history. In Kerrs edition of Blackstone,
published in 1857, vol. 180, I find repeated, without alteration
or comment, the monstrous assertion of Blackstone: I believe there
is no instance wherein the Crown of England has ever been asserted to
be elective, except by the regicides at the infamous and unparalleled
trial of King Charles I. And in Serjeant Stephens Commentaries
(1853), which are not a mere edition of Blackstone, but New
Commentaries partly founded on Blackstone, the same words are found
in vol. 403, only leaving out the epithet unparalleled, which
might with truth have been allowed to stay. 481-2) we read how after the Saxon government was firmly established
in this island came the subdivision of the kingdom into a heptarchy,
consisting of seven independent kingdoms, peopled and governed by
different clans and colonies. It seems then that in 1857 there
were learned gentlemen who believed in a kingdom subdivided into a
heptarchy. But when, in the next page, Blackstone tells us how lfred
set about to new-model the constitution, to rebuild it on a plan that
should endure for ages, and goes on in the usual style to attribute
everything whatever to lfred personally, this seems to have been too
much, and the editor gives an extract from Kemble by way of correction. One wonders that, if he had read Kemble at all, he had not learned a
little more from him. It is amusing again when Blackstone tells us (i. 186, Kerr), From Egbert to the death of Edmund Ironside, a period
of above two hundred years, the Crown descended regularly through a
succession of fifteen princes, without any deviation or interruption:
save onlyall the cases where it did not descend regularly, according
to Blackstones notions of regularity: But it is almost more amusing
when Serjeant Stephen (ii. 410) throws Blackstones exceptions, which
are at least historical facts, into a note, and gives us instead as
his own exceptions, the statement, very doubtful and, if true, utterly
irrelevant, that thelstan and Eadmund Ironside were illegitimate (see
Norman Conquest, i. We of course get the usual talk about the
usurpations of Harold, Stephen, John, and Henry the Fourth, and about
the rights of Eadgar and Arthur of Britanny. For the former we get a
quotation from Matthew Paris, to whom it would have been more to the
purpose to go for the great speech of Archbishop Hubert. The comments
on the succession of John (i. 189, Kerr) are singularly amusing, but
too long to quote. To prove the strictly hereditary
nature of the succession, Blackstone (i. 189, Kerr) quotes the Statute
of 25 Edward III. that the law of the Crown of England is, and always
hath been, that the children of the King of England, whether born in
England or elsewhere, ought to bear the inheritance after the death of
their ancestors. We are bound to suppose that these learned lawyers
had read through the statute which they quoted; but it is wonderful
that they did not see that it had nothing whatever to do with fixing
the hereditary succession of the Crown. The original text (Revised
Statutes, i. 176) runs thus:

La lei de la Corone Dengleterre est, et ad este touz jours tiele,
que les enfantz des Rois Dengleterre, _queu part qils soient neez en
Engleterre ou aillors_, sont ables et deivent porter heritage, apres la
mort lour auncestors.

The object of the statute is something quite different from what any
one would think from Blackstones way of quoting it. The emphatic words
are those which are put in italics. The object of the statute is to
make the Kings children and others born of English parents beyond sea
capable of inheriting in England. As far as the succession to the Crown
is concerned, its effect is simply to put a child of the King born out
of the realm on a level with his brother born in the realm; that is,
in the view of our older Law, to give both alike the preference due to
an theling. (34) It is as well to explain this, because most people seem to think
that a man becomes a Bishop by virtue of receiving a private letter
from the First Lord of the Treasury. We constantly see a man spoken of
as Bishop of such a see, and his works advertised as such, before a
single ecclesiastical or legal step has been taken to make him so. (36) The succession of a grandson, which first took place in England in
the case of Richard the Second, marks a distinct stage in the growth
of the doctrine of hereditary right. It involves the doctrine of
representation, which is a very subtle and technical one, and is not
nearly so obvious or so likely to occur in an early state of society
as the doctrine of nearness of kin. No opposition was made to the
accession of Richard the Second, but there seems to have been a strong
notion in mens minds that John of Gaunt sought to displace his nephew. In earlier times, as the eldest and most eminent of the surviving sons
of Edward the Third, John would probably have been elected without any
thought of the claims of young Richard. (37) In Yorkist official language the three Lancastrian Kings were
usurpers, and Duke Richard was _de jure_, though not _de facto_, King. Henry the Sixth is, in the Act of 1461, Henry Usurpour, late called
Kyng Henry the sixt. The claim of the House of York was through an
intricate female descent from Lionel Duke of Clarence, a son of Edward
the Third older than John of Gaunt. A claim so purely technical had
never been set forth before; but we may be quite sure that it would not
have been thought to have much weight, if Duke Richard had not been, by
another branch, descended from Edward the Third in the male line, and
if he had not moreover been the ablest and most popular nobleman in the
country. (38) A prospective election before the vacancy of course hindered
any interregnum. In this case the formula Le Roi est mort; vive le
Roi, was perfectly true. The new King was already chosen and crowned,
and he had nothing to do but to go on reigning singly instead of in
partnership with his father, just as William went on reigning alone
after the death of Mary. In Germany this took place whenever a King
of the Romans was chosen in the lifetime of the reigning Emperor. In
France, under the early Kings of the Parisian dynasty, the practice
was specially common, and the fact that there seldom or never was an
interregnum doubtless helped much to make the French Crown become, as
it did, the most strictly hereditary crown in Christendom. In England,
the only distinct case of a coronation of a son during the lifetime of
his father was that of Henry, the son of Henry the Second, known as the
younger King, and sometimes as Henry the Third. In earlier times we get
something like it in the settlement of the Crown by thelwulf, with the
consent of his Witan (see Old-English History, 105, 106), but it does
not seem clear whether there was in this case any actual coronation
during the fathers lifetime. If there was not, this would be the case
most like that of Duke Richard. The compromise placed the Duke in the
same position as if he had been Prince of Wales, or rather in a better
position, for it might be held to shut out the need of even a formal
election on the Kings death. (39) See note 59 on Chapter II. (41) See Hallams Constitutional History, i. It is to be noticed
that the settlement enacts that the inheritance of the Crown, &c.,
should remain in Henry the Seventh and the heirs of his body for ever,
and in none other. This would seem to bar a great number of contingent
claims in various descendants of earlier Kings. As it happens, this Act
has been literally carried out, for every later Sovereign of England
has been a descendant of the body of Henry the Seventh. (42) The will of Henry the Eighth is fully discussed by Hallam, i. 34,
288, 294; Lingard, vi. There are two Acts of Henrys reign bearing
on the matter. 7, the Crown is
entailed on the Kings sons by Jane Seymour or any other wife; then
on the Kings legitimate daughters, no names being mentioned; the Act
then goes on to say, your Highnes shall have full and plenar power
and auctorite to geve despose appoynte assigne declare and lymytt by
your letters patentes under your great seale or ells by your laste Will
made in wrytynge and signed with your moste gracious hande, at your
onely pleasure from tyme to tyme herafter, the imperiall Crowne of this
Realme and all other the premisses thereunto belongyng, to be remayne
succede and come after your decease and for lack of lawfull heires of
your body to be procreated and begoten as is afore lymytted by this
Acte, to such person or persones in possession and remaynder as shall
please your Highnes and according to such estate and after such maner
forme facion ordre and condicion as shalbe expressed declared named and
lymytted in your said letters patentes or by your said laste will.
The later Act, 35 Henry VIII. 1, puts Henrys two daughters, Mary
and Elizabeth, into the entail, but in a very remarkable way. The Acts
declaring their illegitimacy are not repealed, nor is the legitimacy of
either of them in any way asserted; in fact it is rather denied when
the preamble rehearses that The kings Majesty hath only issue of his
body lawfully begotten betwixt his Highness and his said late wife
Queen Jane the noble and excellent Prince Edward. The Act then goes
on to enact that, although the King had been enabled to dispose the
Crown to any person or persons of such estate therein as should please
his Highness to limit and appoint, yet that, in failure of heirs of
the body of either the King or his son, the said imperial Crown and
all other the premises shall be to the Lady Mary the Kings Highness
daughter, and to the heirs of the body of the same Lady Mary lawfully
begotten, with such conditions as by his Highness shall be limited by
his letters patents under his great seal, or by his Majestys last will
in writing signed with his gracious hand. Failing Mary and her issue,
the same conditional entail is extended to Elizabeth and her issue. The
power of creating a remainder after the issue of Elizabeth of course
remained with Henry, and he exercised it in favour of the issue of his
younger sister Mary. Mary and Elizabeth therefore really reigned, not
by virtue of any royal descent, but by virtue of a particular entail by
which the Crown was settled on the Kings illegitimate daughters, as it
might have been settled on a perfect stranger. It was an attempt on the
part of Edward the Sixth to do without parliamentary authority what his
father had done by parliamentary authority which led to the momentary
occupation of the throne by Lady Jane Grey. Mary, on her accession,
raked up the whole story of her mothers marriage and divorce, and the
Act of the first year of her reign recognized her as inheriting by
legitimate succession. The Act passed on the accession of Elizabeth,
1 Eliz. It enacts that your majestie our sayd
Sovereigne Ladye ys and in verye dede and of most meere right ought
to bee by the Lawes of God and the Lawes and Statutes of this Realme
our most rightfull and lawfull Sovereigne liege Ladie and Quene; and
that your Highness ys rightlye lynyallye and lawfully discended and
come of the bloodd royall of this Realme of Englande in and to whose
princely person and theires of your bodye lawfully to bee begotten
after youe without all doubte ambiguitee scruple or question the
imperiall and Royall estate place crowne and dignitie of this Reallme
withe all honnours stiles titles dignities Regalities Jurisdiccons and
preheminences to the same nowe belonging & apperteyning arre & shalbee
most fully rightfully really & entierly invested & incorporated united
& annexed as rightfully & lawfully to all intentes construccons &
purposes as the same were in the said late Henrye theight or in the
late King Edwarde the Syxte your Highnes Brother, or in the late Quen
Marye your Highnes syster at anye tyme since thacte of parliament made
in the xxxvth yere of the reigne of your said most noble father king
Henrye theight.

It should be remembered that Sir Thomas More, though he refused to
swear to the preamble of the oath prescribed by the Act of Supremacy,
was ready to swear to the order of succession which entailed the Crown
on the issue of Anne Boleyn. On his principles the issue of Anne Boleyn
would be illegitimate; but he also held that Parliament could settle
the Crown upon anybody, on an illegitimate child of the King or on an
utter stranger; to the succession therefore he had no objection to
swear. For a parallel to the extraordinary power thus granted to Henry we have
to go back to the days of thelwulf. (43) The position of the daughters of Henry the Eighth was of course
practically affected by the fact that each was the child of a mother
who was acknowledged as a lawful wife at the time of her daughters
birth. There was manifest harshness in ranking children so born with
ordinary illegitimate children; but, in strictness of Law, as Henry
married Anne Boleyn while Katharine of Aragon was alive, the daughter
of Katharine and the daughter of Anne could not both be legitimate. It should also be
remembered that the marriage of Anne Boleyn was declared void, and her
daughter declared illegitimate, on groundswhatever they werewhich had
nothing to do with the earlier question of the marriage and divorce of
Katharine. 1, declares it to be treason yf any person shall in any wyse holde
and affyrme or mayntayne that the Common Lawes of this Realme not
altred by Parlyament, ought not to dyrecte the Ryght of the crowne
of England, or that our said sovrayne Ladye Elizabeth the Quenes
Majestie that nowe is, with and by the aucthoritye of the Parlyament
of Englande is not able to make Lawes and Statutes of suffycyent force
and valyditie to lymit and bynd the Crowne of this Realme, and the
Descent Lymitacion Inheritaunce and Government thereof. The like is
the crime of whosoever shall hereafter duryng the Lyef of our said
Soveraigne Ladye, by any Booke or Worke prynted or written, dyrectly
and expresly declare and affyrme at any tyme before the same be by Acte
of Parlyament of this Realme established and affyrmed, that any one
particular person whosover it be, is or ought to be the ryght Heire
and Successor to the Queenes Majestie that nowe is (whome God longe
preserve) except the same be the naturall yssue of her Majesties bodye.

This statute may possibly be taken as setting aside the claims of the
House of Suffolk; but, if so, it sets aside the claims of the House of
Stewart along with them. (45) Jamess right was acknowledged by his own first Parliament, just
as the claims of other Kings who entered in an irregular way had
been. It should be marked however that he was crowned before he was
acknowledged. 1, declares that immediatelie upon
the Dissolution and Decease of Elizabeth late Queene of England, the
Imperiall Crowne of the Realme of England, and of all the Kingdomes
Dominions and Rights belonging to the same, did by inherent Birthright
and lawfull undoubted Succession, descend and come to your moste
excellent Majestie, as beinge lineallie justly and lawfullie next and
sole Heire of the Blood Royall of this Realme as is aforesaid. It is
worth noticing that in this Act we get the following definition of
Parliament; this high Court of Parliament, where all the whole Body of
the Realm and every particular member thereof, either in Person or by
Representation (upon their own free elections), are by the Laws of this
Realm deemed to be personally present.

(46) The fact that James the First, a King who came in with no title
whatever but what was given him by an Act of Parliament passed after
his coronation, was acknowledged without the faintest opposition is
one of the most remarkable things in our history. 294)
remarks that there is much reason to believe that the consciousness of
this defect in his parliamentary title put James on magnifying, still
more than from his natural temper he was prone to do, the inherent
rights of primogenitory succession, as something indefeasible by the
legislature; a doctrine which, however it might suit the schools of
divinity, was in diametrical opposition to our statutes. Certainly no
opposition can be more strongly marked than that between the language
of Jamess own Parliament and the words quoted above from 13 Eliz. But see the remarks of Hallam a few pages before (i. 288) on the
kind of tacit election by which it might be said that James reigned. What renders it absurd to call him and his children usurpers? He had
that which the flatterers of his family most affected to disdainthe
will of the people; not certainly expressed in regular suffrage or
declared election, but unanimously and voluntarily ratifying that which
in itself could surely give no right, the determination of the late
Queens Council to proclaim his accession to the throne.

(47) Whitelockes Memorials, 367. The heads of the charge against the
King were published by leave, in this form: That Charles Stuart, being
admitted King of England, & therein trusted with a limited power, to
govern by, & according to the Laws of the Land, & not otherwise, &
by his trust being obliged, as also by his Oath, & office to use the
power committed to him, for the good & benefit of the people, & for the
preservation of their Rights and Privileges, etc. At an earlier stage (365) the President had told the King that the
Court sat here by the Authority of the Commons of England: & all your
predecessours, & you are responsible to them. The King answered I
deny that, shew me one Precedent. The President, instead of quoting
the precedents which were at least plausible, told the prisoner that
he was not to interrupt the Court. Earlier still the King had objected
to the authority of the Court that he saw no Lords there which should
make a Parliament, including the King, & urged that the Kingdom
of England was hereditary, & not successive. The strong point of
Charless argument undoubtedly was the want of concurrence on the part
of the Lords. Both Houses of Parliament had agreed in the proceedings
against Edward the Second and Richard the Second. It is a small point, but it is well to notice that the description of
the King as Charles Stewart was perfectly accurate. Charles, the son
of James, the son of Henry Stewart Lord Darnley, really had a surname,
though it might not be according to Court etiquette to call him by
it. The helpless French imitators in 1793 summoned their King by the
name of Louis Capet, as if Charles had been summoned by the name of
Unready, Bastard, Lackland, Longshanks, or any other nickname
of an earlier King and forefather. I believe that many people fancy that Guelph or Welf is a surname of
the present, or rather late, royal family. (48) The Act 1 William and Mary (Revised Statutes, ii. 11) entailed the
Crown after their deceases, to the heires of the body of the said
princesse & for default of such issue to the Princesse Anne of Denmarke
& the heires of her body & for default of such issue to the heires of
the body of the said Prince of Orange. It was only after the death of
the most hopeful Prince William Duke of Gloucester that the Crown
was settled (12 and 13 Will. 94) on
the most excellent Princess Sophia Electress and Dutchess Dowager of
Hannover, daughter of the most excellent Princess Elizabeth, late Queen
of Bohemia, daughter of our late sovereign lord King James the First of
happy memory, and the heirs of her body being protestants.

(49) We hardly need assurance of the fact, but if it were needed,
something like an assurance to that effect was given by an official
member of the House during the session of 1872. At all events we
read in Sir T. E. May (ii. 83); The increased power of the House
of Commons, under an improved representation, has been patent and
indisputable. Responsible to the people, it has, at the same time,
wielded the peoples strength. No longer subservient to the crown, the
ministers, and the peerage, it has become the predominant authority
in the state. But the following strange remark follows: But it is
characteristic of the British constitution, and _a proof of its
freedom from the spirit of democracy_, that the more dominant the power
of the House of Commons,the greater has been its respect for the law,
and the more carefully have its acts been restrained within the proper
limits of its own jurisdiction.

   ,  ' ;

Has Mr. Grote lived and written so utterly in vain that a writer widely
indeed removed from the vulgar herd of oligarchic babblers looks on
the spirit of democracy as something inconsistent with respect for
the law? (50) The story is told (Plutarch, Lycurgus, 7), that King Theopompos,
having submitted to the lessening of the kingly power by that of the
Ephors, was rebuked by his wife, because the power which he handed on
to those who came after him would be less than what he had received
from those who went before him.       
       , 
,   , ,      
       . 11) tells the story to the same effect, bringing it in with
the comment,      ,   
          
   ,      .           ,
            
,          
         
 ,        
. The kingdom of the Molossians, referred to in the extract from
Aristotle, is one of those states of antiquity of which we should
be well pleased to hear more. Like the Macedonian kingdom, it was an
instance of the heroic kingship surviving into the historical ages of
Greece. But the Molossian kingship seems to have been more regular and
popular than that of Macedonia, and to have better deserved the name
of a constitutional monarchy. The Molossian people and the Molossian
King exchanged oaths not unlike those of the Landesgemeinde and the
Landammann of Appenzell-Ausserrhoden, the King swearing to rule
according to the laws, and the people swearing to maintain the kingdom
according to the laws. In the end the kingdom changed into a Federal
Republic. (51) It is simply frivolous in the present state of England to discuss
the comparative merits of commonwealths and constitutional monarchies
with any practical object. Constitutional monarchy is not only firmly
fixed in the hearts of the people, but it has some distinct advantages
over republican forms of government, just as republican forms of
government have some advantages over it. It may be doubted whether
the people have not a more real control over the Executive, when the
House of Commons, or, in the last resort, the people itself in the
polling-booths (as in 1868), can displace a Government at any moment,
than they have in constitutions in which an Executive, however much
it may have disappointed the hopes of those who chose it, cannot be
removed before the end of its term of office, except on the legal
proof of some definite crime. But in itself, there really seems no
reason why the form of the Executive Government should not be held
to be as lawful a subject for discussion as the House of Lords, the
Established Church, the standing army, or anything else. It shows
simple ignorance, if it does not show something worse, when the word
republican is used as synonymous with cut-throat or pickpocket. I do
not find that in republican countries this kind of language is applied
to the admirers of monarchy; but the people who talk in this way are
just those who have no knowledge of republics either in past history or
in present times. They may very likely have climbed a Swiss mountain,
but they have taken care not to ask what was the constitution of the
country at its foot. They may even have learned to write Greek iambics
and to discuss Greek particles; but they have learned nothing from
the treasures of wisdom taught by Grecian history from Herodotus to
Polybios. I have discussed the three chief forms of executive government, the
constitutional King and his Ministry, the President, and the Executive
Council, in the last of my first series of Historical Essays. 250:

   '      
  ',      ' 
    ,    . LONDON: R. CLAY, SONS, AND TAYLOR, PRINTERS. 10_s._
  6_d._

  HISTORICAL ESSAYS. 10_s._ 6_d._

  THE UNITY OF HISTORY. The Rede Lecture delivered before the
  University of Cambridge, May 24th, 1872. 2_s._

  HISTORY OF THE CATHEDRAL CHURCH OF WELLS: as illustrating the
  History of the Cathedral Churches of the Old Foundation. 3_s._ 6_d._

  HISTORY OF FEDERAL GOVERNMENT, from the Foundation of the
  Achaian league to the Disruption of the United States. 21_s._

  GENERAL SKETCH OF EUROPEAN HISTORY. 3_s._ 6_d._ Being
  Volume I. of A Historical Course for Schools; edited by E. A.
  FREEMAN. MACMILLAN AND CO., LONDON. MACMILLAN AND CO.S PUBLICATIONS. By JAMES BRYCE, D.C.L., Regius Professor
  of Civil Law at Oxford. 7_s._ 6_d._

  THE ROMAN AND THE TEUTON. A Series of Lectures delivered before
  the University of Cambridge, by CANON KINGSLEY. 12_s._

  ON THE ANCIEN RGIME as it existed on the Continent before the
  French Revolution. 6_s._

  GUSTAVUS ADOLPHUS: and other Lectures on the Thirty Years War. By R. CHENEVIX TRENCH, D.D., Archbishop of Dublin. 4_s._

  EXPERIENCES OF A DIPLOMATIST. Being Recollections of Germany,
  founded on Diaries kept during the years 1840-1870. By JOHN
  WARD, C.B., late H.M. Minister-Resident to the Hanse Towns. 10_s._ 6_d._

  THE SOUTHERN STATES SINCE THE WAR. 9_s._

  HISTORICAL GLEANINGS. A Series of Sketches by J. THOROLD ROGERS. I.Montagu, Walpole, Adam Smith, Cobbett. 4_s._6_d._ Vol. II.Wiklif, Laud, Wilkes, Horne Tooke. 6_s._


MACMILLAN AND CO., LONDON. we'll fight fur it
          till--' an' then we hearn a sort o' snap, an' he
          fell forred--dead! "We buried him that night, I an' my mates. I cut
          off a lock o' his hair fur his poor mother, afore
          we put the airth over him; an' giv it to her, wi'
          poor Bill's money, faithful an' true, wen we kim
          home. I've lived to be an old man since then, an'
          see the Major go afore me, as I hoped to sarve
          till my dyin' day; but Lord willing I shel go
          next, to win the Salwation as I've fitten for, by
          Bill's side, a sojer in Christ's army, in the
          Etarnal Jerusalem!" The boys took a long breath when Jerry had finished his story, and more
than one bright eye was filled with tears. The rough words, and plain,
unpolished manner of the old soldier, only heightened the impression
made by his story; and as he rose to go away, evidently much moved by
the painful recollections it excited, there was a hearty, "Thank you,
sergeant, for your story--it was real good!" Jerry only touched his cap
to the young soldiers, and marched off hastily, while the boys looked
after him in respectful silence. But young spirits soon recover from
gloomy influences, and in a few moments they were all chattering merrily
again. "What a pity we must go home Monday!" cried Louie; "I wish we could camp
out forever! Oh, Freddy, do write a letter to General McClellan, and ask
him to let us join the army right away! Tell him we'll buy some new
india-rubber back-bones and stretch ourselves out big directly, if he'll
only send right on for us!" "Perhaps he would, if he knew how jolly we can drill already!" "I tell you what, boys, the very thing! let's have a
review before we go home. I'll ask all the boys and girls I know to come
and look on, and we might have quite a grand entertainment. We can march about all over, and fire off the cannons and
everything! "Yes, but how's General McClellan to hear anything about it?" "Why--I don't know," said Peter, rather taken aback by this view of the
subject. "Well, somehow--never mind, it will be grand fun, and I mean
to ask my father right away." Finally it was
concluded that it might make more impression on Mr. Schermerhorn's mind,
if the application came from the regiment in a body; so, running for
their swords and guns, officers and men found their places in the
battalion, and the grand procession started on its way--chattering all
the time, in utter defiance of that "article of war" which forbids
"talking in the ranks." Just as they were passing the lake, they heard
carriage wheels crunching on the gravel, and drew up in a long line on
the other side of the road to let the vehicle pass them; much to the
astonishment of two pretty young ladies and a sweet little girl, about
Freddy's age, who were leaning comfortably back in the handsome
barouche. exclaimed one of the ladies, "what in the world is all
this?" cried Peter, running up to the carriage, "why, these are the
Dashahed Zouaves, Miss Carlton. Good morning, Miss Jessie," to the little girl on the front seat, who
was looking on with deep interest. "Oh, to be sure, I remember," said Miss Carlton, laughing; "come,
introduce the Zouaves, Peter; we are wild to know them!" The boys clustered eagerly about the carriage and a lively chat took
place. The Zouaves, some blushing and bashful, others frank and
confident, and all desperately in love already with pretty little
Jessie, related in high glee their adventures--except the celebrated
court martial--and enlarged glowingly upon the all-important subject of
the grand review. Colonel Freddy, of course, played a prominent part in all this, and with
his handsome face, bright eyes, and frank, gentlemanly ways, needed only
those poor lost curls to be a perfect picture of a soldier. He chattered
away with Miss Lucy, the second sister, and obtained her special promise
that she would plead their cause with Mr. Schermerhorn in case the
united petitions of the corps should fail. The young ladies did not know
of Mrs. Schermerhorn's departure, but Freddy and Peter together coaxed
them to come up to the house "anyhow." The carriage was accordingly
taken into the procession, and followed it meekly to the house; the
Zouaves insisting on being escort, much to the terror of the young
ladies; who were in constant apprehension that the rear rank and the
horses might come to kicks--not to say blows--and the embarrassment of
the coachman; who, as they were constantly stopping unexpectedly to turn
round and talk, didn't know "where to have them," as the saying is. However, they reached their destination in safety before long, and
found Mr. Schermerhorn seated on the piazza. He hastened forward to meet
them, with the cordial greeting of an old friend. "Well, old bachelor," said Miss Carlton, gayly, as the young ladies
ascended the steps, "you see we have come to visit you in state, with
the military escort befitting patriotic young ladies who have four
brothers on the Potomac. "Gone to Niagara and left me a 'lone lorn creetur;'" said Mr. "Basely deserted me when my farming couldn't be
left. But how am I to account for the presence of the military,
mademoiselle?" "Really, I beg their pardons," exclaimed Miss Carlton. "They have come
on a special deputation to you, Mr. Schermerhorn, so pray don't let us
interrupt business." Thus apostrophised, the boys scampered eagerly up the steps; and Freddy,
a little bashful, but looking as bright as a button, delivered the
following brief oration: "Mr. Schermerhorn: I want--that is, the boys
want--I mean we all want--to have a grand review on Saturday, and ask
our friends to look on. Schermerhorn,
smiling; "but what will become of you good people when I tell you that
I have just received a letter from Mrs. Schermerhorn, asking me to join
her this week instead of next, and bring Peter with me." interrupted Peter; "can't you tell ma
I've joined the army for the war? "No, the army
must give you up, and lose a valuable member, Master Peter; but just
have the goodness to listen a moment. The review shall take place, but
as the camp will have to break up on Saturday instead of Monday, as I
had intended, the performances must come off to-morrow. The boys gave a delighted consent to this arrangement, and now the only
thing which dampened their enjoyment was the prospect of such a speedy
end being put to their camp life. what was the fun for a
fellow to be poked into a stupid watering place, where he must bother to
keep his hair parted down the middle, and a clean collar stiff enough to
choke him on from morning till night?" as Tom indignantly remarked to
George and Will the same evening. "The fact is, this sort of thing is
_the_ thing for a _man_ after all!" an opinion in which the other _men_
fully concurred. But let us return to the piazza, where we have left the party. After a
few moments more spent in chatting with Mr. Schermerhorn, it was decided
to accept Colonel Freddy's polite invitation, which he gave with such a
bright little bow, to inspect the camp. You may be sure it was in
apple-pie order, for Jerry, who had taken the Zouaves under his special
charge, insisted on their keeping it in such a state of neatness as only
a soldier ever achieved. The party made an extremely picturesque
group--the gay uniforms of the Zouaves, and light summer dresses of the
ladies, charmingly relieved against the background of trees; while Mr. Schermerhorn's stately six feet, and somewhat portly proportions, quite
reminded one of General Scott; especially among such a small army; in
which George alone quite came up to the regulation "63 inches." Little Jessie ran hither and thither, surrounded by a crowd of adorers,
who would have given their brightest buttons, every "man" of them, to be
the most entertaining fellow of the corps. They showed her the battery
and the stacks of shining guns--made to stand up by Jerry in a wonderful
fashion that the boys never could hope to attain--the inside of all the
tents, and the smoke guard house (Tom couldn't help a blush as he looked
in); and finally, as a parting compliment (which, let me tell you, is
the greatest, in a boy's estimation, that can possibly be paid), Freddy
made her a present of his very largest and most gorgeous "glass agates;"
one of which was all the colors of the rainbow, and the other
patriotically adorned with the Stars and Stripes in enamel. Peter
climbed to the top of the tallest cherry tree, and brought her down a
bough at least a yard and a half long, crammed with "ox hearts;" Harry
eagerly offered to make any number of "stunning baskets" out of the
stones, and in short there never was such a belle seen before. "Oh, a'int she jolly!" was the ruling opinion among the Zouaves. A
private remark was also circulated to the effect that "Miss Jessie was
stunningly pretty." The young ladies at last said good-by to the camp; promising faithfully
to send all the visitors they could to the grand review, and drove off
highly entertained with their visit. Schermerhorn decided to take
the afternoon boat for the city and return early Friday morning, and the
boys, left to themselves, began to think of dinner, as it was two
o'clock. A brisk discussion was kept up all dinner time you may be sure,
concerning the event to come off on the morrow. "I should like to know, for my part, what we do in a review," said
Jimmy, balancing his fork artistically on the end of his finger, and
looking solemnly round the table. "March about,
and form into ranks and columns, and all that first, then do charming
"parade rest," "'der humps!" and the rest of it; and finish off by
firing off our guns, and showing how we can't hit anything by any
possibility!" "But I'm sure father won't let us have any powder," said Peter
disconsolately. "You can't think how I burnt the end of my nose last
Fourth with powder! It was so sore I couldn't blow it for a week!" The boys all burst out laughing at this dreadful disaster, and George
said, "You weren't lighting it with the end of your nose, were you?" "No; but I was stooping over, charging one of my cannon, and I dropped
the 'punk' right in the muzzle somehow, and, would you believe it, the
nasty thing went off and burnt my nose! and father said I shouldn't play
with powder any more, because I might have put out my eyes." "Well, we must take it out in marching, then," said Freddy, with a
tremendous sigh. "No, hold on; I'll tell you what we can do!" "I have
some 'double headers' left from the Fourth; we might fire them out of
the cannon; they make noise enough, I'm sure. I'll write to my mother
this afternoon and get them." The boys couldn't help being struck with the generosity of this offer,
coming from Tom after their late rather unkind treatment of him; and the
older ones especially were very particular to thank him for his present. As soon as dinner was over, he started for the house to ask Mr. As he hurried along the road, his
bright black eyes sparkling with the happiness of doing a good action,
he heard trotting steps behind him, felt an arm stealing round his neck,
schoolboy fashion, and there was Freddy. "I ran after you all the way," he pantingly said. "I want to tell you,
dear Tom, how much we are obliged to you for giving us your crackers,
and how sorry we are that we acted so rudely to you the other day. Please forgive us; we all like you so much, and we would feel as mean as
anything to take your present without begging pardon. George, Peter, and
I feel truly ashamed of ourselves every time we think of that abominable
court martial." "There, old fellow, don't say a word more about it!" was the hearty
response; and Tom threw his arm affectionately about his companion. "It
was my fault, Freddy, and all because I was mad at poor old Jerry; how
silly! I was sorry for what I said right afterward." "Yes; I'll like you as long as I live! And so
we will leave the two on their walk to the house, and close this
abominably long chapter. THERE are really scarcely words enough in the dictionary properly to
describe the immense amount of drill got through with by the Dashahed
Zouaves between three o'clock that afternoon and twelve, noon, of the
following day. This Friday afternoon was going to be memorable in
history for one of the most splendid reviews on record. They almost ran
poor old Jerry off his legs in their eagerness to go over every possible
variety of exercise known to "Hardee's Tactics," and nearly dislocated
their shoulder blades trying to waggle their elbows backward and forward
all at once when they went at "double quick;" at the same time keeping
the other arm immovably pinioned to their sides. Then that wonderful
operation of stacking the rebellious guns, which obstinately clattered
down nine times and a half out of ten, had to be gone through with, and
a special understanding promulgated in the corps as to when Jerry's
"'der arms!" meant "shoulder arms," and when "order arms" (or bringing
all the muskets down together with a bang); and, in short, there never
was such a busy time seen in camp before. Friday morning dawned, if possible, still more splendidly than any of
the preceding days, with a cool, refreshing breeze, just enough snowy
clouds in the sky to keep off the fiery summer heat in a measure, and
not a headache nor a heartache among the Zouaves to mar the pleasure of
the day. The review was to come off at four o'clock, when the July sun
would be somewhat diminished in warmth, and from some hints that Jerry
let fall, Mrs. Lockitt, and the fat cook, Mrs. Mincemeat, were holding
high council up at the house, over a certain collation to be partaken of
at the end of the entertainments. As the day wore on the excitement of our friends the Zouaves increased. They could hardly either eat their dinners, or sit down for more than a
moment at a time; and when, about three o'clock, Mr. Schermerhorn
entered the busy little camp, he was surrounded directly with a crowd of
eager questioners, all talking at once, and making as much noise as a
colony of rooks. "Patience, patience, my good friends!" Schermerhorn, holding
up a finger for silence. Tom, here are your 'double
headers,' with love from your mother. Fred, I saw your father to-day,
and they are all coming down to the review. George, here is a note left
for you in my box at the Post Office, and Dashahed Zouaves in
general--I have one piece of advice to give you. Get dressed quietly,
and then sit down and rest yourselves. You will be tired out by the end
of the afternoon, at all events; so don't frisk about more than you can
help at present;" and Mr. Schermerhorn left the camp; while the boys,
under strong pressure of Jerry, and the distant notes of a band which
suddenly began to make itself heard, dressed themselves as nicely as
they could, and sat down with heroic determination to wait for four
o'clock. Presently, carriages began to crunch over the gravel road one after
another, filled with merry children, and not a few grown people besides. Jourdain, with Bella, were among the first to arrive; and
soon after the Carltons' barouche drove up. Jessie, for some unknown
reason, was full of half nervous glee, and broke into innumerable little
trilling laughs when any one spoke to her. A sheet of lilac note paper,
folded up tight, which she held in her hand, seemed to have something to
do with it, and her soft brown curls and spreading muslin skirts were in
equal danger of irremediable "mussing," as she fidgetted about on the
carriage seat, fully as restless as any of the Zouaves. Schermerhorn received his guests on the piazza, where all the chairs
in the house, one would think, were placed for the company, as the best
view of the lawn was from this point. To the extreme right were the
white tents of the camp, half hidden by the immense trunk of a
magnificent elm, the only tree that broke the smooth expanse of the
lawn. On the left a thick hawthorne hedge separated the ornamental
grounds from the cultivated fields of the place, while in front the view
was bounded by the blue and sparkling waters of the Sound. Soon four o'clock struck; and, punctual to the moment, the Zouaves could
be seen in the distance, forming their ranks. Jerry, in his newest suit
of regimentals, bustled about here and there, and presently his voice
was heard shouting, "Are ye all ready now? and to
the melodious notes of "Dixie," performed by the band, which was
stationed nearer the house, the regiment started up the lawn! Jerry
marching up beside them, and occasionally uttering such mysterious
mandates as, "Easy in the centre! Oh, what a burst of delighted applause greeted them as they neared the
house! The boys hurrahed, the girls clapped their hands, ladies and
gentlemen waved their hats and handkerchiefs; while the Dashahed
Zouaves, too soldierly _now_ to grin, drew up in a long line, and stood
like statues, without so much as winking. And now the music died away, and everybody was as still as a mouse,
while Jerry advanced to the front, and issued the preliminary order:

"To the rear--open order!" and the rear rank straightway fell back;
executing, in fact, that wonderful "tekkinapesstoth'rare" which had
puzzled them so much on the first day of their drilling. Then came those
other wonderful orders:

          "P'_sent_ humps! And so on, at which the muskets flew backward and forward, up and down,
with such wonderful precision. The spectators were delighted beyond
measure; an enthusiastic young gentleman, with about three hairs on
each side of his mustache, who belonged to the Twenty-second Regiment,
declared "It was the best drill he had seen out of his company room!" a
celebrated artist, whose name I dare not tell for the world, sharpened
his pencil, and broke the point off three times in his hurry, and at
last produced the beautiful sketch which appears at the front of this
volume; while all the little boys who were looking on, felt as if they
would give every one of their new boots and glass agates to belong to
the gallant Dashahed Zouaves. [Illustration: "DOUBLE-QUICK."] After the guns had been put in every possible variety of position, the
regiment went through their marching. They broke into companies,
formed the line again, divided in two equal parts, called "breaking into
platoons," showed how to "wheel on the right flank," and all manner of
other mysteries. Finally, they returned to their companies, and on Jerry's giving the
order, they started at "double quick" (which is the most comical
tritty-trot movement you can think of), dashed down the <DW72> of the
lawn, round the great elm, up hill again full speed, and in a moment
more were drawn up in unbroken lines before the house, and standing once
again like so many statues. Round after round of applause greeted the
Zouaves, who kept their positions for a moment, then snatching off
their saucy little fez caps, they gave the company three cheers in
return, of the most tremendous description; which quite took away the
little remaining breath they had after the "double quick." Thus ended the first part of the review; and now, with the assistance of
their rather Lilliputian battery, and Tom's double headers, they went
through some firing quite loud enough to make the little girls start and
jump uncomfortably; so this part of the entertainment was brought to
rather a sudden conclusion. Jerry had just issued the order, "Close up
in ranks to dismiss," when Mr. Schermerhorn, who, with Miss Carlton and
Jessie, had left the piazza a few minutes before, came forward, saying,
"Have the goodness to wait a moment, Colonel; there is one more ceremony
to go through with." The boys looked at each other in silent curiosity, wondering what could
be coming; when, all at once, the chairs on the piazza huddled back in a
great hurry, to make a lane for a beautiful little figure, which came
tripping from the open door. It was Jessie; but a great change had been made in her appearance. Over
her snowy muslin skirts she had a short classic tunic of red, white, and
blue silk; a wreath of red and white roses and bright blue jonquils
encircled her curls, and in her hand she carried a superb banner. It
was made of dark blue silk, trimmed with gold fringe; on one side was
painted an American eagle, and on the other the words "Dashahed
Zouaves," surrounded with a blaze of glory and gold stars. She advanced
to the edge of the piazza, and in a clear, sweet voice, a little
tremulous, but very distinct, she said:

          "COLONEL AND BRAVE SOLDIERS:

          "I congratulate you, in the name of our friends,
          on the success you have achieved. You have shown
          us to-day what Young America can do; and as a
          testimonial of our high admiration, I present you
          the colors of your regiment! "Take them, as the assurance that our hearts are
          with you; bear them as the symbol of the Cause you
          have enlisted under; and should you fall beneath
          them on the field of battle, I bid you lay down
          your lives cheerfully for the flag of your
          country, and breathe with your last sigh the name
          of the Union! Freddy's cheeks grew crimson, and the great tears swelled to his eyes as
he advanced to take the flag which Jessie held toward him. And now our
little Colonel came out bright, sure enough. Perhaps not another member
of the regiment, called upon to make a speech in this way, could have
thought of a word to reply; but Freddy's quick wit supplied him with
the right ideas; and it was with a proud, happy face, and clear voice
that he responded:

          "LADIES AND GENTLEMEN:

          "I thank you, in the name of my regiment, for the
          honor you have done us. Inspired by your praises,
          proud to belong to the army of the Republic, we
          hope to go on as we have begun. To your kindness
          we owe the distinguishing colors under which we
          march hereafter; and by the Union for which we
          fight, they shall never float over a retreating
          battalion!" the cheers and clapping of hands which followed this little speech! Everybody was looking at Freddy as he stood there, the colors in his
hand, and the bright flush on his cheek, with the greatest admiration. Of course, his parents weren't proud of him; certainly not! But the wonders were not at an end yet; for suddenly the band began
playing a new air, and to this accompaniment, the sweet voice of some
lady unseen, but which sounded to those who knew, wonderfully like Miss
Lucy Carlton's, sang the following patriotic ballad:

          "We will stand by our Flag--let it lead where it will--
          Our hearts and our hopes fondly cling to it still;
          Through battle and danger our Cause must be won--
          Yet forward! still unsullied and bright,
          As when first its fair stars lit oppression's dark night
          And the standard that guides us forever shall be
          The Star-spangled Banner, the Flag of the Free! "A handful of living--an army of dead,
          The last charge been made and the last prayer been said;
          What is it--as sad we retreat from the plain
          That cheers us, and nerves us to rally again? to our country God-given,
          That gleams through our ranks like a glory from heaven! And the foe, as they fly, in our vanguard shall see
          The Star-spangled Banner, the Flag of the Free! "We will fight for the Flag, by the love that we bear
          In the Union and Freedom, we'll baffle despair;
          Trust on in our country, strike home for the right,
          And Treason shall vanish like mists of the night. every star in it glows,
          The terror of traitors! And the victory that crowns us shall glorified be,
          'Neath the Star-spangled Banner, the Flag of the Free!" As the song ended, there was another tumult of applause; and then the
band struck up a lively quickstep, and the company, with the Zouaves
marching ahead, poured out on the lawn toward the camp, where a
bountiful collation was awaiting them, spread on the regimental table. Two splendid pyramids of flowers ornamented the centre, and all manner
of "goodies," as the children call them, occupied every inch of space on
the sides. At the head of the table Jerry had contrived a canopy from a
large flag, and underneath this, Miss Jessie, Colonel Freddy, with the
other officers, and some favored young ladies of their own age, took
their seats. The other children found places around the table, and a
merrier fete champetre never was seen. The band continued to play lively
airs from time to time, and I really can give you my word as an author,
that nobody looked cross for a single minute! Between you and me, little reader, there had been a secret arrangement
among the grown folks interested in the regiment, to get all this up in
such fine style. Every one had contributed something to give the Zouaves
their flag and music, while to Mr. Schermerhorn it fell to supply the
supper; and arrangements had been made and invitations issued since the
beginning of the week. The regiment, certainly, had the credit, however,
of getting up the review, it only having been the idea of their good
friends to have the entertainment and flag presentation. So there was a
pleasant surprise on both sides; and each party in the transaction, was
quite as much astonished and delighted as the other could wish. The long sunset shadows were rapidly stealing over the velvet sward as
the company rose from table, adding a new charm to the beauty of the
scene. Everywhere the grass was dotted with groups of elegant ladies and
gentlemen, and merry children, in light summer dresses and quaintly
pretty uniforms. The little camp, with the stacks of guns down its
centre, the bayonets flashing in the last rays of the sun, was all
crowded and brilliant with happy people; looking into the tents and
admiring their exquisite order, inspecting the bright muskets, and
listening eagerly or good-humoredly, as they happened to be children or
grown people, to the explanations and comments of the Zouaves. And on the little grassy knoll, where the flag staff was planted,
central figure of the scene, stood Colonel Freddy, silent and thoughtful
for the first time to-day, with Jerry beside him. The old man had
scarcely left his side since the boy took the flag; he would permit no
one else to wait upon him at table, and his eyes followed him as he
moved among the gay crowd, with a glance of the utmost pride and
affection. The old volunteer seemed to feel that the heart of a soldier
beat beneath the little dandy ruffled shirt and gold-laced jacket of the
young Colonel. Suddenly, the boy snatches up again the regimental
colors; the Stars and Stripes, and little Jessie's flag, and shakes
them out to the evening breeze; and as they flash into view and once
more the cheers of the Zouaves greet their colors, he says, with
quivering lip and flashing eye, "Jerry, if God spares me to be a man,
I'll live and die a soldier!" The soft evening light was deepening into night, and the beautiful
planet Venus rising in the west, when the visitors bade adieu to the
camp; the Zouaves were shaken hands with until their wrists fairly
ached; and then they all shook hands with "dear" Jessie, as Charley was
heard to call her before the end of the day, and heard her say in her
soft little voice how sorry she was they must go to-morrow (though she
certainly couldn't have been sorrier than _they_ were), and then the
good people all got into their carriages again, and drove off; waving
their handkerchiefs for good-by as long as the camp could be seen; and
so, with the sound of the last wheels dying away in the distance, ended
the very end of

                                THE GRAND REVIEW. AND now, at last, had come that "day of disaster," when Camp McClellan
must be deserted. The very sun didn't shine so brilliantly as usual,
thought the Zouaves; and it was positively certain that the past five
days, although they had occurred in the middle of summer, were the very
shortest ever known! Eleven o'clock was the hour appointed for the
breaking up of the camp, in order that they might return to the city by
the early afternoon boat. "Is it possible we have been here a week?" exclaimed Jimmy, as he sat
down to breakfast. "It seems as if we had only come yesterday." "What a jolly time it has been!" "I don't want
to go to Newport a bit. "To Baltimore--but I don't mean to Secesh!" added Tom, with a little
blush. "I have a cousin in the Palmetto Guards at Charleston, and that's
one too many rebels in the family." cried George Chadwick; "the Pringles are a first rate
family; the rest of you are loyal enough, I'm sure!" and George gave
Tom such a slap on the back, in token of his good will, that it quite
brought the tears into his eyes. When breakfast was over, the Zouaves repaired to their tents, and
proceeded to pack their clothes away out of the lockers. They were not
very scientific packers, and, in fact, the usual mode of doing the
business was to ram everything higgledy-piggledy into their valises, and
then jump on them until they consented to come together and be locked. Presently Jerry came trotting down with a donkey cart used on the farm,
and under his directions the boys folded their blankets neatly up, and
placed them in the vehicle, which then drove off with its load, leaving
them to get out and pile together the other furnishings of the tents;
for, of course, as soldiers, they were expected to wind up their own
affairs, and we all know that boys will do considerable _hard work_ when
it comes in the form of _play_. Just as the cart, with its vicious
little wrong-headed steed, had tugged, and jerked, and worried itself
out of sight, a light basket carriage, drawn by two dashing black
Canadian ponies, drew up opposite the camp, and the reins were let fall
by a young lady in a saucy "pork pie" straw hat, who was driving--no
other than Miss Carlton, with Jessie beside her. The boys eagerly
surrounded the little carriage, and Miss Carlton said, laughing, "Jessie
begged so hard for a last look at the camp, that I had to bring her. "Really," repeated Freddy; "but I am so glad you came, Miss Jessie, just
in time to see us off." "You know soldiers take themselves away houses and all," said George;
"you will see the tents come down with a run presently." As he spoke, the donkey
cart rattled up, and Jerry, touching his cap to the ladies, got out, and
prepared to superintend the downfall of the tents. By his directions,
two of the Zouaves went to each tent, and pulled the stakes first from
one corner, then the other; then they grasped firmly the pole which
supported the centre, and when the sergeant ejaculated "Now!" the tents slid smoothly to the ground all at the same moment,
just as you may have made a row of blocks fall down by upsetting the
first one. And now came the last ceremony, the hauling down of the flag. shouted Jerry, and instantly a company was
detached, who brought the six little cannon under the flagstaff, and
charged them with the last of the double headers, saved for this
purpose; Freddy stood close to the flagstaff, with the halyards ready in
his hands. and the folds of the flag stream out proudly in the breeze, as it
rapidly descends the halyards, and flutters softly to the greensward. There was perfectly dead silence for a moment; then the voice of Mr. Schermerhorn was heard calling, "Come, boys, are you ready? Jump in,
then, it is time to start for the boat." The boys turned and saw the
carriages which had brought them so merrily to the camp waiting to
convey them once more to the wharf; while a man belonging to the farm
was rapidly piling the regimental luggage into a wagon. With sorrowful faces the Zouaves clustered around the pretty pony
chaise; shaking hands once more with Jessie, and internally vowing to
adore her as long as they lived. Then they got into the carriages, and
old Jerry grasped Freddy's hand with an affectionate "Good-by, my little
Colonel, God bless ye! Old Jerry won't never forget your noble face as
long as he lives." It would have seemed like insulting the old man to
offer him money in return for his loving admiration, but the handsome
gilt-edged Bible that found its way to him soon after the departure of
the regiment, was inscribed with the irregular schoolboy signature of
"Freddy Jourdain, with love to his old friend Jeremiah Pike." As for the regimental standards, they were found to be rather beyond
the capacity of a rockaway crammed full of Zouaves, so Tom insisted on
riding on top of the baggage, that he might have the pleasure of
carrying them all the way. Up he mounted, as brisk as a lamplighter,
with that monkey, Peter, after him, the flags were handed up, and with
three ringing cheers, the vehicles started at a rapid trot, and the
regiment was fairly off. They almost broke their necks leaning back to
see the last of "dear Jessie," until the locusts hid them from sight,
when they relapsed into somewhat dismal silence for full five minutes. As Peter was going on to Niagara with his father, Mr. Schermerhorn
accompanied the regiment to the city, which looked dustier and red
brickier (what a word!) than ever, now that they were fresh from the
lovely green of the country. Schermerhorn's advice, the party
took possession of two empty Fifth avenue stages which happened to be
waiting at the Fulton ferry, and rode slowly up Broadway to Chambers
street, where Peter and his father bid them good-by, and went off to the
depot. As Peter had declined changing his clothes before he left, they
had to travel all the way to Buffalo with our young friend in this
unusual guise; but, as people had become used to seeing soldiers
parading about in uniform, they didn't seem particularly surprised,
whereat Master Peter was rather disappointed. To go back to the Zouaves, however. When the stages turned into Fifth
avenue, they decided to get out; and after forming their ranks in fine
style, they marched up the avenue, on the sidewalk this time, stopping
at the various houses or street corners where they must bid adieu to one
and another of their number, promising to see each other again as soon
as possible. At last only Tom and Freddy were left to go home by themselves. As they
marched along, keeping faultless step, Freddy exclaimed, "I tell you
what, Tom! I mean to ask my father, the minute he comes home, to let me
go to West Point as soon as I leave school! I must be a soldier--I
can't think of anything else!" "That's just what I mean to do!" cried Tom, with sparkling eyes; "and,
Fred, if you get promoted before me, promise you will have me in your
regiment, won't you?" answered Freddy; "but you're the oldest, Tom,
and, you know, the oldest gets promoted first; so mind you don't forget
me when you come to your command!" As he spoke, they reached his own home; and our hero, glad after all to
come back to father, mother, and sister, bounded up the steps, and rang
the bell good and _hard_, just to let Joseph know that a personage of
eminence had arrived. As the door opened, he turned gayly round, cap in
hand, saying, "Good-by, Maryland; you've left the regiment, but you'll
never leave the Union!" and the last words he heard Tom say were, "No,
by George, _never_!" *       *       *       *       *

And now, dear little readers, my boy friends in particular, the history
of Freddy Jourdain must close. He still lives in New York, and attends
Dr. Larned's school, where he is at the head of all his classes. The Dashahed Zouaves have met very often since the encampment, and had
many a good drill in their room--the large attic floor which Mr. Jourdain allowed them for their special accommodation, and where the
beautiful regimental colors are carefully kept, to be proudly displayed
in every parade of the Zouaves. When he is sixteen, the boy Colonel is to enter West Point Academy, and
learn to be a real soldier; while Tom--poor Tom, who went down to
Baltimore that pleasant July month, promising so faithfully to join
Freddy in the cadet corps, may never see the North again. And in conclusion let me say, that should our country again be in danger
in after years, which God forbid, we may be sure that first in the
field, and foremost in the van of the grand army, will be our gallant
young friend,

                                 COLONEL FREDDY. IT took a great many Saturday afternoons to finish the story of "Colonel
Freddy," and the children returned to it at each reading with renewed
and breathless interest. George and Helen couldn't help jumping up off
their seats once or twice and clapping their hands with delight when
anything specially exciting took place in the pages of the wonderful
story that was seen "before it was printed," and a great many "oh's" and
"ah's" testified to their appreciation of the gallant "Dashahed
Zouaves." They laughed over the captive Tom, and cried over the true
story of the old sergeant; and when at length the very last word had
been read, and their mother had laid down the manuscript, George sprang
up once more, exclaiming; "Oh, I wish I could be a boy soldier! Mamma,
mayn't I recruit a regiment and camp out too?" cried his sister; "I wish I had been Jessie; what a
pity it wasn't all true!" "And what if I should tell you," said their mother, laughing, "that a
little bird has whispered in my ear that 'Colonel Freddy' was
wonderfully like your little Long Island friend Hilton R----?" "Oh, something funny I heard about him last summer; never mind what!" The children wisely concluded that it was no use to ask any more
questions; at the same moment solemnly resolving that the very next time
they paid a visit to their aunt, who lived at Astoria, they would beg
her to let them drive over to Mr. R----'s place, and find out all about
it. After this, there were no more readings for several Saturdays; but at
last one morning when the children had almost given up all hopes of more
stories, George opened his eyes on the sock hanging against the door,
which looked more bulgy than ever. he shouted; "Aunt Fanny's
daughter hasn't forgotten us, after all!" and dressing himself in a
double quick, helter-skelter fashion, George dashed out into the entry,
forgot his good resolution, and slid down the banisters like a streak of
lightning and began pummelling on his sister's door with both fists;
shouting, "Come, get up! here's another Sock story for
us!" This delightful announcement was quite sufficient to make Helen's
stockings, which she was just drawing on in a lazy fashion, fly up to
their places in a hurry; then she popped her button-over boots on the
wrong feet, and had to take them off and try again; and, in short, the
whole of her dressing was an excellent illustration of that time-honored
maxim, "The more _haste_, the worse _speed_;" George, meanwhile,
performing a distracted Indian war dance in the entry outside, until his
father opened his door and wanted to know what the racket was all about. At this moment Helen came out, and the two children scampered down
stairs, and sitting down side by side on the sofa, they proceeded to
examine this second instalment of the Sock stories. They found it was
again a whole book; and the title, on a little page by itself, read
"GERMAN SOCKS." "These must be more stories like that
dear 'Little White Angel.'" And so they proved to be; for, on their mother's commencing to read the
first story, it was found to be called, "God's Pensioners;" and
commenced, "It was a cold--" but stop! This book was to be devoted
to "Colonel Freddy;" but if you will only go to Mr. Leavitt's, the
publishers, you will there discover what was the rest of the second Sock
Stories. *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired. Page 41, "dilemna" changed to "dilemma" (horns of this dilemma)

Page 81, "arttisically" changed to "artistically" (his fork
artistically)





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Red, White, Blue Socks. The long,
flexible stems of the cactus, which might be taken for reptiles, encircle
also this trunk, and clothe it with their bunches of silvery white,
shaded inside with bright orange. These flowers emit a strong scent of
vanilla. A serpent, of a brick-red, about the thickness of a large quill, and five
or six inches long, half protrudes its flat head from one of those
enormous, perfumed calyces, in which it lies closely curled up. Within the ajoupa, a young man is extended on a mat in a profound sleep. His complexion of a clear golden yellow, gives him the appearance of a
statue of pale bronze, on which a ray of sun is playing. His attitude is
simple and graceful; his right arm sustains his head, a little raised and
turned on one side; his ample robe of white muslin, with hanging sleeves,
leaves uncovered his chest and arms worthy of the Antoinous. Marble is
not more firm, more polished than his skin, the golden hue of which
contracts strongly with the whiteness of his garments. Upon his broad
manly chest a deep scar is visible--the mark of the musket-ball he
received in defending the life of General Simon, the father of Rose and
Blanche. Suspended from his neck, he wears a medal similar to that in the
possession of the two sisters. His features are at once very noble and very beautiful. His hair of a
blue black, parted upon his forehead, falls waving, but not curled over
his shoulders; whilst his eyebrows, boldly and yet delicately defined,
are of as deep a jet as the long eyelashes, that cast their shadow upon
his beardless cheek. His bright, red lips are slightly apart, and he
breathes uneasily; his sleep is heavy and troubled, for the heat becomes
every moment more and more suffocating. Yet
now the tall ferns, which cover the soil, begin to move almost
imperceptibly, as though their stems were shaken by the slow progress of
some crawling body. From time to time, this trifling oscillation suddenly
ceases, and all is again motionless. But, after several of these
alternations of rustling and deep silence, a human head appears in the
midst of the jungle, a little distance from the trunk of the dead tree. The man to whom it belonged was possessed of a grim countenance, with a
complexion the color of greenish bronze, long black hair bound about his
temples, eyes brilliant with savage fire, and an expression remarkable
for its intelligence and ferocity. Holding his breath, he remained quite
still for a moment; then, advancing upon his hands and knees, pushing
aside the leaves so gently, that not the slightest noise could be heard,
he arrived cautiously and slowly at the trunk of the dead tree, the
summit of which nearly touched the roof of the ajoupa. This man, of Malay origin, belonging to the sect of the Lughardars
(Stranglers), after having again listened, rose almost entirely from
amongst the brushwood. With the exception of white cotton drawers,
fastened around his middle by a parti- sash, he was completely
naked. His bronze, supple, and nervous limbs were overlaid with a thick
coat of oil. Stretching himself along the huge trunk on the side furthest
from the cabin, and thus sheltered by the whole breadth of the tree with
its surrounding creepers, he began to climb silently, with as much
patience as caution. In the undulations of his form, in the flexibility
of his movements, in the restrained vigor, which fully put forth would
have been alarming, there was some resemblance to the stealthy and
treacherous advance of the tiger upon its prey. Having reached, completely unperceived, the inclined portion of the tree,
which almost touched the roof of the cabin, he was only separated from
the window by a distance of about a foot. Cautiously advancing his head,
he looked down into the interior, to see how he might best find an
entrance. At sight of Djalma in his deep sleep, the Thug's bright eyes glittered
with increased brilliancy; a nervous contraction, or rather a mute,
ferocious laugh, curling the corners of his mouth, drew them up towards
the cheekbones, and exposed rows of teeth, filed sharp like the points of
a saw, and dyed of a shining black. Djalma was lying in such a manner and so near the door of the ajoupa,
which opened inwards, that, were it moved in the least, he must be
instantly awakened. The Strangler, with his body still sheltered by the
tree, wishing to examine more attentively the interior of the cabin,
leaned very forward, and in order to maintain his balance, lightly rested
his hand on the ledge of the opening that served for a window. This
movement shook the large cactus-flowers, within which the little serpent
lay curled, and, darting forth it twisted itself rapidly round the wrist
of the Strangler. Whether from pain or surprise, the man uttered a low
cry; and as he drew back swiftly, still holding by the trunk of the tree,
he perceived that Djalma had moved. The young Indian, though retaining his supine posture, had half opened
his eyes, and turned his head towards the window, whilst his breast
heaved with a deep-drawn sigh, for, beneath that thick dome of moist
verdure, the concentrated heat was intolerable. Hardly had he moved, when, from behind the tree, was heard the shrill,
brief, sonorous note, which the bird of paradise titters when it takes
its flight--a cry which resembles that of the pheasant. This note was
soon repeated, but more faintly, as though the brilliant bird were
already at a distance. Djalma, thinking he had discovered the cause of
the noise which had aroused him for an instant, stretched out the arm
upon which his head had rested, and went to sleep again, with scarcely
any change of position. For some minutes, the most profound silence once more reigned in this
solitude, and everything remained motionless. The Strangler, by his skillful imitation of the bird, had repaired the
imprudence of that exclamation of surprise and pain, which the reptile
bite had forced from him. When he thought all was safe, he again advanced
his head, and saw the young Indian once more plunged in sleep. Then he
descended the tree with the same precautions, though his left hand was
somewhat swollen from the sting of the serpent, and disappeared in the
jungle. At that instant a song of monotonous and melancholy cadence was heard in
the distance. The Strangler raised himself, and listened attentively, and
his face took an expression of surprise and deadly anger. The song came
nearer and nearer to the cabin, and, in a few seconds, an Indian, passing
through an open space in the jungle, approached the spot where the Thug
lay concealed. The latter unwound from his waist a long thin cord, to one of the ends of
which was attached a leaden ball, of the form and size of an egg; having
fastened the other end of this cord to his right wrist, the Strangler
again listened, and then disappeared, crawling through the tall grass in
the direction of the Indian, who still advanced slowly, without
interrupting his soft and plaintive song. He was a young fellow scarcely twenty, with a bronzed complexion, the
slave of Djalma, his vest of blue cotton was confined at the waist by a
parti- sash; he wore a red turban, and silver rings in his ears
and about his wrists. He was bringing a message to his master, who,
during the great heat of the day was reposing in the ajoupa, which stood
at some distance from the house he inhabited. Arriving at a place where two paths separated, the slave, without
hesitation took that which led to the cabin, from which he was now scarce
forty paces distant. One of those enormous Java butterflies, whose wings extend six or eight
inches in length, and offer to the eye two streaks of gold on a ground of
ultramarine, fluttering from leaf to leaf, alighted on a bush of Cape
jasmine, within the reach of the young Indian. The slave stopped in his
song, stood still, advanced first a foot, then a hand, and seized the
butterfly. Suddenly he sees a dark figure rise before him; he hears a whizzing noise
like that of a sling; he feels a cord, thrown with as much rapidity as
force, encircle his neck with a triple band; and, almost in the same
instant, the leaden ball strikes violently against the back of his head. This attack was so abrupt and unforseen, that Djalma's servant could not
even utter a single cry, a single groan. He tottered--the Strangler gave
a vigorous pull at the cord--the bronzed countenance of the slave became
purple, and he fell upon his knees, convulsively moving his arms. Then
the Strangler threw him quite down, and pulled the cord so violently,
that the blood spurted from the skin. The victim struggled for a
moment--and all was over. During his short but intense agony, the murderer, kneeling before his
victim, and watching with ardent eye his least convulsions, seemed
plunged into an ecstasy of ferocious joy. His nostrils dilated, the veins
of his neck and temples were swollen, and the same savage laugh, which
had curled his lips at the aspect of the sleeping Djalma, again displayed
his pointed black teeth, which a nervous trembling of the jaws made to
chatter. But soon he crossed his arms upon his heaving breast, bowed his
forehead, and murmured some mysterious words, which sounded like an
invocation or a prayer. Immediately after, he returned to the
contemplation of the dead body. The hyena and the tiger-cat, who, before
devouring, crouch beside the prey that they have surprised or hunted
down, have not a wilder or more sanguinary look than this man. But, remembering that his task was not yet accomplished tearing himself
unwillingly from the hideous spectacle, he unbound the cord from the neck
of his victim, fastened it round his own body, dragged the corpse out of
the path, and, without attempting to rob it of its silver rings,
concealed it in a thick part of the jungle. Then the Strangler again began to creep on his knees and belly, till he
arrived at the cabin of Djalma--that cabin constructed of mats suspended
from bamboos. After listening attentively, he drew from his girdle a
knife, the sharp-pointed blade of which was wrapped in a fig-leaf, and
made in the matting an incision of three feet in length. This was done
with such quickness, and with so fine a blade, that the light touch of
the diamond cutting glass would have made more noise. Seeing, by means of
this opening, which was to serve him for a passage, that Djalma was still
fast asleep, the Thug, with incredible temerity, glided into the cabin. THE TATTOOING

The heavens, which had been till now of transparent blue, became
gradually of a greenish tint, and the sun was veiled in red, lurid vapor. This strange light gave to every object a weird appearance, of which one
might form an idea, by looking at a landscape through a piece of copper
 glass. In those climates, this phenomenon, when united with an
increase of burning heat, always announces the approach of a storm. From time to time there was a passing odor of sulphur; then the leaves,
slightly shaken by electric currents, would tremble upon their stalks;
till again all would return to the former motionless silence. The weight
of the burning atmosphere, saturated with sharp perfumes, became almost
intolerable. Large drops of sweat stood in pearls on the forehead of
Djalma, still plunged in enervating sleep--for it no longer resembled
rest, but a painful stupor. The Strangler glided like a reptile along the sides of the ajoupa, and,
crawling on his belly, arrived at the sleeping-mat of Djalma, beside
which he squatted himself, so as to occupy as little space as possible. Then began a fearful scene, by reason of the mystery and silence which
surrounded it. Djalma's life was at the mercy of the Strangler. The latter, resting upon
his hands and knees, with his neck stretched forward, his eye fixed and
dilated, continued motionless as a wild beast about to spring. Only a
slight nervous trembling of the jaws agitated that mask of bronze. But soon his hideous features revealed a violent struggle that was
passing within him--a struggle between the thirst, the craving for the
enjoyment of murder, which the recent assassination of the slave had made
still more active, and the orders he had received not to attempt the life
of Djalma, though the design, which brought him to the ajoupa, might
perhaps be as fatal to the young Indian as death itself. Twice did the
Strangler, with look of flame, resting only on his left hand, seize with
his right the rope's end; and twice his hand fell--the instinct of murder
yielding to a powerful will, of which the Malay acknowledged the
irresistible empire. In him, the homicidal craving must have amounted to madness, for, in
these hesitations, he lost much precious time: at any moment, Djalma,
whose vigor, skill, and courage were known and feared, might awake from
his sleep, and, though unarmed, he would prove a terrible adversary. At
length the Thug made up his mind; with a suppressed sigh of regret, he
set about accomplishing his task. This task would have appeared impossible to any one else. Djalma, with his face turned towards the left, leaned his head upon his
curved arm. It was first necessary, without waking him, to oblige him to
turn his face towards the right (that is, towards the door), so that, in
case of his being half-roused, his first glance might not fall upon the
Strangler. The latter, to accomplish his projects, would have to remain
many minutes in the cabin. The heavens became darker; the heat arrived at its last degree of
intensity; everything combined to increase the torpor of the sleeper, and
so favor the Strangler's designs. Kneeling down close to Djalma, he
began, with the tips of his supple, well-oiled fingers, to stroke the
brow, temples, and eyelids of the young Indian, but with such extreme
lightness, that the contact of the two skins was hardly sensible. When
this kind of magnetic incantation had lasted for some seconds, the sweat,
which bathed the forehead of Djalma, became more abundant: he heaved a
smothered sigh, and the muscles of his face gave several twitches, for
the strokings, although too light to rouse him, yet caused in him a
feeling of indefinable uneasiness. Watching him with his restless and burning eye, the Strangler continued
his maneuvers with so much patience, that Djalma, still sleeping, but no
longer able to bear this vague, annoying sensation, raised his right hand
mechanically to his face, as if he would have brushed away an importunate
insect. But he had not strength to do it; almost immediately after, his
hand, inert and heavy, fell back upon his chest. The Strangler saw, by
this symptom, that he was attaining his object, and continued to stroke,
with the same address, the eyelids, brow, and temples. Whereupon Djalma, more and more oppressed by heavy sleep, and having
neither strength nor will to raise his hand to his face, mechanically
turned round his head, which fell languidly upon his right shoulder,
seeking by this change of attitude, to escape from the disagreeable
sensation which pursued him. The first point gained, the Strangler could
act more freely. To render as profound as possible the sleep he had half interrupted, he
now strove to imitate the vampire, and, feigning the action of a fan, he
rapidly moved his extended hands about the burning face of the young
Indian. Alive to a feeling of such sudden and delicious coolness, in the
height of suffocating heat, the countenance of Djalma brightened, his
bosom heaved, his half-opened lips drank in the grateful air, and he fell
into a sleep only the more invincible, because it had been at first
disturbed, and was now yielded to under the influence of a pleasing
sensation. A sudden flash of lightning illumined the shady dome that sheltered the
ajoupa: fearing that the first clap of thunder might rouse the young
Indian, the Strangler hastened to complete his Task. Djalma lay on his
back, with his head resting on his right shoulder, and his left arm
extended; the Thug, crouching at his left side, ceased by degrees the
process of fanning; then, with incredible dexterity, he succeeded in
rolling up, above the elbow, the long wide sleeve of white muslin that
covered the left arm of the sleeper. He next drew from the pocket of his drawers a copper box, from which he
took a very fine, sharp-pointed needle, and a piece of a black-looking
root. He pricked this root several times with the needle, and on each
occasion there issued from it a white, glutinous liquid. When the Strangler thought the needle sufficiently impregnated with this
juice, he bent down, and began to blow gently over the inner surface of
Djalma's arm, so as to cause a fresh sensation of coolness; then, with
the point of his needle, he traced almost imperceptibly on the skin of
the sleeping youth some mysterious and symbolical signs. All this was
performed so cleverly and the point of the needle was so fine and keen,
that Djalma did not feel the action of the acid upon the skin. The signs, which the Strangler had traced, soon appeared on the surface,
at first in characters of a pale rose-color, as fine as a hair; but such
was the slowly corrosive power of the juice, that, as it worked and
spread beneath the skin, they would become in a few hours of a violet
red, and as apparent as they were now almost invisible. The Strangler, having so perfectly succeeded in his project, threw a last
look of ferocious longing on the slumbering Indian, and creeping away
from the mat, regained the opening by which he had entered the cabin;
next, closely uniting the edges of the incision, so as to obviate all
suspicion, he disappeared just as the thunder began to rumble hoarsely in
the distance. [4]

[4] We read in the letters of the late Victor Jacquemont upon India, with
regard to the incredible dexterity of these men: "They crawl on the
ground, ditches, in the furrows of fields, imitate a hundred different
voices, and dissipate the effect of any accidental noise by raising the
yelp of the jackal or note of some bird--then are silent, and another
imitates the call of the same animal in the distance. They can molest a
sleeper by all sorts of noises and slight touches, and make his body and
limbs take any position which suits their purpose." Count Edward de
Warren, in his excellent work on English India, which we shall have again
occasion to quote, expresses himself in the same manner as to the
inconceivable address of the Indians: "They have the art," says he, "to
rob you, without interrupting your sleep, of the very sheet in which you
are enveloped. The
movements of the bheel are those of the serpent. If you sleep in your
tent, with a servant lying across each entrance, the bheel will come and
crouch on the outside, in some shady corner, where he can hear the
breathing of those within. As soon as the European sleeps, he feels sure
of success, for the Asiatic will not long resist the attraction of
repose. At the proper moment, he makes a vertical incision in the cloth
of the tent, on the spot where he happens to be, and just large enough to
admit him. He glides through like a phantom, without making the least
grain of sand creak beneath his tread. He is perfectly naked, and all his
body is rubbed over with oil; a two-edged knife is suspended from his
neck. He will squat down close to your couch, and, with incredible
coolness and dexterity, will gather up the sheet in very little folds, so
as to occupy the least surface possible; then, passing to the other side,
he will lightly tickle the sleeper, whom he seems to magnetize, till the
latter shrinks back involuntarily, and ends by turning round, and leaving
the sheet folded behind him. Should he awake, and strive to seize the
robber, he catches at a slippery form, which slides through his hands
like an eel; should he even succeed in seizing him, it would be
fatal--the dagger strikes him to the heart, he falls bathed in his blood,
and the assassin disappears."--E. S.




CHAPTER XIX

THE SMUGGLER

The tempest of the morning has long been over. The sun is verging towards
the horizon. Some hours have elapsed, since the Strangler introduced
himself into Djalma's cabin, and tattooed him with a mysterious sign
during his sleep. A horseman advances rapidly down a long avenue of spreading trees. Sheltered by the thick and verdant arch, a thousand birds salute the
splendid evening with songs and circlings; red and green parrots climb,
by help of their hooked beaks, to the top of pink-blossomed acacias;
large Morea birds of the finest and richest blue, whose throats and long
tails change in the light to a golden brown, are chasing the prince
oriels, clothed in their glossy feathers of black and orange; Kolo doves,
of a changeable violet hue, are gently cooing by the side of the birds of
paradise, in whose brilliant plumage are mingled the prismatic colors of
the emerald and ruby, the topaz and sapphire. This avenue, a little raised, commanded a view of a small pond, which
reflected at intervals the green shade of tamarind trees. In the calm,
limpid waters, many fish were visible, some with silver scales and purple
fins, others gleaming with azure and vermilion; so still were they that
they looked as if set in a mass of bluish crystal, and, as they dwelt
motionless near the surface of the pool, on which played a dazzling ray
of the sun, they revelled in the enjoyment of the light and heat. A
thousand insects--living gems, with wings of flame--glided, fluttered and
buzzed over the transparent wave, in which, at an extraordinary depth,
were mirrored the variegated tints of the aquatic plants on the bank. It is impossible to give an adequate idea of the exuberant nature of this
scene, luxuriant in the sunlight, colors, and perfumes, which served, so
to speak, as a frame to the young and brilliant rider, who was advancing
along the avenue. He had not yet perceived the indelible
marks, which the Strangler had traced upon his left arm. His Japanese mare, of slender make, full of fire and vigor, is black as
night. To moderate the
impetuous bounds of the animal, Djalma uses a small steel bit, with
headstall and reins of twisted scarlet silk, fine as a thread. Not one of those admirable riders, sculptured so masterly on the frieze
of the Parthenon, sits his horse more gracefully and proudly than this
young Indian, whose fine face, illumined by the setting sun, is radiant
with serene happiness; his eyes sparkle with joy, and his dilated
nostrils and unclosed lips inhale with delight the balmy breeze, that
brings to him the perfume of flowers and the scent of fresh leaves, for
the trees are still moist from the abundant rain that fell after the
storm. A red cap, similar to that worn by the Greeks, surmounting the black
locks of Djalma, sets off to advantage the golden tint of his complexion;
his throat is bare; he is clad in his robe of white muslin with large
sleeves, confined at the waist by a scarlet sash; very full drawers, in
white cotton stuff, leave half uncovered his tawny and polished legs;
their classic curve stands out from the dark sides of the horse, which he
presses tightly between his muscular calves. He has no stirrups; his
foot, small and narrow, is shod with a sandal of morocco leather. The rush of his thoughts, by turns impetuous and restrained, was
expressed in some degree by the pace he imparted to his horse--now bold
and precipitate, like the flight of unbridled imagination--now calm and
measured, like the reflection which succeeds an idle dream. But, in all
this fantastic course, his least movements were distinguished by a proud,
independent and somewhat savage grace. Dispossessed of his paternal territory by the English, and at first
detained by them as a state-prisoner after the death of his father--who
(as M. Joshua Van Dael had written to M. Rodin) had fallen sword in
hand--Djalma had at length been restored to liberty. Abandoning the
continent of India, and still accompanied by General Simon, who had
lingered hard by the prison of his old friend's son, the young Indian
came next to Batavia, the birthplace of his mother, to collect the modest
inheritance of his maternal ancestors. And amongst this property, so long
despised or forgotten by his father, he found some important papers, and
a medal exactly similar to that worn by Rose and Blanche. General Simon was not more surprised than pleased at this discovery,
which not only established a tie of kindred between his wife and Djalma's
mother, but which also seemed to promise great advantages for the future. Leaving Djalma at Batavia, to terminate some business there, he had gone
to the neighboring island of Sumatra, in the hope of finding a vessel
that would make the passage to Europe directly and rapidly; for it was
now necessary that, cost what it might, the young Indian also should be
at Paris on the 13th February, 1832. Should General Simon find a vessel
ready to sail for Europe, he was to return immediately, to fetch Djalma;
and the latter, expecting him daily, was now going to the pier of
Batavia, hoping to see the father of Rose and Blanche arrive by the mail
boat from Sumatra. A few words are here necessary on the early life of the son of Kadja
sing. Having lost his mother very young, and brought up with rude simplicity,
he had accompanied his father, whilst yet a child, to the great tiger
hunts, as dangerous as battles; and, in the first dawn of youth, he had
followed him to the stern bloody war, which he waged in defence of his
country. Thus living, from the time of his mother's death, in the midst
of forests and mountains and continual combats, his vigorous and
ingenuous nature had preserved itself pure, and he well merited the name
of "The Generous" bestowed on him. Born a prince, he was--which by no
means follows--a prince indeed. During the period of his captivity, the
silent dignity of his bearing had overawed his jailers. Never a reproach,
never a complaint--a proud and melancholy calm was all that he opposed to
a treatment as unjust as it was barbarous, until he was restored to
freedom. Having thus been always accustomed to a patriarchal life, or to a war of
mountaineers, which he had only quitted to pass a few months in prison,
Djalma knew nothing, so to speak, of civilized society. Without its
exactly amounting to a defect, he certainly carried his good qualities to
their extreme limits. Obstinately faithful to his pledged word, devoted
to the death, confiding to blindness, good almost to a complete
forgetfulness of himself, he was inflexible towards ingratitude,
falsehood, or perfidy. He would have felt no compunction to sacrifice a
traitor, because, could he himself have committed a treason, he would
have thought it only just to expiate it with his life. He was, in a word, the man of natural feelings, absolute and entire. Such
a man, brought into contact with the temperaments, calculations,
falsehoods, deceptions, tricks, restrictions, and hollowness of a refined
society, such as Paris, for example, would, without doubt, form a very
curious subject for speculation. We raise this hypothesis, because, since
his journey to France had been determined on, Djalma had one fixed,
ardent desire--to be in Paris. In Paris--that enchanted city--of which, even in Asia, the land of
enchantment, so many marvelous tales were told. What chiefly inflamed the fresh, vivid imagination of the young Indian,
was the thought of French women--those attractive Parisian beauties,
miracles of elegance and grace, who eclipsed, he was informed, even the
magnificence of the capitals of the civilized world. And at this very
moment, in the brightness of that warm and splendid evening, surrounded
by the intoxication of flowers and perfumes, which accelerated the pulses
of his young fiery heart, Djalma was dreaming of those exquisite
creatures, whom his fancy loved to clothe in the most ideal garbs. It seemed to him as if, at the end of the avenue, in the midst of that
sheet of golden light, which the trees encompassed with their full, green
arch, he could see pass and repass, white and sylph-like, a host of
adorable and voluptuous phantoms, that threw him kisses from the tips of
their rosy fingers. Unable to restrain his burning emotions, carried away
by a strange enthusiasm, Djalma uttered exclamations of joy, deep, manly,
and sonorous, and made his vigorous courser bound under him in the
excitement of a mad delight. Just then a sunbeam, piercing the dark vault
of the avenue, shone full upon him. For several minutes, a man had been advancing rapidly along a path,
which, at its termination, intersected the avenue diagonally. He stopped
a moment in the shade, looking at Djalma with astonishment. It was indeed
a charming sight, to behold, in the midst of a blaze of dazzling lustre,
this youth, so handsome, joyous, and ardent, clad in his white and
flowing vestments, gayly and lightly seated on his proud black mare, who
covered her red bridle with her foam, and whose long tail and thick mane
floated on the evening breeze. But, with that reaction which takes place in all human desires, Djalma
soon felt stealing over him a sentiment of soft, undefinable melancholy. He raised his hand to his eyes, now dimmed with moisture, and allowed the
reins to fall on the mane of his docile steed, which, instantly stopping,
stretched out its long neck, and turned its head in the direction of the
personage, whom it could see approaching through the coppice. This man, Mahal the Smuggler, was dressed nearly like European sailors. He wore jacket and trousers of white duck, a broad red sash, and a very
low-crowned straw hat. His face was brown, with strongly-marked features,
and, though forty years of age, he was quite beardless. In another moment, Mahal was close to the young Indian. "You are Prince
Djalma?" said he, in not very good French, raising his hand respectfully
to his hat. "You are the son of Kadja-sing?" "You are going to meet him, as you have gone every evening, since you
expect his return from Sumatra?" "Yes, but how do you know all this?" said the Indian looking at the
Smuggler with as much surprise as curiosity. "Is he not to land at Batavia, to-day or to-morrow?" "Perhaps," said Mahal, with a distrustful air. "But are you really the
son of Kadja-sing?" "Yes, I tell you--but where have you seen General Simon?" "If you are the son of Kadja-sing," resumed Mahal, continuing to regard
Djalma with a suspicious eye, "what is your surname?" "My sire was called the 'Father of the Generous,'" answered the young
Indian, as a shade of sorrow passed over his fine countenance. These words appeared in part to convince Mahal of the identity of Djalma;
but, wishing doubtless to be still more certain, he resumed: "You must
have received, two days ago, a letter from General Simon, written from
Sumatra?" "To assure myself that you are really the son of Kadja-sing, and to
execute the orders I have received." "When I have proof that you are Prince Djalma, I will tell you. I was
informed that you would be mounted on a black mare, with a red bridle. But--"

"By the soul of my mother! "I will tell you all--if you can tell me what was the printed paper,
contained in the last letter that General Simon wrote you from Sumatra." "It was a cutting from a French newspaper." "Did it announce good or bad news for the general?" "Good news--for it related that, during his absence, they had
acknowledged the last rank and title bestowed on him by the Emperor, as
they had done for others of his brothers in arms, exiled like him." "You are indeed Prince Djalma," said the Smuggler, after a moment's
reflection. General Simon landed last night in Java, but on
a desert part of the coast." exclaimed Djalma, in amazement; "why?" asked Djalma, growing pale with alarm. "He is three leagues hence--near the sea-shore--in the ruins of Tchandi." repeated Djalma, and his countenance expressed
increasing surprise and anxiety. "Without being certain, I think it is because of a duel he fought in
Sumatra," said the Smuggler, mysteriously. "I don't know--I am not at all certain on the subject. But do you know
the ruins of Tchandi?" "The general expects you there; that is what he ordered me to tell you." "So you came with him from Sumatra?" "I was pilot of the little smuggling coaster, that landed him in the
night on a lonely beach. He knew that you went every day to the mole, to
wait for him; I was almost sure that I should meet you. He gave me
details about the letter you received from him as a proof that he had
sent me. If he could have found the means of writing, he would have
written." "But he did not tell you why he was obliged to hide himself?" Certain words made me suspect what I told you--a
duel." Knowing the mettle of General Simon, Djalma thought the suspicions of the
Smuggler not unfounded. After a moment's silence he said to him: "Can you
undertake to lead home my horse? My dwelling is without the town--there,
in the midst of those trees--by the side of the new mosque. In ascending
the mountain of Tchandi, my horse would be in my way; I shall go much
faster on foot." "I know where you live; General Simon told me. I should have gone there
if I had not met you. Djalma sprang lightly to the ground, threw the bridle to Mahal, unrolled
one end of his sash, took out a silk purse, and gave it to the Smuggler,
saying: "You have been faithful and obedient. Here!--it is a trifle--but
I have no more." "Kadja-sing was rightly called the 'Father of the Generous,'" said the
Smuggler, bowing with respect and gratitude. He took the road to Batavia,
leading Djalma's horse. The young Indian, on the contrary, plunged into
the coppice, and, walking with great strides, he directed his course
towards the mountain, on which were the ruins of Tchandi, where he could
not arrive before night. M. JOSHUA VAN DAEL. M. Joshua Van Dael a Dutch merchant, and correspondent of M. Rodin, was
born at Batavia, the capital of the island of Java; his parents had sent
him to be educated at Pondicherry, in a celebrated religious house, long
established in that place, and belonging to the "Society of Jesus." It
was there that he was initiated into the order as "professor of the three
vows," or lay member, commonly called "temporal coadjutor." Joshua was a man of probity that passed for stainless; of strict accuracy
in business, cold, careful, reserved, and remarkably skillful and
sagacious; his financial operations were almost always successful, for a
protecting power gave him ever in time, knowledge of events which might
advantageously influence his commercial transactions. The religious house
of Pondicherry was interested in his affairs, having charged him with the
exportation and exchange of the produce of its large possessions in this
colony. Speaking little, hearing much, never disputing, polite in the
extreme--giving seldom, but with choice and purpose--Joshua, without
inspiring sympathy, commanded generally that cold respect, which is
always paid to the rigid moralist; for instead of yielding to the
influence of lax and dissolute colonial manners, he appeared to live with
great regularity, and his exterior had something of austerity about it,
which tended to overawe. The following scene took place at Batavia, while Djalma was on his way to
the ruins of Tchandi in the hope of meeting General Simon. M. Joshua had just retired into his cabinet, in which were many shelves
filled with paper boxes, and huge ledgers and cash boxes lying open upon
desks. The only window of this apartment, which was on the ground floor,
looked out upon a narrow empty court, and was protected externally by
strong iron bars; instead of glass, it was fitted with a Venetian blind,
because of the extreme heat of the climate. M. Joshua, having placed upon his desk a taper in a glass globe, looked
at the clock. Saying this, he went out, passing through an antechamber, opened a second
thick door, studded with nail-heads, in the Dutch fashion, cautiously
entered the court (so as not to be heard by the people in the house), and
drew back the secret bolt of a gate six feet high, formidably garnished
with iron spikes. Leaving this gate unfastened, he regained his cabinet,
after he had successively and carefully closed the two other doors behind
him. M. Joshua next seated himself at his desk, and took from a drawer a long
letter, or rather statement, commenced some time before, and continued
day by day. It is superfluous to observe, that the letter already
mentioned, as addressed to M. Rodin, was anterior to the liberation of
Djalma and his arrival at Batavia. The present statement was also addressed to M. Rodin, and Van Dael thus
went on with it:

"Fearing the return of General Simon, of which I had been informed by
intercepting his letters--I have already told you, that I had succeeded
in being employed by him as his agent here; having then read his letters,
and sent them on as if untouched to Djalma, I felt myself obliged, from
the pressure of the circumstances, to have recourse to extreme
measures--taking care always to preserve appearances, and rendering at
the same time a signal service to humanity, which last reason chiefly
decided me. "A new danger imperiously commanded these measures. The steamship
'Ruyter' came in yesterday, and sails tomorrow in the course of the day. She is to make the voyage to Europe via the Arabian Gulf; her passengers
will disembark at Suez, cross the Isthmus, and go on board another vessel
at Alexandria, which will bring them to France. This voyage, as rapid as
it is direct, will not take more than seven or eight weeks. We are now at
the end of October; Prince Djalma might then be in France by the
commencement of the month of January; and according to your instructions,
of which I know not the motive, but which I execute with zeal and
submission, his departure must be prevented at all hazards, because, you
tell me, some of the gravest interests of the Society would be
compromised, by the arrival of this young Indian in Paris before the 13th
of February. Now, if I succeed, as I hope, in making him miss this
opportunity of the 'Ruyter' it will be materially impossible for him to
arrive in France before the month of April; for the 'Ruyter' is the only
vessel which makes the direct passage, the others taking at least four or
five months to reach Europe. "Before telling you the means which I have thought right to employ, to
detain Prince Djalma--of the success of which means I am yet
uncertain--it is well that you should be acquainted with the following
facts. "They have just discovered, in British India, a community whose members
call themselves 'Brothers of the Good Work,' or 'Phansegars,' which
signifies simply 'Thugs' or 'Stranglers;' these murderers do not shed
blood, but strangle their victims, less for the purpose of robbing them,
than in obedience to a homicidal vocation, and to the laws of an infernal
divinity named by them 'Bowanee.' "I cannot better give you an idea of this horrible sect, than by
transcribing here some lines from the introduction of a report by Colonel
Sleeman, who has hunted out this dark association with indefatigable
zeal. The report in question was published about two months ago. Here is
the extract; it is the colonel who speaks:

"'From 1822 to 1824, when I was charged with the magistracy and civil
administration of the district of Nersingpore, not a murder, not the
least robbery was committed by an ordinary criminal, without my being
immediately informed of it; but if any one had come and told me at this
period, that a band of hereditary assassins by profession lived in the
village of Kundelie, within about four hundred yards of my court of
justice--that the beautiful groves of the village of Mundesoor, within a
day's march of my residence, formed one of the most frightful marts of
assassination in all India--that numerous bands of 'Brothers of the Good
Work,' coming from Hindostan and the Deccan, met annually beneath these
shades, as at a solemn festival, to exercise their dreadful vocation upon
all the roads which cross each other in this locality--I should have
taken such a person for a madman, or one who had been imposed upon by
idle tales. And yet nothing could be truer; hundreds of travellers had
been buried every year in the groves of Mundesoor; a whole tribe of
assassins lived close to my door, at the very time I was supreme
magistrate of the province, and extended their devastations to the cities
of Poonah and Hyderabad. I shall never forget, when, to convince me of
the fact, one of the chiefs of the Stranglers, who had turned informer
against them, caused thirteen bodies to be dug up from the ground beneath
my tent, and offered to produce any number from the soil in the immediate
vicinity. '[5]

"These few words of Colonel Sleeman will give some idea of this dread
society, which has its laws, duties, customs, opposed to all other laws,
human and divine. Devoted to each other, even to heroism, blindly
obedient to their chiefs, who profess themselves the immediate
representatives of their dark divinity, regarding as enemies all who do
not belong to them, gaining recruits everywhere by a frightful system of
proselytising--these apostles of a religion of murder go preaching their
abominable doctrines in the shade, and spreading their immense net over
the whole of India. "Three of their principal chiefs, and one of their adepts, flying from
the determined pursuit of the English governor-general, having succeeded
in making their escape, had arrived at the Straits of Malacca, at no
great distance from our island; a smuggler, who is also something of a
pirate, attached to their association, and by name Mahal, took them on
board his coasting vessel, and brought them hither, where they think
themselves for some time in safety--as, following the advice of the
smuggler, they lie concealed in a thick forest, in which are many ruined
temples and numerous subterranean retreats. "Amongst these chiefs, all three remarkably intelligent, there is one in
particular, named Faringhea, whose extraordinary energy and eminent
qualities make him every way redoubtable. He is of the mixed race, half
white and Hindoo, has long inhabited towns in which are European
factories and speaks English and French very well. The other two chiefs
are a <DW64> and a Hindoo; the adept is a Malay. "The smuggler, Mahal, considering that he could obtain a large reward by
giving up these three chiefs and their adept, came to me, knowing, as all
the world knows, my intimate relations with a person who has great
influence with our governor. Two days ago, he offered me, on certain
conditions, to deliver up the <DW64>, the half-caste, the Hindoo, and the
Malay. These conditions are--a considerable sum of money, and a free
passage on board a vessel sailing for Europe or America, in order to
escape the implacable vengeance of the Thugs. "I joyfully seized the occasion to hand over three such murderers to
human justice, and I promised Mahal to arrange matters for him with the
governor, but also on certain conditions, innocent in themselves, and
which concerned Djalma. Should my project succeed, I will explain myself
more at length; I shall soon know the result, for I expect Mahal every
minute. "But before I close these despatches, which are to go tomorrow by the
'Ruyter'--in which vessel I have also engaged a passage for Mahal the
Smuggler, in the event of the success of my plans--I must include in
parentheses a subject of some importance. "In my last letter, in which I announced to you the death of Djalma's
father, and his own imprisonment by the English, I asked for some
information as to the solvency of Baron Tripeaud, banker and manufacturer
at Paris, who has also an agency at Calcutta. This information will now
be useless, if what I have just learned should, unfortunately, turn out
to be correct, and it will be for you to act according to circumstances. "This house at Calcutta owes considerable sums both to me and our
colleague at Pondicherry, and it is said that M. Tripeaud has involved
himself to a dangerous extent in attempting to ruin, by opposition, a
very flourishing establishment, founded some time ago by M. Francois
Hardy, an eminent manufacturer. I am assured that M. Tripeaud has already
sunk and lost a large capital in this enterprise: he has no doubt done a
great deal of harm to M. Francois Hardy; but he has also, they say,
seriously compromised his own fortune--and, were he to fail, the effects
of his disaster would be very fatal to us, seeing that he owes a large
sum of money to me and to us. "In this state of things it would be very desirable if, by the employment
of the powerful means of every kind at our disposal, we could completely
discredit and break down the house of M. Francois Hardy, already shaken
by M. Tripeaud's violent opposition. In that case, the latter would soon
regain all he has lost; the ruin of his rival would insure his
prosperity, and our demands would be securely covered. "Doubtless, it is painful, it is sad, to be obliged to have recourse to
these extreme measures, only to get back our own; but, in these days, are
we not surely justified in sometimes using the arms that are incessantly
turned against us? If we are reduced to such steps by the injustice and
wickedness of men, we may console ourselves with the reflection that we
only seek to preserve our worldly possessions, in order to devote them to
the greater glory of God; whilst, in the hands of our enemies, those very
goods are the dangerous instruments of perdition and scandal. "After all it is merely a humble proposition that I submit to you. Were
it in my power to take an active part in the matter, I should do nothing
of myself. It belongs, with all I possess, to
those whom I have sworn absolute obedience." Here a slight noise interrupted M. Joshua, and drew his attention from
his work. He rose abruptly, and went straight to the window. Three gentle
taps were given on the outside of one of the slats of the blind. asked M. Joshua, in a low voice. "It is I," was answered from without, also in a low tone. cried M. Joshua, with an expression of great satisfaction; "are
you sure of it?" "Quite sure: there is no devil more clever and intrepid." "The parts of the letter, which I quoted, convinced him that I came from
General Simon, and that he would find him at the ruins of Tchandi." "Therefore, at this moment--"

"Djalma goes to the ruins, where he will encounter the black, the half
blood, and the Indian. It is there they have appointed to meet the Malay,
who tattooed the prince during his sleep." "Have you been to examine the subterraneous passage?" One of the stones of the pedestal of the statue
turns upon itself; the stairs are large; it will do." "None--I saw them in the morning--and this evening the Malay came to tell
me all, before he went to join them at the ruins of Tchandi--for he had
remained hidden amongst the bushes, not daring to go there in the
daytime." "Mahal--if you have told the truth, and if all succeed--your pardon and
ample reward are assured to you. Your berth has been taken on board the
'Ruyter;' you will sail to-morrow; you will thus be safe from the malice
of the Stranglers, who would follow you hither to revenge the death of
their chiefs, Providence having chosen you to deliver those three great
criminals to justice. Heaven will bless you!--Go and wait for me at the
door of the governor's house; I will introduce you. The matter is so
important that I do not hesitate to disturb him thus late in the night. Go quickly!--I will follow on my side." The steps of Mahal were distinctly audible, as he withdrew precipitately,
and then silence reigned once more in the house. Joshua returned to his
desk, and hastily added these words to the despatch, which he had before
commenced:

"Whatever may now happen, it will be impossible for Djalma to leave
Batavia at present. You may rest quite satisfied; he will not be at Paris
by the 13th of next February. As I foresaw, I shall have to be up all
night.--I am just going to the governor's. To-morrow I will add a few
lines to this long statement, which the steamship 'Ruyter' will convey to
Europe." Having locked up his papers, Joshua rang the bell loudly, and, to the
great astonishment of his servants, not accustomed to see him leave home
in the middle of the night, went in all haste to the residence of the
governor of the island. We now conduct the reader to the ruins of Tchandi. [5] This report is extracted from Count Edward de Warren's excellent work,
"British India in 1831."--E. To the storm in the middle of the day, the approach of which so well
served the Strangler's designs upon Djalma, has succeeded a calm and
serene night. The disk of the moon rises slowly behind a mass of lofty
ruins, situated on a hill, in the midst of a thick wood, about three
leagues from Batavia. Long ranges of stone, high walls of brick, fretted away by time,
porticoes covered with parasitical vegetation, stand out boldly from the
sheet of silver light which blends the horizon with the limpid blue of
the heavens. Some rays of the moon, gliding through the opening on one of
these porticoes, fall upon two colossal statues at the foot of an immense
staircase, the loose stones of which are almost entirely concealed by
grass, moss, and brambles. The fragments of one of these statues, broken in the middle, lie strewed
upon the ground; the other, which remains whole and standing, is
frightful to behold. It represents a man of gigantic proportions, with a
head three feet high; the expression of the countenance is ferocious,
eyes of brilliant slaty black are set beneath gray brows, the large, deep
mouth gapes immoderately, and reptiles have made their nest between the
lips of stone; by the light of the moon, a hideous swarm is there dimly
visible. A broad girdle, adorned with symbolic ornaments, encircles the
body of this statue, and fastens a long sword to its right side. The
giant has four extended arms, and, in his great hands, he bears an
elephant's head, a twisted serpent, a human skull, and a bird resembling
a heron. The moon, shedding her light on the profile of this statue,
serves to augment the weirdness of its aspect. Here and there, enclosed in the half-crumbling walls of brick, are
fragments of stone bas-reliefs, very boldly cut; one of those in the best
preservation represents a man with the head of an elephant, and the wings
of a bat, devouring a child. Nothing can be more gloomy than these ruins,
buried among thick trees of a dark green, covered with frightful emblems,
and seen by the moonlight, in the midst of the deep silence of night. Against one of the walls of this ancient temple, dedicated to some
mysterious and bloody Javanese divinity, leans a kind of hut, rudely
constructed of fragments of brick and stone; the door, made of woven
rushes, is open, and a red light streams from it, which throws its rays
on the tall grass that covers the ground. Three men are assembled in this
hovel, around a clay-lamp, with a wick of cocoanut fibre steeped in
palm-oil. The first of these three, about forty years of age, is poorly clad in the
European fashion; his pale, almost white, complexion, announces that he
belongs to the mixed race, being offspring of a white father and Indian
mother. The second is a robust African <DW64>, with thick lips, vigorous
shoulders, and lank legs; his woolly hair is beginning to turn gray; he
is covered with rags, and stands close beside the Indian. The third
personage is asleep, and stretched on a mat in the corner of the hovel. These three men are the three Thuggee chiefs, who, obliged to fly from
the continent of India, have taken refuge in Java, under the guidance of
Mahal the Smuggler. "The Malay does not return," said the half-blood, named Faringhea, the
most redoubtable chief of this homicidal sect: "in executing our orders,
he has perhaps been killed by Djalma." "The storm of this morning brought every reptile out of the earth," said
the <DW64>; "the Malay must have been bitten, and his body ere now a nest
of serpents." "To serve the good work," proceeded Faringhea, with a gloomy air, "one
must know how to brave death." "And to inflict it," added the <DW64>. A stifled cry, followed by some inarticulate words, here drew the
attention of these two men, who hastily turned their heads in the
direction of the sleeper. His
beardless face, of a bright copper color, his robe of coarse stuff, his
turban striped brown and yellow, showed that he belonged to the pure
Hindoo race. His sleep appeared agitated by some painful vision; an
abundant sweat streamed over his countenance, contracted by terror; he
spoke in his dream, but his words were brief and broken, and accompanied
with convulsive starts. said Faringhea to the <DW64>. "Do you not remember, how, five years ago, that savage, Colonel Kennedy,
butcher of the Indians, came to the banks of the Ganges, to hunt the
tiger, with twenty horses, four elephants, and fifty servants?" "Yes, yes," said the <DW64>; "and we three, hunters of men, made a better
day's sport than he did. Kennedy, his horses, his elephants, and his
numerous servants did not get their tiger--but we got ours," he added,
with grim irony. "Yes; Kennedy, that tiger with a human face, fell into
our ambush, and the brothers of the good work offered up their fine prey
to our goddess Bowanee." "If you remember, it was just at the moment when we gave the last tug to
the cord round Kennedy's neck, that we perceived on a sudden a traveller
close at hand. He had seen us, and it was necessary to make away with
him. Now, since that time," added Faringhea, "the remembrance of the
murder of that man pursues our brother in his dreams," and he pointed to
the sleeping Indian. "And even when he is awake," said the <DW64>, looking at Faringhea with a
significant air. said the other, again pointing to the Indian, who, in the
agitation of his dream, recommenced talking in abrupt sentences; "listen! he is repeating the answers of the traveller, when we told him he must
die, or serve with us on Thuggee. His mind is still impressed--deeply
impressed--with those words." And, in fact, the Indian repeated aloud in his sleep, a sort of
mysterious dialogue, of which he himself supplied both questions and
answers. "'Traveller,' said he, in a voice broken by sudden pauses, 'why that
black mark on your forehead, stretching from one temple to the other? It
is a mark of doom and your look is sad as death. Come with us; Kallee will avenge you. --'Yes, I have
greatly suffered.' --'Yes, for a very long
time.' --What do you reserve for
those who injure you?' --'Will you not render blow for
blow?' --'Who are you, then, that render
good for evil?' --'I am one who loves, and suffers, and forgives.'" said the <DW64> to Faringhea; "he has not
forgotten the words of the traveller before his death." Still under the influence of his dream, the Indian continued:

"'Traveller, we are three; we are brave; we have your life in our
hands--you have seen us sacrifice to the good work. Be one of us, or
die--die--die! Not thus--do not look at me thus!'" As he
uttered these last words, the Indian made a sudden movement, as if to
keep off some approaching object, and awoke with a start. Then, passing
his hand over his moist forehead, he looked round him with a bewildered
eye. "For a bold hunter of
men, you have a weak head. Luckily, you have a strong heart and arm." The other remained a moment silent, his face buried in his hands; then he
replied: "It is long since I last dreamed of that traveller." said Faringhea, shrugging his shoulders. "Did you not
yourself throw the cord around his neck?" "Did we not dig his grave by the side of Colonel Kennedy's? Did we not
bury him with the English butcher, under the sand and the rushes?" "Yes, we dug his grave," said the Indian, trembling; "and yet, only a
year ago, I was seated one evening at the gate of Bombay, waiting for one
of our brothers--the sun was setting behind the pagoda, to the right of
the little hill--the scene is all before me now--I was seated under a
figtree--when I heard a slow, firm, even step, and, as I turned round my
head--I saw him--coming out of the town." "A vision," said the <DW64>; "always the same vision!" "A vision," added Faringhea, "or a vague resemblance." "I knew him by the black mark on his forehead; it was none but he. I
remained motionless with fear, gazing at him with eyes aghast. He
stopped, bending upon me his calm, sad look. In spite of myself, I could
not help exclaiming: 'It is he!' --'Yes,' he replied, in his gentle voice,
'it is I. Since all whom thou killest must needs live again,' and he
pointed to heaven as he spoke, 'why shouldst thou kill?--Hear me! I have
just come from Java; I am going to the other end of the world, to a
country of never-melting snow; but, here or there, on plains of fire or
plains of ice, I shall still be the same. Even so is it with the souls of
those who fall beneath thy kalleepra; in this world or up above, in this
garb or in another, the soul must still be a soul; thou canst not smite
it. --and shaking his head sorrowfully, he went on his
way, walking slowly, with downcast eyes; he ascended the hill of the
pagoda; I watched him as he went, without being able to move: at the
moment the sun set, he was standing on the summit of the hill, his tall
figure thrown out against the sky--and so he disappeared. added the Indian with a shudder, after a long pause: "it was none but
he." In this story the Indian had never varied, though he had often
entertained his companions with the same mysterious adventure. This
persistency on his part had the effect of shaking their incredulity, or
at least of inducing them to seek some natural cause for this apparently
superhuman event. "Perhaps," said Faringhea, after a moment's reflection, "the knot round
the traveller's neck got jammed, and some breath was left him, the air
may have penetrated the rushes with which we covered his grave, and so
life have returned to him." "No, no," said the Indian, shaking his head, "this man is not of our
race." said the Indian, in a solemn voice; "the number of victims that
the children of Bowanee have sacrificed since the commencement of ages,
is nothing compared to the immense heap of dead and dying, whom this
terrible traveller leaves behind him in his murderous march." cried the <DW64> and Faringhea. repeated the Hindoo, with a convinced accent, that made its
impression upon his companions. "Hear me and tremble!--When I met this
traveller at the gates of Bombay, he came from Java, and was going
towards the north, he said. The very next day, the town was a prey to the
cholera, and we learned sometime after, that this plague had first broken
out here, in Java." "That is true," said the <DW64>. "'I am going towards the
north, to a country of eternal snow,' said the traveller to me. The
cholera also went towards the north, passing through Muscat--Ispahan
--Tauris--Tiflis--till it overwhelmed Siberia." "True," said Faringhea, becoming thoughtful:

"And the cholera," resumed the Indian, "only travelled its five or six
leagues a day--a man's tramp--never appeared in two places at once--but
swept on slowly, steadily,--even as a man proceeds." At the mention of this strange coincidence, the Hindoo's companions
looked at each other in amazement. After a silence of some minutes, the
awe-struck <DW64> said to the last speaker: "So you think that this man--"

"I think that this man, whom we killed, restored to life by some infernal
divinity, has been commissioned to bear this terrible scourge over the
earth, and to scatter round his steps that death, from which he is
himself secure. added the Indian, with gloomy enthusiasm,
"this awful wayfarer passed through Java--the cholera wasted Java. He
passed through Bombay--the cholera wasted Bombay. He went towards the
north--the cholera wasted the north." So saying, the Indian fell into a profound reverie. The <DW64> and
Faringhea were seized with gloomy astonishment. The Indian spoke the truth as to the mysterious march (still unexplained)
of that fearful malady, which has never been known to travel more than
five or six leagues a day, or to appear simultaneously in two spots. Nothing can be more curious, than to trace out, on the maps prepared at
the period in question, the slow, progressive course of this travelling
pestilence, which offers to the astonished eye all the capricious
incidents of a tourist's journey. Passing this way rather than
that--selecting provinces in a country--towns in a province--one quarter
in a town--one street in a quarter--one house in a street--having its
place of residence and repose, and then continuing its slow, mysterious,
fear inspiring march. The words of the Hindoo, by drawing attention to these dreadful
eccentricities, made a strong impression upon the minds of the <DW64> and
Faringhea--wild natures, brought by horrible doctrines to the monomania
of murder. Yes--for this also is an established fact--there have been in India
members of an abominable community, who killed without motive, without
passion--killed for the sake of killing--for the pleasure of murder--to
substitute death for life--to make of a living man a corpse, as they have
themselves declared in one of their examinations. The mind loses itself in the attempt to penetrate the causes of these
monstrous phenomena. By what incredible series of events, have men been
induced to devote themselves to this priesthood of destruction? Without
doubt, such a religion could only flourish in countries given up, like
India, to the most atrocious slavery, and to the most merciless iniquity
of man to man. Such a creed!--is it not the hate of exasperated humanity, wound up to
its highest pitch by oppression?--May not this homicidal sect, whose
origin is lost in the night of ages, have been perpetuated in these
regions, as the only possible protest of slavery against despotism? May
not an inscrutable wisdom have here made Phansegars, even as are made
tigers and serpents? What is most remarkable in this awful sect, is the mysterious bond,
which, uniting its members amongst themselves, separates them from all
other men. They have laws and customs of their own, they support and help
each other, but for them there is neither country nor family; they owe no
allegiance save to a dark, invisible power, whose decrees they obey with
blind submission, and in whose name they spread themselves abroad, to
make corpses, according to their own savage expression. [6]

For some moments the three Stranglers had maintained a profound silence. Outside the hut, the moon continued to throw great masses of white
radiance, and tall bluish shadows, over the imposing fabric of the ruins;
the stars sparkled in the heavens; from time to time, a faint breeze
rustled through the thick and varnished leaves of the bananas and the
palms. The pedestal of the gigantic statue, which, still entire, stood on the
left side of the portico, rested upon large flagstones, half hidden with
brambles. Suddenly, one of these stones appeared to fall in; and from the
aperture, which thus formed itself without noise, a man, dressed in
uniform, half protruded his body, looked carefully around him, and
listened. Seeing the rays of the lamp, which lighted the interior of the hovel,
tremble upon the tall grass, he turned round to make a signal, and soon,
accompanied by two other soldiers, he ascended, with the greatest silence
and precaution, the last steps of the subterranean staircase, and went
gliding amongst the ruins. For a few moments, their moving shadows were
thrown upon the moonlit ground; then they disappeared behind some
fragments of broken wall. At the instant when the large stone resumed its place and level, the
heads of many other soldiers might have been seen lying close in the
excavation. The half-caste, the Indian, and the <DW64>, still seated
thoughtfully in the hut, did not perceive what was passing. [6] The following are some passages from the Count de Warren's very
curious book, "British India in 1831:" "Besides the robbers, who kill for
the sake of the booty they hope to find upon travellers, there is a class
of assassins, forming an organized society, with chiefs of their own, a
slang-language, a science, a free-masonry, and even a religion, which has
its fanaticism and its devotion, its agents, emissaries, allies, its
militant forces, and its passive adherents, who contribute their money to
the good work. This is the community of the Thugs or Phansegars
(deceivers or stranglers, from thugna, to deceive, and phansna, to
strangle), a religious and economical society, which speculates with the
human race by exterminating men; its origin is lost in the night of ages. "Until 1810 their existence was unknown, not only to the European
conquerors, but even to the native governments. Between the years 1816
and 1830, several of their bands were taken in the act, and punished: but
until this last epoch, all the revelations made on the subject by
officers of great experience, had appeared too monstrous to obtain the
attention or belief of the public; they had been rejected and despised as
the dreams of a heated imagination. And yet for many years, at the very
least for half a century, this social wound had been frightfully on the
increase, devouring the population from the Himalayas to Cape Comorin and
from Cutch to Assam. "It was in the year 1830 that the revelations of a celebrated chief,
whose life was spared on condition of his denouncing his accomplices,
laid bare the whole system. The basis of the Thuggee Society is a
religious belief--the worship of Bowanee, a gloomy divinity, who is only
pleased with carnage, and detests above all things the human race. Her
most agreeable sacrifices are human victims, and the more of these her
disciple may have offered up in this world the more he will be
recompensed in the next by all the delights of soul and sense, by women
always beautiful, and joys eternally renewed. If the assassin meets the
scaffold in his career, he dies with the enthusiasm of a martyr, because
he expects his reward. To obey his divine mistress, he murders, without
anger and without remorse, the old man, woman and child; whilst, to his
fellow-religionists, he may be charitable, humane, generous, devoted, and
may share all in common with them, because, like himself, they are the
ministers and adopted children of Bowanee. The destruction of his
fellow-creatures, not belonging to his community--the diminution of the
human race--that is the primary object of his pursuit; it is not as a
means of gain, for though plunder may be a frequent, and doubtless an
agreeable accessory, it is only secondary in his estimation. Destruction
is his end, his celestial mission, his calling; it is also a delicious
passion, the most captivating of all sports--this hunting of men!--'You
find great pleasure,' said one of those that were condemned, 'in tracking
the wild beast to his den, in attacking the boar, the tiger, because
there is danger to brave, energy and courage to display. Think how this
attraction must be redoubled, when the contest is with man, when it is
man that is to be destroyed. Instead of the single faculty of courage,
all must be called into action--courage, cunning, foresight, eloquence,
intrigue. To sport
with all the passions, to touch the chords of love and friendship, and so
draw the prey into one's net--that is a glorious chase--it is a delight,
a rapture, I tell you!' "Whoever was in India in the years 1831 and 1832, must remember the
stupor and affright, which the discovery of this vast infernal machine
spread through all classes of society. A great number of magistrates and
administrators of provinces refused to believe in it, and could not be
brought to comprehend that such a system had so long preyed on the body
politic, under their eyes as it were, silently, and without betraying
itself." --See "British India in 183," by Count Edward de Warren, 2 vols. THE AMBUSCADE

The half-blood Faringhea, wishing doubtless to escape from the dark
thoughts which the words of the Indian on the mysterious course of the
Cholera had raised within him, abruptly changed the subject of
conversation. His eye shone with lurid fire, and his countenance took an
expression of savage enthusiasm, as he cried: "Bowanee will always watch
over us, intrepid hunters of men! The world
is large; our prey is everywhere. The English may force us to quit India,
three chiefs of the good work--but what matter? We leave there our
brethren, secret, numerous, and terrible, as black scorpions, whose
presence is only known by their mortal sting. said he to the Hindoo, with an
inspired air. Wherever men are to be found, there must
be oppressors and victims--wherever there are victims, there must be
hearts swollen with hate--it is for us to inflame that hate with all the
ardor of vengeance! It is for us, servants of Bowanee, to draw towards
us, by seducing wiles, all whose zeal, courage, and audacity may be
useful to the cause. Let us rival each other in devotion and sacrifices;
let us lend each other strength, help, support! That all who are not with
us may be our prey, let us stand alone in the midst of all, against all,
and in spite of all. For us, there must be neither country nor family. Our family is composed of our brethren; our country is the world." This kind of savage eloquence made a deep impression on the <DW64> and the
Indian, over whom Faringhea generally exercised considerable influence,
his intellectual powers being very superior to theirs, though they were
themselves two of the most eminent chiefs of this bloody association. cried the Indian, sharing the enthusiasm
of Faringhea; "the world is ours. Even here, in Java, let us leave some
trace of our passage. Before we depart, let us establish the good work in
this island; it will increase quickly, for here also is great misery, and
the Dutch are rapacious as the English. Brother, I have seen in the
marshy rice-fields of this island, always fatal to those who cultivate
them, men whom absolute want forced to the deadly task--they were livid
as corpses--some of them worn out with sickness, fatigue, and hunger,
fell--never to rise again. Brothers, the good work will prosper in this
country!" "The other evening," said the half-caste, "I was on the banks of the
lake, behind a rock; a young woman came there--a few rags hardly covered
her lean and sun-scorched body--in her arms she held a little child,
which she pressed weeping to her milkless breast. She kissed it three
times, and said to it: 'You, at least, shall not be so unhappy as your
father'--and she threw it into the lake. It uttered one wail, and
disappeared. On this cry, the alligators, hidden amongst the reeds,
leaped joyfully into the water. There are mothers here who kill their
children out of pity.--Brothers, the good work will prosper in this
country!" "This morning," said the <DW64>, "whilst they tore the flesh of one of his
black slaves with whips, a withered old merchant of Batavia left his
country-house to come to the town. Lolling in his palanquin, he received,
with languid indolence, the sad caresses of two of those girls, whom he
had bought, to people his harem, from parents too poor to give them food. The palanquin, which held this little old man, and the girls, was carried
by twelve young and robust men. There are here, you see, mothers who in
their misery sell their own daughters--slaves that are scourged--men that
carry other men, like beasts of burden.--Brothers, the good work will
prosper in this country!" "Yes, in this country--and in every land of oppression, distress,
corruption, and slavery." "Could we but induce Djalma to join us, as Mahal the Smuggler advised,"
said the Indian, "our voyage to Java would doubly profit us; for we
should then number among our band this brave and enterprising youth, who
has so many motives to hate mankind." "He will soon be here; let us envenom his resentments." "Remind him of his father's death!" "Only let hatred inflame his heart, and he will be ours." The <DW64>, who had remained for some time lost in thought, said suddenly:
"Brothers, suppose Mahal the Smuggler were to betray us?" "He" cried the Hindoo, almost with indignation; "he gave us an asylum on
board his bark; he secured our flight from the Continent; he is again to
take us with him to Bombay, where we shall find vessels for America,
Europe, Africa." "What interest would Mahal have to betray us?" "Nothing
could save him from the vengeance of the sons of Bowanee, and that he
knows." "Well," said the black, "he promised to get Djalma to come hither this
evening, and, once amongst us, he must needs be our own." "Was it not the Smuggler who told us to order the Malay to enter the
ajoupa of Djalma, to surprise him during his sleep, and, instead of
killing him as he might have done, to trace the name of Bowanee upon his
arm? Djalma will thus learn to judge of the resolution, the cunning and
obedience of our brethren, and he will understand what he has to hope or
fear from such men. Be it through admiration or through terror, he must
become one of us." "But if he refuses to join us, notwithstanding the reasons he has to hate
mankind?" "Then--Bowanee will decide his fate," said Faringhea, with a gloomy look;
"I have my plan." "But will the Malay succeed in surprising Djalma during his sleep?" "There is none nobler, more agile, more dexterous, than the Malay," said
Faringhea. "He once had the daring to surprise in her den a black
panther, as she suckled her cub. He killed the dam, and took away the
young one, which he afterwards sold to some European ship's captain." exclaimed the Indian, listening to a singular
kind of hoot, which sounded through the profound silence of the night and
of the woods. "Yes, it is the scream of the vulture seizing its prey," said the <DW64>,
listening in his turn; "it is also the signal of our brethren, after they
have seized their prey." In a few minutes, the Malay appeared at the door of the hut. He had wound
around him a broad length of cotton, adorned with bright  stripes. "Well," said the <DW64>, anxiously; "have you succeeded?" "Djalma must bear all his life the mark of the good work," said the
Malay, proudly. "To reach him, I was forced to offer up to Bowanee a man
who crossed my path--I have left his body under the brambles, near the
ajoupa. But Djalma is marked with the sign. Mahal the Smuggler was the
first to know it." said the Indian, confounded by the Malay's
adroitness. "Had he awoke," replied the other, calmly, "I should have been a dead
man--as I was charged to spare his life." "Because his life may be more useful to us than his death," said the
half-caste. Then, addressing the Malay, he added: "Brother, in risking
life for the good work, you have done to-day what we did yesterday, what
we may do again to-morrow. This time, you obey; another you will
command." "We all belong to Bowanee," answered the Malay. "What is there yet to
do?--I am ready." Whilst he thus spoke, his face was turned towards the
door of the hut; on a sudden, he said in a low voice: "Here is Djalma. "He must not see me yet," said Faringhea, retiring to an obscure corner
of the cabin, and hiding himself under a mat; "try to persuade him. If he
resists--I have my project." Hardly had Faringhea disappeared, saying these words, when Djalma arrived
at the door of the hovel. At sight of those three personages with their
forbidding aspect, Djalma started in surprise. But ignorant that these
men belonged to the Phansegars, and knowing that, in a country where
there are no inns, travellers often pass the night under a tent, or
beneath the shelter of some ruins, he continued to advance towards them. After the first moment, he perceived by the complexion and the dress of
one of these men, that he was an Indian, and he accosted him in the
Hindoo language: "I thought to have found here a European--a Frenchman--"

"The Frenchman is not yet come," replied the Indian; "but he will not be
long." Guessing by Djalma's question the means which Mahal had employed to draw
him into the snare, the Indian hoped to gain time by prolonging his
error. asked Djalma of the Phansegar. "He appointed us to meet here, as he did you," answered the Indian. inquired Djalma, more and more astonished. "General Simon told you to be at this place?" "Yes, General Simon," replied the Indian. There was a moment's pause, during which Djalma sought in vain to explain
to himself this mysterious adventure. asked he, with a
look of suspicion; for the gloomy silence of the Phansegar's two
companions, who stared fixedly at each other, began to give him some
uneasiness. "We are yours, if you will be ours," answered the Indian. "I have no need of you--nor you of me." The English killed your father, a king; made you a
captive; proscribed you, you have lost all your possessions." At this cruel reminder, the countenance of Djalma darkened. He started,
and a bitter smile curled his lip. The Phansegar continued:

"Your father was just and brave--beloved by his subjects--they called him
'Father of the Generous,' and he was well named. Will you leave his death
unavenged? Will the hate, which gnaws at your heart, be without fruit?" "My father died with arms in his hand. I revenged his death on the
English whom I killed in war. He, who has since been a father to me, and
who fought also in the same cause, told me, that it would now be madness
to attempt to recover my territory from the English. When they gave me my
liberty, I swore never again to set foot in India--and I keep the oaths I
make." "Those who despoiled you, who took you captive, who killed your
father--were men. Are there not other men, on whom you can avenge
yourself! "You, who speak thus of men, are not a man!" "I, and those who resemble me, are more than men. We are, to the rest of
the human race, what the bold hunter is to the wild beasts, which they
run down in the forest. Will you be, like us, more than a man? Will you
glut surely, largely, safely--the hate which devours your heart, for all
the evil done you?" "Your words become more and more obscure: I have no hatred in my heart,"
said Djalma. "When an enemy is worthy of me, I fight with him; when he is
unworthy, I despise him. So that I have no hate--either for brave men or
cowards." cried the <DW64> on a sudden, pointing with rapid gesture to
the door, for Djalma and the Indian had now withdrawn a little from it,
and were standing in one corner of the hovel. At the shout of the <DW64>, Faringhea, who had not been perceived by
Djalma, threw off abruptly the mat which covered him, drew his crease,
started up like a tiger, and with one bound was out of the cabin. Then,
seeing a body of soldiers advancing cautiously in a circle, he dealt one
of them a mortal stroke, threw down two others, and disappeared in the
midst of the ruins. All this passed so instantaneously, that, when Djalma
turned round, to ascertain the cause of the <DW64>'s cry of alarm,
Faringhea had already disappeared. The muskets of several soldiers, crowding to the door, were immediately
pointed at Djalma and the three Stranglers, whilst others went in pursuit
of Faringhea. The <DW64>, the Malay, and the Indian, seeing the
impossibility of resistance, exchanged a few rapid words, and offered
their hands to the cords, with which some of the soldiers had provided
themselves. The Dutch captain, who commanded the squad, entered the cabin at this
moment. said he, pointing out Djalma to the
soldiers, who were occupied in binding the three Phansegars. Djalma had remained petrified with surprise, not understanding what was
passing round him; but, when he saw the sergeant and two soldiers
approach with ropes to bind him, he repulsed them with violent
indignation, and rushed towards the door where stood the officer. The
soldiers, who had supposed that Djalma would submit to his fate with the
same impassibility as his companions, were astounded by this resistance,
and recoiled some paces, being struck in spite of themselves, with the
noble and dignified air of the son of Kadja-sing. "Why would you bind me like these men?" cried Djalma, addressing himself
in Hindostanee to the officer, who understood that language from his long
service in the Dutch colonies. "Why would we bind you, wretch?--because you form part of this band of
assassins. added the officer in Dutch, speaking to the soldiers,
"are you afraid of him?--Tie the cord tight about his wrists; there will
soon be another about his neck." "You are mistaken," said Djalma, with a dignity and calmness which
astonished the officer; "I have hardly been in this place a quarter of an
hour--I do not know these men. "Not a Phansegar like them?--Who will believe the falsehood?" cried Djalma, with so natural a movement and expression of
horror, that with a sign the officer stopped the soldiers, who were again
advancing to bind the son of Kadja-sing; "these men form part of that
horrible band of murderers! and you accuse me of being their
accomplice!--Oh, in this case, sir! I am perfectly at ease," said the
young man, with a smile of disdain. "It will not be sufficient to say that you are tranquil," replied the
officer; "thanks to their confessions, we now know by what mysterious
signs to recognize the Thugs." "I repeat, sir, that I hold these murderers in the greatest horror, and
that I came here--"

The <DW64>, interrupting Djalma, said to the officer with a ferocious joy:
"You have hit it; the sons of the good work do know each other by marks
tattooed on their skin. For us, the hour has come--we give our necks to
the cord. Often enough have we twined it round the necks of those who
served not with us the good work. Now, look at our arms, and look at the
arms of this youth!" The officer, misinterpreting the words of the <DW64>, said to Djalma: "It
is quite clear, that if, as this <DW64> tells us, you do not bear on your
arm the mysterious symbol--(we are going to assure ourselves of the
fact), and if you can explain your presence here in a satisfactory
manner, you may be at liberty within two hours." "You do not understand me," said the <DW64> to the officer; "Prince Djalma
is one of us, for he bears on his left arm the name of Bowanee." he is like us, a son of Kale!" "He is like us, a Phansegar," said the Indian. The three men, irritated at the horror which Djalma had manifested on
learning that they were Phansegars, took a savage pride in making it
believed that the son of Kadja-sing belonged to their frightful
association. The latter again
gave a look of disdainful pity, raised with his right hand his long, wide
left sleeve, and displayed his naked arm. cried the officer, for on the inner part of the fore
arm, a little below the bend, the name of the Bowanee, in bright red
Hindoo characters, was distinctly visible. The officer ran to the Malay,
and uncovered his arm; he saw the same word, the same signs. Not yet
satisfied, he assured himself that the <DW64> and the Indian were likewise
so marked. cried he, turning furiously towards Djalma; "you inspire even
more horror than your accomplices. Bind him like a cowardly assassin,"
added he to the soldiers; "like a cowardly assassin, who lies upon the
brink of the grave, for his execution will not be long delayed." Struck with stupor, Djalma, who for some moments had kept his eye riveted
on the fatal mark, was unable to pronounce a word, or make the least
movement: his powers of thought seemed to fail him, in presence of this
incomprehensible fact. said the officer to him, with
indignation. "I cannot deny what I see--what is," said Djalma, quite overcome. "It is lucky that you confess at last," replied the officer. "Soldiers,
keep watch over him and his accomplices--you answer for them." Almost believing himself the sport of some wild dream. Djalma offered no
resistance, but allowed himself to be bound and removed with mechanical
passiveness. The officer, with part of his soldiers, hoped still to
discover Faringhea amongst the ruins; but his search was vain, and, after
spending an hour in fruitless endeavors, he set out for Batavia, where
the escort of the prisoners had arrived before him. Some hours after these events, M. Joshua van Dael thus finished his long
despatch, addressed to M. Rodin, of Paris:

"Circumstances were such, that I could not act otherwise; and, taking all
into consideration, it is a very small evil for a great good. Three
murderers are delivered over to justice, and the temporary arrest of
Djalma will only serve to make his innocence shine forth with redoubled
luster. "Already this morning I went to the governor, to protest in favor of our
young prince. 'As it was through me,' I said, 'that those three great
criminals fell into the hands of the authorities, let them at least show
me some gratitude, by doing everything to render clear as day the
innocence of Prince Djalma, so interesting by reason of his misfortunes
and noble qualities. Most certainly,' I added, 'when I came yesterday to
inform the governor, that the Phansegars would be found assembled in the
ruins of Tchandi, I was far from anticipating that any one would confound
with those wretches the adopted son of General Simon, an excellent man,
with whom I have had for some time the most honorable relations. We must,
then, at any cost, discover the inconceivable mystery that has placed
Djalma in this dangerous position;' and, I continued,'so convinced am I
of his innocence, that, for his own sake, I would not ask for any favor
on his behalf. He will have sufficient courage and dignity to wait
patiently in prison for the day of justice.' In all this, you see, I
spoke nothing but the truth, and had not to reproach myself with the
least deception, for nobody in the world is more convinced than I am of
Djalma's innocence. "The governor answered me as I expected, that morally he felt as certain
as I did of the innocence of the young prince, and would treat him with
all possible consideration; but that it was necessary for justice to have
its course, because it would be the only way of demonstrating the
falsehood of the accusation, and discovering by what unaccountable
fatality that mysterious sign was tattooed upon Djalma's arm. "Mahal the Smuggler, who alone could enlighten justice on this subject,
will in another hour have quitted Batavia, to go on board the 'Ruyter,'
which will take him to Egypt; for he has a note from me to the captain,
to certify that he is the person for whom I engaged and paid the passage. At the same time, he will be the bearer of this long despatch, for the
'Ruyter' is to sail in an hour, and the last letter-bag for Europe was
made up yesterday evening. But I wished to see the governor this morning,
before closing the present. "Thus, then, is Prince Djalma enforced detained for a month, and, this
opportunity of the 'Ruyter' once lost, it is materially impossible that
the young Indian can be in France by the 13th of next February. You see,
therefore, that, even as you ordered, so have I acted according to the
means at my disposal--considering only the end which justifies them--for
you tell me a great interest of the society is concerned. "In your hands, I have been what we all ought to be in the hands of our
superiors--a mere instrument: since, for the greater glory of God, we
become corpses with regard to the will. [7] Men may deny our unity and
power, and the times appear opposed to us; but circumstances only change;
we are ever the same. "Obedience and courage, secrecy and patience, craft and audacity, union
and devotion--these become us, who have the world for our country, our
brethren for family, Rome for our Queen! About ten o'clock in the morning, Mahal the Smuggler set out with this
despatch (sealed) in his possession, to board the "Ruyter." An hour
later, the dead body of this same Mahal, strangled by Thuggee, lay
concealed beneath some reeds on the edge of a desert strand, whither he
had gone to take boat to join the vessel. When at a subsequent period, after the departure of the steamship, they
found the corpse of the smuggler, M. Joshua sought in vain for the
voluminous packet, which he had entrusted to his care. Neither was there
any trace of the note which Mahal was to have delivered to the captain of
the "Ruyter," in order to be received as passenger. Finally, the searches and bushwhacking ordered throughout the country for
the purpose of discovering Faringhea, were of no avail. The dangerous
chief of the Stranglers was never seen again in Java. [7] It is known that the doctrine of passive and absolute obedience, the
main-spring of the Society of Jesus, is summed up in those terrible words
of the dying Loyola: "Every member of the Order shall be, in the hands of
his superiors, even as a corpse (Perinde ac Cadaver)."--E. Three months have elapsed since Djalma was thrown into Batavia Prison
accused of belonging to the murderous gang of Megpunnas. The following
scene takes place in France, at the commencement of the month of
February, 1832, in Cardoville Manor House, an old feudal habitation
standing upon the tall cliffs of Picardy, not far from Saint Valery, a
dangerous coast on which almost every year many ships are totally
wrecked, being driven on shore by the northwesters, which render the
navigation of the Channel so perilous. From the interior of the Castle is heard the howling of a violent
tempest, which has arisen during the night; a frequent formidable noise,
like the discharge of artillery, thunders in the distance, and is
repeated by the echoes of the shore; it is the sea breaking with fury
against the high rocks which are overlooked by the ancient Manor House. It is about seven o'clock in the morning. Daylight is not yet visible
through the windows of a large room situated on the ground-floor. In this
apartment, in which a lamp is burning, a woman of about sixty years of
age, with a simple and honest countenance, dressed as a rich farmer's
wife of Picardy, is already occupied with her needle-work,
notwithstanding the early hour. Close by, the husband of this woman,
about the same age as herself, is seated at a large table, sorting and
putting up in bags divers samples of wheat and oats. The face of this
white-haired man is intelligent and open, announcing good sense and
honesty, enlivened by a touch of rustic humor; he wears a shooting-jacket
of green cloth, and long gaiters of tan- leather, which half
conceal his black velveteen breeches. The terrible storm which rages without renders still more agreeable the
picture of this peaceful interior. A rousing fire burns in a broad
chimney-place faced with white marble, and throws its joyous light on the
carefully polished floor; nothing can be more cheerful than the old
fashioned chintz hangings and curtains with red Chinese figures upon a
white ground, and the panels over the door painted with pastoral scenes
in the style of Watteau. A clock of Sevres china, and rosewood furniture
inlaid with green--quaint and portly furniture, twisted into all sorts of
grotesque shapes--complete the decorations of this apartment. Out-doors, the gale continued to howl furiously, and sometimes a gust of
wind would rush down the chimney, or shake the fastenings of the windows. The man who was occupied in sorting the samples of grain was M. Dupont,
bailiff of Cardoville manor. said his wife; "what dreadful weather, my dear! This M.
Rodin, who is to come here this morning, as the Princess de Saint
Dizier's steward announced to us, picked out a very bad day for it." "Why, in truth, I have rarely heard such a hurricane. If M. Rodin has
never seen the sea in its fury, he may feast his eyes to-day with the
sight." "What can it be that brings this M. Rodin, my dear?" The steward tells me in his letter to
show M. Rodin the greatest attention, and to obey him as if he were my
master. It will be for him to explain himself, and for me to execute his
orders, since he comes on the part of the princess." "By rights he should come from Mademoiselle Adrienne, as the land belongs
to her since the death of the duke her father." "Yes; but the princess being aunt to the young lady, her steward manages
Mademoiselle Adrienne's affairs--so whether one or the other, it amounts
to the same thing." "May be M. Rodin means to buy the estate. Though, to be sure, that stout
lady who came from Paris last week on purpose to see the chateau appeared
to have a great wish for it." At these words the bailiff began to laugh with a sly look. "What is there to laugh at, Dupont?" asked his wife, a very good
creature, but not famous for intelligence or penetration. "I laugh," answered Dupont, "to think of the face and figure of that
enormous woman: with such a look, who the devil would call themselves
Madame de la Sainte-Colombe--Mrs. A pretty saint, and a pretty
dove, truly! She is round as a hogshead, with the voice of a town-crier;
has gray moustachios like an old grenadier, and without her knowing it, I
heard her say to her servant: 'Stir your stumps, my hearty!' --and yet she
calls herself Sainte-Colombe!" "How hard on her you are, Dupont; a body don't choose one's name. And, if
she has a beard, it is not the lady's fault." "No--but it is her fault to call herself Sainte-Colombe. Ah, my poor Catherine, you are yet very green in some
things." "While you, my poor Dupont, are well read in slander! The first thing she asked for on arriving was the
chapel of the Castle, of which she had heard speak. She even said that
she would make some embellishments in it; and, when I told her we had no
church in this little place, she appeared quite vexed not to have a
curate in the village." that's the first thought of your upstarts--to play the
great lady of the parish, like your titled people." "Madame de la Sainte-Colombe need not play the great lady, because she is
one." "Yes--only see how she was dressed, in scarlet gown, and violet gloves
like a bishop's; and, when she took off her bonnet, she had a diamond
band round her head-dress of false, light hair, and diamond ear-drops as
large as my thumb, and diamond rings on every finger! None of your
tuppenny beauties would wear so many diamonds in the middle of the day." "Do you mean to say there's more?" "She talked of nothing but dukes, and marquises, and counts, and very
rich gentlemen, who visit at her house, and are her most intimate
friends; and then, when she saw the summer house in the park, half-burnt
by the Prussians, which our late master never rebuilt, she asked, 'What
are those ruins there?' and I answered: 'Madame, it was in the time of
the Allies that the pavilion was burnt.' --'Oh, my clear,' cried she; 'our
allies, good, dear allies! So
you see, Dupont, I said to myself directly: 'She was no doubt one of the
noble women who fled abroad--'"

"Madame de la Sainte-Colombe!" "Oh,
my poor, poor wife!" "Oh, it is all very well; but because you have been three years at Paris,
don't think yourself a conjurer!" "Catherine, let's drop it: you will make me say some folly, and there are
certain things which dear, good creatures like you need never know." "I cannot tell what you are driving at, only try to be less
slanderous--for, after all, should Madame de la Sainte-Colombe buy the
estate, will you be sorry to remain as her bailiff, eh?" "Not I--for we are getting old, my good Catherine; we have lived here
twenty years, and we have been too honest to provide for our old days by
pilfering--and truly, at our age, it would be hard to seek another place,
which perhaps we should not find. What I regret is, that Mademoiselle
Adrienne should not keep the land; it seems that she wished to sell it,
against the will of the princess." is it not very extraordinary that Mademoiselle
Adrienne should have the disposal of her large fortune so early in life?" Our young lady, having no father or mother, is
mistress of her property, besides having a famous little will of her own. Dost remember, ten years ago, when the count brought her down here one
summer?--what an imp of mischief! eh?--how they
sparkled, even then!" "It is true that Mademoiselle Adrienne had in her look--an expression--a
very uncommon expression for her age." "If she has kept what her witching, luring face promised, she must be
very pretty by this time, notwithstanding the peculiar color of her
hair--for, between ourselves, if she had been a tradesman's daughter,
instead of a young lady of high birth, they would have called it red." Heaven forbid--I always thought
that she would be as good as pretty, and it is not speaking ill of her to
say she has red hair. On the contrary, it always appears to me so fine,
so bright, so sunny, and to suit so well her snowy complexion and black
eyes, that in truth I would not have had it other than it was; and I am
sure, that now this very color of her hair, which would be a blemish in
any one else, must only add to the charm of Mademoiselle Adrienne's face. She must have such a sweet vixen look!" to be candid, she really was a vixen--always running about the park,
aggravating her governess, climbing the trees--in fact, playing all
manner of naughty tricks." "I grant you, Mademoiselle Adrienne was a chip of the old block; but then
what wit, what engaging ways, and above all, what a good heart!" Once I remember she gave her shawl and her
new merino frock to a poor little beggar girl, and came back to the house
in her petticoat, and bare arms." "Oh, an excellent heart--but headstrong--terribly headstrong!" "Yes--that she was; and 'tis likely to finish badly, for it seems that
she does things at Paris--oh! such things--"

"What things?" "Oh, my dear; I can hardly venture--"

"Fell, but what are they?" "Why," said the worthy dame, with a sort of embarrassment and confusion,
which showed how much she was shocked by such enormities, "they say, that
Mademoiselle Adrienne never sets foot in a church, but lives in a kind of
heathen temple in her aunt's garden, where she has masked women to dress
her up like a goddess, and scratches them very often, because she gets
tipsy--without mentioning, that every night she plays on a hunting horn
of massive gold--all which causes the utmost grief and despair to her
poor aunt the princess." Here the bailiff burst into a fit of laughter, which interrupted his
wife. "Now tell me," said he, when this first access of hilarity was over,
"where did you get these fine stories about Mademoiselle Adrienne?" "From Rene's wife, who went to Paris to look for a child to nurse; she
called at Saint-Dizier House, to see Madame Grivois, her godmother.--Now
Madame Grivois is first bedchamber woman to the princess--and she it was
who told her all this--and surely she ought to know, being in the house." "Yes, a fine piece of goods that Grivois! once she was a regular bad 'un,
but now she professes to be as over-nice as her mistress; like master
like man, they say. The princess herself, who is now so stiff and
starched, knew how to carry on a lively game in her time. Fifteen years
ago, she was no such prude: do you remember that handsome colonel of
hussars, who was in garrison at Abbeville? an exiled noble who had served
in Russia, whom the Bourbons gave a regiment on the Restoration?" "Yes, yes--I remember him; but you are really too backbiting." "Not a bit--I only speak the truth. The colonel spent his whole time
here, and every one said he was very warm with this same princess, who is
now such a saint. Every evening, some new
entertainment at the chateau. What a fellow that colonel was, to set
things going; how well he could act a play!--I remember--"

The bailiff was unable to proceed. A stout maid-servant, wearing the
costume and cap of Picardy, entered in haste, and thus addressed her
mistress: "Madame, there is a person here that wants to speak to master;
he has come in the postmaster's calash from Saint-Valery, and he says
that he is M. A moment after, M. Rodin made his appearance. According to his custom, he
was dressed even more than plainly. With an air of great humility, he
saluted the bailiff and his wife, and at a sign from her husband, the
latter withdrew. The cadaverous countenance of M. Rodin, his almost
invisible lips, his little reptile eyes, half concealed by their flabby
lids, and the sordid style of his dress, rendered his general aspect far
from prepossessing; yet this man knew how, when it was necessary, to
affect, with diabolical art, so much sincerity and good-nature--his words
were so affectionate and subtly penetrating--that the disagreeable
feeling of repugnance, which the first sight of him generally inspired,
wore off little by little, and he almost always finished by involving his
dupe or victim in the tortuous windings of an eloquence as pliant as it
was honeyed and perfidious; for ugliness and evil have their fascination,
as well as what is good and fair. The honest bailiff looked at this man with surprise, when he thought of
the pressing recommendation of the steward of the Princess de Saint
Dizier; he had expected to see quite another sort of personage, and,
hardly able to dissemble his astonishment, he said to him: "Is it to M.
Rodin that I have the honor to speak?" "Yes, sir; and here is another letter from the steward of the Princess de
Saint-Dizier." "Pray, sir, draw near the fire, whilst I just see what is in this letter. The weather is so bad," continued the bailiff, obligingly, "may I not
offer you some refreshment?" "A thousand thanks, my dear sir; I am off again in an hour." Whilst M. Dupont read, M. Rodin threw inquisitive glances round the
chamber; like a man of skill and experience, he had frequently drawn just
and useful inductions from those little appearances, which, revealing a
taste or habit, give at the same time some notion of a character; on this
occasion, however, his curiosity was at fault. "Very good, sir," said the bailiff, when he had finished reading; "the
steward renews his recommendation, and tells me to attend implicitly to
your commands." "Well, sir, they will amount to very little, and I shall not trouble you
long." "It will be no trouble, but an honor." "Nay, I know how much your time must be occupied, for, as soon as one
enters this chateau, one is struck with the good order and perfect
keeping of everything in it--which proves, my dear sir, what excellent
care you take of it." "Oh, sir, you flatter me." "Flatter you?--a poor old man like myself has something else to think of. But to come to business: there is a room here which is called the Green
Chamber?" "Yes, sir; the room which the late Count-Duke de Cardoville used for a
study." "You will have the goodness to take me there." "Unfortunately, it is not in my power to do so. After the death of the
Count-Duke, and when the seals were removed, a number of papers were shut
up in a cabinet in that room, and the lawyers took the keys with them to
Paris." "Here are those keys," said M. Rodin, showing to the bailiff a large and
a small key tied together. "Yes--for certain papers--and also far a small mahogany casket, with
silver clasps--do you happen to know it?" "Yes, sir; I have often seen it on the count's writing-table. It must be
in the large, lacquered cabinet, of which you have the key." "You will conduct me to this chamber, as authorized by the Princess de
Saint-Dizier?" "Yes, sir; the princess continues in good health?" "And Mademoiselle Adrienne?" said M. Rodin, with a sigh of deep contrition and
grief. has any calamity happened to Mademoiselle Adrienne?" "No, no--she is, unfortunately, as well as she is beautiful." for when beauty, youth, and health are joined to an evil
spirit of revolt and perversity--to a character which certainly has not
its equal upon earth--it would be far better to be deprived of those
dangerous advantages, which only become so many causes of perdition. But
I conjure you, my dear sir, let us talk of something else: this subject
is too painful," said M. Rodin, with a voice of deep emotion, lifting the
tip of his little finger to the corner of his right eye, as if to stop a
rising tear. The bailiff did not see the tear, but he saw the gesture, and he was
struck with the change in M. Rodin's voice. He answered him, therefore,
with much sympathy: "Pardon my indiscretion, sir; I really did not
know--"

"It is I who should ask pardon for this involuntary display of
feeling--tears are so rare with old men--but if you had seen, as I have,
the despair of that excellent princess, whose only fault has been too
much kindness, too much weakness, with regard to her niece--by which she
has encouraged her--but, once more, let us talk of something else, my
dear sir!" After a moment's pause, during which M. Rodin seemed to recover from his
emotion, he said to Dupont: "One part of my mission, my dear sir--that
which relates to the Green Chamber--I have now told you; but there is yet
another. Before coming to it, however, I must remind you of a
circumstance you have perhaps forgotten--namely, that some fifteen or
sixteen years ago, the Marquis d'Aigrigny, then colonel of the hussars in
garrison at Abbeville, spent some time in this house." It was only just now, that I
was talking about him to my wife. He was the life of the house!--how well
he could perform plays--particularly the character of a scapegrace. In
the Two Edmonds, for instance, he would make you die with laughing, in
that part of a drunken soldier--and then, with what a charming voice he
sang Joconde, sir--better than they could sing it at Paris!" Rodin, having listened complacently to the bailiff, said to him: "You
doubtless know that, after a fierce duel he had with a furious
Bonapartist, one General Simon, the Marquis d'Aigrigny (whose private
secretary I have now the honor to be) left the world for the church." "That fine officer--brave, noble, rich, esteemed, and
flattered--abandoned all those advantages for the sorry black gown; and,
notwithstanding his name, position, high connections, his reputation as a
great preacher, he is still what he was fourteen years ago--a plain
abbe--whilst so many, who have neither his merit nor his virtues, are
archbishops and cardinals." M. Rodin expressed himself with so much goodness, with such an air of
conviction, and the facts he cited appeared to be so incontestable, that
M. Dupont could not help exclaiming: "Well, sir, that is splendid
conduct!" said M. Rodin, with an inimitable expression of
simplicity; "it is quite a matter of course when one has a heart like M.
d'Aigrigny's. But amongst all his good qualities, he has particularly
that of never forgetting worthy people--people of integrity, honor,
conscience--and therefore, my dear M. Dupont, he has not forgotten you." "What, the most noble marquis deigns to remember--"

"Three days ago, I received a letter from him, in which he mentions your
name." "He will be there soon, if not there now. He went to Italy about three
months ago, and, during his absence, he received a very sad piece of
news--the death of his mother, who was passing the autumn on one of the
estates of the Princess de Saint-Dizier." "Yes, it was a cruel grief to him; but we must all resign ourselves to
the will of Providence!" "And with regard to what subject did the marquis do me the honor to
mention my name?" First of all, you must know that this house is
sold. The bill of sale was signed the day before my departure from
Paris." "I am afraid that the new proprietors may not choose to keep me as their
bailiff." It is just on that subject that I am going
to speak to you." Knowing the interest which the marquis feels for you, I am
particularly desirous that you should keep this place, and I will do all
in my power to serve you, if--"

"Ah, sir!" cried Dupont, interrupting Rodin; "what gratitude do I not owe
you! "Now, my dear sir, you flatter me in your turn; but I ought to tell you,
that I'm obliged to annex a small condition to my support." "The person who is about to inhabit this mansion, is an old lady in every
way worthy of veneration; Madame de la Sainte-Colombe is the name of this
respectable--"

"What, sir?" said the bailiff, interrupting Rodin; "Madame de la Sainte
Colombe the lady who has bought us out?" "Yes, sir, she came last week to see the estate. My wife persists that
she is a great lady; but--between ourselves--judging by certain words
that I heard her speak--"

"You are full of penetration, my dear M. Dupont. Madame de la Sainte
Colombe is far from being a great lady. I believe she was neither more
nor less than a milliner, under one of the wooden porticoes of the Palais
Royal. You see, that I deal openly with you." "And she boasted of all the noblemen, French and foreign, who used to
visit her!" "No doubt, they came to buy bonnets for their wives! However, the fact
is, that, having gained a large fortune and, after being in youth and
middle age--indifferent--alas! more than indifferent to the salvation of
her soul--Madame de la Sainte-Colombe is now in a likely way to
experience grace--which renders her, as I told you, worthy of veneration,
because nothing is so respectable as a sincere repentance--always
providing it to be lasting. Now to make the good work sure and effectual,
we shall need your assistance, my dear M. "A great deal; and I will explain to you how. There is no church in this
village, which stands at an equal distance from either of two parishes. Madame de la Sainte-Colombe, wishing to make choice of one of the two
clergymen, will naturally apply to you and Madame Dupont, who have long
lived in these parts, for information respecting them." in that case the choice will soon be made. The incumbent of
Danicourt is one of the best of men." "Now that is precisely what you must not say to Madame de la Sainte
Colombe." "You must, on the contrary, much praise, without ceasing, the curate of
Roiville, the other parish, so as to decide this good lady to trust
herself to his care." "And why, sir, to him rather than to the other?" "Why?--because, if you and Madame Dupont succeed in persuading Madame de
la Sainte-Colombe to make the choice I wish, you will be certain to keep
your place as bailiff. I give you my word of it, and what I promise I
perform." "I do not doubt, sir, that you have this power," said Dupont, convinced
by Rodin's manner, and the authority of his words; "but I should like to
know--"

"One word more," said Rodin, interrupting him; "I will deal openly with
you, and tell you why I insist on the preference which I beg you to
support. I should be grieved if you saw in all this the shadow of an
intrigue. It is only for the purpose of doing a good action. The curate
of Roiville, for whom I ask your influence, is a man for whom M.
d'Aigrigny feels a deep interest. Though very poor, he has to support an
aged mother. Now, if he had the spiritual care of Madame de la Sainte
Colombe, he would do more good than any one else, because he is full of
zeal and patience; and then it is clear he would reap some little
advantages, by which his old mother might profit--there you see is the
secret of this mighty scheme. When I knew that this lady was disposed to
buy an estate in the neighborhood of our friend's parish, I wrote about
it to the marquis; and he, remembering you, desired me to ask you to
render him this small service, which, as you see, will not remain without
a recompense. For I tell you once more, and I will prove it, that I have
the power to keep you in your place as bailiff." "Well, sir," replied Dupont, after a moment's reflection, "you are so
frank and obliging, that I will imitate your sincerity. In the same
degree that the curate of Danicourt is respected and loved in this
country, the curate of Roiville, whom you wish me to prefer to him, is
dreaded for his intolerance--and, moreover--"

"Well, and what more?" "Why, then, they say--"

"Come, what do they say?" Upon these words, M. Rodin burst into so hearty a laugh that the bailiff
was quite struck dumb with amazement--for the countenance of M. Rodin
took a singular expression when he laughed. he repeated, with
redoubled hilarity; "a Jesuit!--Now really, my dear M. Dupont, for a man
of sense, experience, and intelligence, how can you believe such idle
stories?--A Jesuit--are there such people as Jesuits?--in our time, above
all, can you believe such romance of the Jacobins, hobgoblins of the old
freedom lovers?--Come, come; I wager, you have read about them in the
Constitutionnel!" "And yet, sir, they say--"

"Good heavens! what will they not say?--But wise men, prudent men like
you, do not meddle with what is said--they manage their own little
matters, without doing injury to any one, and they never sacrifice, for
the sake of nonsense, a good place, which secures them a comfortable
provision for the rest of their days. I tell you frankly, however much I
may regret it, that should you not succeed in getting the preference for
my man, you will not remain bailiff here. "But, sir," said poor Dupont, "it will not be my fault, if this lady,
hearing a great deal in praise of the other curate, should prefer him to
your friend." but if, on the other hand, persons who have long lived in the
neighborhood--persons worthy of confidence, whom she will see every
day--tell Madame de la Sainte-Colombe a great deal of good of my friend,
and a great deal of harm of the other curate, she will prefer the former,
and you will continue bailiff." "But, sir--that would be calumny!" said Rodin, with an air of sorrowful and
affectionate reproach, "how can you think me capable of giving you evil
counsel?--I was only making a supposition. You wish to remain bailiff on
this estate. I offer you the certainty of doing so--it is for you to
consider and decide." "But, sir--"

"One word more--or rather one more condition--as important as the other. Unfortunately, we have seen clergymen take advantage of the age and
weakness of their penitents, unfairly to benefit either themselves or
others: I believe our protege incapable of any such baseness--but, in
order to discharge my responsibility--and yours also, as you will have
contributed to his appointment--I must request that you will write to me
twice a week, giving the most exact detail of all that you have remarked
in the character, habits, connections, pursuits, of Madame de la Sainte
Colombe--for the influence of a confessor, you see, reveals itself in the
whole conduct of life, and I should wish to be fully edified by the
proceedings of my friend, without his being aware of it--or, if anything
blameable were to strike you, I should be immediately informed of it by
this weekly correspondence." "But, sir--that would be to act as a spy?" "Now, my dear M. Dupont! how can you thus brand the sweetest, most
wholesome of human desires--mutual confidence?--I ask of you nothing
else--I ask of you to write to me confidentially the details of all that
goes on here. On these two conditions, inseparable one from the other,
you remain bailiff; otherwise, I shall be forced, with grief and regret,
to recommend some one else to Madame de la Sainte-Colombe." "I beg you, sir," said Dupont, with emotion, "Be generous without any
conditions!--I and my wife have only this place to give us bread, and we
are too old to find another. Do not expose our probity of forty years'
standing to be tempted by the fear of want, which is so bad a
counsellor!" "My dear M. Dupont, you are really a great child: you must reflect upon
this, and give me your answer in the course of a week." I implore you--" The conversation was here interrupted by a
loud report, which was almost instantaneously repeated by the echoes of
the cliffs. Hardly had he spoken, when the
same noise was again heard more distinctly than before. "It is the sound of cannon," cried Dupont, rising; "no doubt a ship in
distress, or signaling for a pilot." "My dear," said the bailiffs wife, entering abruptly, "from the terrace,
we can see a steamer and a large ship nearly dismasted--they are drifting
right upon the shore--the ship is firing minute gulls--it will be lost." cried the bailiff, taking his hat and preparing to
go out, "to look on at a shipwreck, and be able to do nothing!" "Can no help be given to these vessels?" "If they are driven upon the reefs, no human power can save them; since
the last equinox two ships have been lost on this coast." "Lost with all on board?--Oh, very frightful," said M. Rodin. "In such a storm, there is but little chance for the crew; no matter,"
said the bailiff, addressing his wife, "I will run down to the rocks with
the people of the farm, and try to save some of them, poor
creatures!--Light large fires in several rooms--get ready linen, clothes,
cordials--I scarcely dare hope to save any, but we must do our best. "I should think it a duty, if I could be at all useful, but I am too old
and feeble to be of any service," said M. Rodin, who was by no means
anxious to encounter the storm. "Your good lady will be kind enough to
show me the Green Chamber, and when I have found the articles I require,
I will set out immediately for Paris, for I am in great haste." Ring the big bell," said the
bailiff to his servant; "let all the people of the farm meet me at the
foot of the cliff, with ropes and levers." "Yes, my dear," replied Catherine; "but do not expose yourself." "Kiss me--it will bring me luck," said the bailiff; and he started at a
full run, crying: "Quick! quick; by this time not a plank may remain of
the vessels." "My dear madam," said Rodin, always impassible, "will you be obliging
enough to show me the Green Chamber?" "Please to follow me, sir," answered Catherine, drying her tears--for she
trembled on account of her husband, whose courage she well knew. THE TEMPEST

The sea is raging. Mountainous waves of dark green, marbled with white
foam, stand out, in high, deep undulations, from the broad streak of red
light, which extends along the horizon. Above are piled heavy masses of
black and sulphurous vapor, whilst a few lighter clouds of a reddish
gray, driven by the violence of the wind, rush across the murky sky. The pale winter sun, before he quite disappears in the great clouds,
behind which he is slowly mounting, casts here and there some oblique
rays upon the troubled sea, and gilds the transparent crest of some of
the tallest waves. A band of snow-white foam boils and rages as far as
the eye can reach, along the line of the reefs that bristle on this
dangerous coast. Half-way up a rugged promontory, which juts pretty far into the sea,
rises Cardoville Castle; a ray of the sun glitters upon its windows; its
brick walls and pointed roofs of slate are visible in the midst of this
sky loaded with vapors. A large, disabled ship, with mere shreds of sail still fluttering from
the stumps of broken masts, drives dead upon the coast. Now she rolls her
monstrous hull upon the waves--now plunges into their trough. A flash is
seen, followed by a dull sound, scarcely perceptible in the midst of the
roar of the tempest. That gun is the last signal of distress from this
lost vessel, which is fast forging on the breakers. At the same moment, a steamer, with its long plume of black smoke, is
working her way from east to west, making every effort to keep at a
distance from the shore, leaving the breakers on her left. The dismasted
ship, drifting towards the rocks, at the mercy of the wind and tide, must
some time pass right ahead of the steamer. Suddenly, the rush of a heavy sea laid the steamer upon her side; the
enormous wave broke furiously on her deck; in a second the chimney was
carried away, the paddle box stove in, one of the wheels rendered
useless. A second white-cap, following the first, again struck the vessel
amidships, and so increased the damage that, no longer answering to the
helm, she also drifted towards the shore, in the same direction as the
ship. But the latter, though further from the breakers, presented a
greater surface to the wind and sea, and so gained upon the steamer in
swiftness that a collision between the two vessels became imminent--a new
clanger added to all the horrors of the now certain wreck. The ship was an English vessel, the "Black Eagle," homeward bound from
Alexandria, with passengers, who arriving from India and Java, via the
Red Sea, had disembarked at the Isthmus of Suez, from on board the
steamship "Ruyter." The "Black Eagle," quitting the Straits of Gibraltar,
had gone to touch at the Azores. She headed thence for Portsmouth, when
she was overtaken in the Channel by the northwester. The steamer was the
"William Tell," coming from Germany, by way of the Elbe, and bound, in
the last place, for Hamburg to Havre. These two vessels, the sport of enormous rollers, driven along by tide
and tempest, were now rushing upon the breakers with frightful speed. The
deck of each offered a terrible spectacle; the loss of crew and
passengers appeared almost certain, for before them a tremendous sea
broke on jagged rocks, at the foot of a perpendicular cliff. The captain of the "Black Eagle," standing on the poop, holding by the
remnant of a spar, issued his last orders in this fearful extremity with
courageous coolness. The smaller boats had been carried away by the
waves; it was in vain to think of launching the long-boat; the only
chance of escape in case the ship should not be immediately dashed to
pieces on touching the rocks, was to establish a communication with the
land by means of a life-line--almost the last resort for passing between
the shore and a stranded vessel. The deck was covered with passengers, whose cries and terror augmented
the general confusion. Some, struck with a kind of stupor, and clinging
convulsively to the shrouds, awaited their doom in a state of stupid
insensibility. Others wrung their hands in despair, or rolled upon the
deck uttering horrible imprecations. Here, women knelt down to pray;
there, others hid their faces in their hands, that they might not see the
awful approach of death. A young mother, pale as a specter, holding her
child clasped tightly to her bosom, went supplicating from sailor to
sailor, and offering a purse full of gold and jewels to any one that
would take charge of her son. These cries, and tears, and terror contrasted with the stern and silent
resignation of the sailors. Knowing the imminence of the inevitable
danger, some of them stripped themselves of part of their clothes,
waiting for the moment to make a last effort, to dispute their lives with
the fury of the waves; others renouncing all hope, prepared to meet death
with stoical indifference. Here and there, touching or awful episodes rose in relief, if one may so
express it, from this dark and gloomy background of despair. A young man of about eighteen or twenty, with shiny black hair, copper
<DW52> complexion, and perfectly regular and handsome features,
contemplated this scene of dismay and horror with that sad calmness
peculiar to those who have often braved great perils; wrapped in a cloak,
he leaned his back against the bulwarks, with his feet resting against
one of the bulkheads. Suddenly, the unhappy mother, who, with her child
in her arms, and gold in her hand, had in vain addressed herself to
several of the mariners, to beg them to save her boy, perceiving the
young man with the copper-<DW52> complexion, threw herself on her knees
before him, and lifted her child towards him with a burst of
inexpressible agony. The young man took it, mournfully shook his head,
and pointed to the furious waves--but, with a meaning gesture, he
appeared to promise that he would at least try to save it. Then the young
mother, in a mad transport of hope, seized the hand of the youth, and
bathed it with her tears. Further on, another passenger of the "Black Eagle," seemed animated by
sentiments of the most active pity. One would hardly have given him
five-and-twenty years of age. His long, fair locks fell in curls on
either side of his angelic countenance. He wore a black cassock and white
neck-band. Applying himself to comfort the most desponding, he went from
one to the other, and spoke to them pious words of hope and resignation;
to hear him console some, and encourage others, in language full of
unction, tenderness, and ineffable charity, one would have supposed him
unaware or indifferent to the perils that he shared. On his fine, mild features, was impressed a calm and sacred intrepidity,
a religious abstraction from every terrestrial thought; from time to
time, he raised to heaven his large blue eyes, beaming with gratitude,
love, and serenity, as if to thank God for having called him to one of
those formidable trials in which the man of humanity and courage may
devote himself for his brethren, and, if not able to rescue them at all,
at least die with them, pointing to the sky. One might almost have taken
him for an angel, sent down to render less cruel the strokes of
inexorable fate. not far from this young man's angelic beauty, there was
another being, who resembled an evil spirit! Boldly mounted on what was left of the bowsprit, to which he held on by
means of some remaining cordage, this man looked down upon the terrible
scene that was passing on the deck. A grim, wild joy lighted up his
countenance of a dead yellow, that tint peculiar to those who spring from
the union of the white race with the East. He wore only a shirt and linen
drawers; from his neck was suspended, by a cord, a cylindrical tin box,
similar to that in which soldiers carry their leave of absence. The more the danger augmented, the nearer the ship came to the breakers,
or to a collision with the steamer, which she was now rapidly
approaching--a terrible collision, which would probably cause the two
vessels to founder before even they touched the rocks--the more did the
infernal joy of this passenger reveal itself in frightful transports. He
seemed to long, with ferocious impatience, for the moment when the work
of destruction should be accomplished. To see him thus feasting with
avidity on all the agony, the terror, and the despair of those around
him, one might have taken him for the apostle of one of those sanguinary
deities, who, in barbarous countries, preside over murder and carnage. By this time the "Black Eagle," driven by the wind and waves, came so
near the "William Tell" that the passengers on the deck of the nearly
dismantled steamer were visible from the first-named vessel. The heavy sea, which stove in
the paddle-box and broke one of the paddles, had also carried away nearly
the whole of the bulwarks on that side; the waves, entering every instant
by this large opening, swept the decks with irresistible violence, and
every time bore away with them some fresh victims. Amongst the passengers, who seemed only to have escaped this danger to be
hurled against the rocks, or crushed in the encounter of the two vessels,
one group was especially worthy of the most tender and painful interest. Taking refuge abaft, a tall old man, with bald forehead and gray
moustache, had lashed himself to a stanchion, by winding a piece of rope
round his body, whilst he clasped in his arms, and held fast to his
breast, two girls of fifteen or sixteen, half enveloped in a pelisse of
reindeer-skin. A large, fallow, Siberian dog, dripping with water, and
barking furiously at the waves, stood close to their feet. These girls, clasped in the arms of the old man, also pressed close to
each other; but, far from being lost in terror, they raised their eyes to
heaven, full of confidence and ingenuous hope, as though they expected to
be saved by the intervention of some supernatural power. A frightful shriek of horror and despair, raised by the passengers of
both vessels, was heard suddenly above the roar of the tempest. At the
moment when, plunging deeply between two waves, the broadside of the
steamer was turned towards the bows of the ship, the latter, lifted to a
prodigious height on a mountain of water, remained, as it were, suspended
over the "William Tell," during the second which preceded the shock of
the two vessels. There are sights of so sublime a horror, that it is impossible to
describe them. Yet, in the midst of these catastrophes, swift as thought,
one catches sometimes a momentary glimpse of a picture, rapid and
fleeting, as if illumined by a flash of lightning. Thus, when the "Black Eagle," poised aloft by the flood, was about to
crash down upon the "William Tell," the young man with the angelic
countenance and fair, waving locks bent over the prow of the ship, ready
to cast himself into the sea to save some victim. Suddenly, he perceived
on board the steamer, on which he looked down from the summit of the
immense wave, the two girls extending their arms towards him in
supplication. They appeared to recognize him, and gazed on him with a
sort of ecstacy and religious homage! For a second, in spite of the horrors of the tempest, in spite of the
approaching shipwreck, the looks of those three beings met. The features
of the young man were expressive of sudden and profound pity; for the
maidens with their hands clasped in prayer, seemed to invoke him as their
expected Saviour. The old man, struck down by the fall of a plank, lay
helpless on the deck. A fearful mass of water dashed the "Black Eagle" down upon the "William
Tell," in the midst of a cloud of boiling foam. To the dreadful crash of
the two great bodies of wood and iron, which splintering against one
another, instantly foundered, one loud cry was added--a cry of agony and
death--the cry of a hundred human creatures swallowed up at once by the
waves! A few moments after, the fragments of the two vessels appeared in the
trough of the sea, and on the caps of the waves--with here and there the
contracted arms, the livid and despairing faces of some unhappy wretches,
striving to make their way to the reefs along the shore, at the risk of
being crushed to death by the shock of the furious breakers. While the bailiff was gone to the sea-shore, to render help to those of
the passengers who might escape from the inevitable shipwreck, M. Rodin,
conducted by Catherine to the Green Chamber, had there found the articles
that he was to take with him to Paris. After passing two hours in this apartment, very indifferent to the fate
of the shipwrecked persons, which alone absorbed the attention of the
inhabitants of the Castle, Rodin returned to the chamber commonly
occupied by the bailiff, a room which opened upon a long gallery. When he
entered it he found nobody there. Under his arm he held a casket, with
silver fastenings, almost black from age, whilst one end of a large red
morocco portfolio projected from the breast-pocket of his half buttoned
great coat. Had the cold and livid countenance of the Abbe d'Aigrigny's secretary
been able to express joy otherwise than by a sarcastic smile, his
features would have been radiant with delight; for, just then, he was
under the influence of the most agreeable thoughts. Having placed the
casket upon a table, it was with marked satisfaction that he thus
communed with himself:

"All goes well. It was prudent to keep these papers here till this
moment, for one must always be on guard against the diabolical spirit of
that Adrienne de Cardoville, who appears to guess instinctively what it
is impossible she should know. Fortunately, the time approaches when we
shall have no more need to fear her. Her fate will be a cruel one; it
must be so. Those proud, independent characters are at all times our
natural enemies--they are so by their very essence--how much more when
they show themselves peculiarly hurtful and dangerous! As for La Sainte
Colombe, the bailiff is sure to act for us; between what the fool calls
his conscience, and the dread of being at his age deprived of a
livelihood, he will not hesitate. I wish to have him because he will
serve us better than a stranger; his having been here twenty years will
prevent all suspicion on the part of that dull and narrow-minded woman. Once in the hands of our man at Roiville, I will answer for the result. The course of all such gross and stupid women is traced beforehand: in
their youth, they serve the devil; in riper years, they make others serve
him; in their old age, they are horribly afraid of him; and this fear
must continue till she has left us the Chateau de Cardoville, which, from
its isolated position, will make us an excellent college. As for the affair of the medals, the 13th of February approaches,
without news from Joshua--evidently, Prince Djalma is still kept prisoner
by the English in the heart of India, or I must have received letters
from Batavia. The daughters of General Simon will be detained at Leipsic
for at least a month longer. All our foreign relations are in the best
condition. As for our internal affairs--"

 Here M. Rodin was interrupted in the current of his reflections by the
entrance of Madame Dupont, who was zealously engaged in preparations to
give assistance in case of need. "Now," said she to the servant, "light a fire in the next room; put this
warm wine there; your master may be in every minute." "Well, my dear madam," said Rodin to her, "do they hope to save any of
these poor creatures?" He is so courageous, so imprudent, if
once he thinks he can be of any service." "Courageous even to imprudence," said Rodin to himself, impatiently; "I
do not like that." "Well," resumed Catherine, "I have here at hand my hot linen, my
cordials--heaven grant it may all be of use!" "We may at least hope so, my dear madam. I very much regretted that my
age and weakness did not permit me to assist your excellent husband. I
also regret not being able to wait for the issue of his exertions, and to
wish him joy if successful--for I am unfortunately compelled to depart,
my moments are precious. I shall be much obliged if you will have the
carriage got ready." "Yes, Sir; I will see about it directly." "One word, my dear, good Madame Dupont. You are a woman of sense, and
excellent judgment. Now I have put your husband in the way to keep, if he
will, his situation as bailiff of the estate--"

"Is it possible? Without this place
what would become of us at our time of life?" "I have only saddled my promise with two conditions--mere trifles--he
will explain all that to you." we shall regard you as our deliverer." Only, on two little conditions--"

"If there were a hundred, sir we should gladly accept them. Think what we
should be without this place--penniless--absolutely penniless!" "I reckon upon you then; for the interest of your husband, you will try
to persuade him." here's master come back," cried a servant,
rushing into the chamber. "No, missus; he is alone." A few moments after, M. Dupont entered the room; his clothes were
streaming with water; to keep his hat on in the midst of the storm, he
had tied it down to his head by means of his cravat, which was knotted
under his chin; his gaiters were covered with chalky stains. "There I have thee, my dear love!" cried his wife, tenderly embracing
him. "Up to the present moment--THREE SAVED." said Rodin; "at least your efforts
will not have been all in vain." "I only speak of those I saw myself, near the little creek of Goelands. Let us hope there may be more saved on other parts of the coast." "Yes, indeed; happily, the shore is not equally steep in all parts." "And where are these interesting sufferers, my dear sir?" asked Rodin,
who could not avoid remaining a few instants longer. "They are mounting the cliffs, supported by our people. As they cannot
walk very fast, I ran on before to console my wife, and to take the
necessary measures for their reception. First of all, my dear, you must
get ready some women's clothes." "There is then a woman amongst the persons saved?" "There are two girls--fifteen or sixteen years of age at the most--mere
children--and so pretty!" said Rodin, with an affectation of interest. "The person to whom they owe their lives is with them. "Yes; only fancy--"

"You can tell me all this by and by. Just slip on this dry warm
dressing-gown, and take some of this hot wine. "I'll not refuse, for I am almost frozen to death. I was telling you that
the person who saved these young girls was a hero; and certainly his
courage was beyond anything one could have imagined. When I left here
with the men of the farm, we descended the little winding path, and
arrived at the foot of the cliff--near the little creek of Goelands,
fortunately somewhat sheltered from the waves by five or six enormous
masses of rock stretching out into the sea. Why, the two young girls I spoke of, in a swoon, with their feet
still in the water, and their bodies resting against a rock, as though
they had been placed there by some one, after being withdrawn from the
sea." said M. Rodin, raising, as usual,
the tip of his little finger to the corner of his right eye, as though to
dry a tear, which was very seldom visible. "What struck me was their great resemblance to each other," resumed the
bailiff; "only one in the habit of seeing them could tell the
difference." "Twin--sisters, no doubt," said Madame Dupont. "One of the poor things," continued the bailiff, "held between her
clasped hands a little bronze medal, which was suspended from her neck by
a chain of the same material." Rodin generally maintained a very stooping posture; but at these last
words of the bailiff, he drew himself up suddenly, whilst a faint color
spread itself over his livid cheeks. In any other person, these symptoms
would have appeared of little consequence; but in Rodin, accustomed for
long years to control and dissimulate his emotions, they announced no
ordinary excitement. Approaching the bailiff, he said to him in a
slightly agitated voice, but still with an air of indifference: "It was
doubtless a pious relic. Did you see what was inscribed on this medal?" "No, sir; I did not think of it." "And the two young girls were like one another--very much like, you say?" "So like, that one would hardly know which was which. Probably they are
orphans, for they are dressed in mourning." said M. Rodin, with another start. "As they had fainted away, we carried them further on to a place where
the sand was quite dry. While we were busy about this, we saw the head of
a man appear from behind one of the rocks, which he was trying to climb,
clinging to it by one hand; we ran to him, and luckily in the nick of
time, for he was clean worn out, and fell exhausted into the arms of our
men. It was of him I spoke when I talked of a hero; for, not content with
having saved the two young girls by his admirable courage, he had
attempted to rescue a third person, and had actually gone back amongst
the rocks and breakers--but his strength failed him, and, without the aid
of our men, he would certainly have been washed away from the ridge to
which he clung." Rodin, with his head bowed upon his breast, seemed quite indifferent to
this conversation. The dismay and stupor, in which he had been plunged,
only increased upon reflection. The two girls, who had just been saved,
were fifteen years of age; were dressed in mourning; were so like, that
one might be taken for the other; one of them wore round her neck a chain
with a bronze medal; he could scarcely doubt that they were the daughters
of General Simon. But how could those sisters be amongst the number of
shipwrecked passengers? How could they have escaped from the prison at
Leipsic? How did it happen, that he had not been informed of it? Could
they have fled, or had they been set at liberty? How was it possible that
he should not be apprise of such an event? But these secondary thoughts,
which offered themselves in crowds to the mind of M. Rodin, were
swallowed up in the one fact: "the daughters of General Simon are
here!" --His plan, so laboriously laid, was thus entirely destroyed. "When I speak of the deliverer of these young girls," resumed the
bailiff, addressing his wife, and without remarking M. Rodin's absence of
mind, "you are expecting no doubt to see a Hercules?--well, he is
altogether the reverse. He is almost a boy in look, with fair, sweet
face, and light, curling locks. I left him a cloak to cover him, for he
had nothing on but his shirt, black knee-breeches, and a pair of black
worsted stockings--which struck me as singular." "Why, it was certainly not a sailor's dress." "Besides, though the ship was English, I believe my hero is a Frenchman,
for he speaks our language as well as we do. What brought the tears to my
eyes, was to see the young girls, when they came to themselves. As soon
as they saw him, they threw themselves at his feet, and seemed to look up
to him and thank him, as one would pray. Then they cast their eyes around
them, as if in search of some other person, and, having exchanged a few
words, they fell sobbing into each other's arms." How many poor creatures must have
perished!" "When we quitted the rocks, the sea had already cast ashore seven dead
bodies, besides fragments of the wrecks, and packages. I spoke to some of
the coast-guard, and they will remain all day on the look-out; and if, as
I hope, any more should escape with life, they are to be brought here. But surely that is the sound of voices!--yes, it is our shipwrecked
guests!" The bailiff and his wife ran to the door of the room--that door, which
opened on the long gallery--whilst Rodin, biting convulsively his flat
nails, awaited with angry impatience the arrival of the strangers. A
touching picture soon presented itself to his view. From the end of the dark some gallery, only lighted on one side by
several windows, three persons, conducted by a peasant, advanced slowly. This group consisted of the two maidens, and the intrepid young man to
whom they owed their lives. Rose and Blanche were on either side of their
deliverer, who, walking with great difficulty, supported himself lightly
on their arms. Though he was full twenty-five years of age, the juvenile countenance of
this man made him appear younger. His long, fair hair, parted on the
forehead, streamed wet and smooth over the collar of a large brown cloak,
with which he had been covered. It would be difficult to describe the
adorable expression of goodness in his pale, mild face, as pure as the
most ideal creations of Raphael's pencil--for that divine artist alone
could have caught the melancholy grace of those exquisite features, the
serenity of that celestial look, from eyes limpid and blue as those of an
archangel, or of a martyr ascended to the skies. for a blood-red halo already encircled that beauteous
head. just above his light eyebrows, and rendered
still more visible by the effect of the cold, a narrow cicatrix, from a
wound inflicted many months before, appeared to encompass his fair
forehead with a purple band; and (still more sad!) his hands had been
cruelly pierced by a crucifixion--his feet had suffered the same
injury--and, if he now walked with so much difficulty, it was that his
wounds had reopened, as he struggled over the sharp rocks. This young man was Gabriel, the priest attached to the foreign mission,
the adopted son of Dagobert's wife. He was a priest and martyr--for, in
our days, there are still martyrs, as in the time when the Caesars flung
the early Christians to the lions and tigers of the circus. Yes, in our days, the children of the people--for it is almost always
amongst them that heroic and disinterested devotion may still be
found--the children of the people, led by an honorable conviction,
because it is courageous and sincere, go to all parts of the world, to
try and propagate their faith, and brave both torture and death with the
most unpretending valor. How many of them, victims of some barbarous tribe, have perished, obscure
and unknown, in the midst of the solitudes of the two worlds!--And for
these humble soldiers of the cross, who have nothing but their faith and
their intrepidity, there is never reserved on their return (and they
seldom do return) the rich and sumptuous dignities of the church. Never
does the purple or the mitre conceal their scarred brows and mutilated
limbs; like the great majority of other soldiers, they die forgotten. [8]

In their ingenuous gratitude, the daughters of General Simon, as soon as
they recovered their senses after the shipwreck, and felt themselves able
to ascend the cliffs, would not leave to any other person the care of
sustaining the faltering steps of him who had rescued them from certain
death. The black garments of Rose and Blanche streamed with water; their faces
were deadly pale, and expressive of deep grief; the marks of recent tears
were on their cheeks, and, with sad, downcast eyes, they trembled both
from agitation and cold, as the agonizing thought recurred to them, that
they should never again see Dagobert, their friend and guide; for it was
to him that Gabriel had stretched forth a helping hand, to assist him to
climb the rocks. Unfortunately the strength of both had failed, and the
soldier had been carried away by a retreating wave. The sight of Gabriel was a fresh surprise for Rodin, who had retired on
one side, in order to observe all; but this surprise was of so pleasant a
nature, and he felt so much joy in beholding the missionary safe after
such imminent peril, that the painful impression, caused by the view of
General Simon's daughters, was a little softened. It must not be
forgotten, that the presence of Gabriel in Paris, on the 13th of
February, was essential to the success of Rodin's projects. The bailiff and his wife, who were greatly moved at sight of the orphans,
approached them with eagerness. Just then a farm-boy entered the room,
crying: "Sir! good news--two more saved from the wreck!" "Blessing and praise to God for it!" asked the bailiff, hastening towards the door. "There is one who can walk, and is following behind me with Justin; the
other was wounded against the rocks, and they are carrying him on a
litter made of branches." "I will run and have him placed in the room below," said the bailiff, as
he went out. "Catherine, you can look to the young ladies." "And the shipwrecked man who can walk--where is he?" "Here he is," said the peasant, pointing to some one who came rapidly
along the gallery; "when he heard that the two young ladies were safe in
the chateau--though he is old, and wounded in the head, he took such
great strides, that it was all I could do to get here before him." Hardly had the peasant pronounced these words, when Rose and Blanche,
springing up by a common impulse, flew to the door. They arrived there at
the same moment as Dagobert. The soldier, unable to utter a syllable, fell on his knees at the
threshold, and extended his arms to the daughters of General Simon; while
Spoil-sport, running to them licked their hands. But the emotion was too much for Dagobert; and, when he had clasped the
orphans in his arms, his head fell backward, and he would have sunk down
altogether, but for the care of the peasants. In spite of the
observations of the bailiff's wife, on their state of weakness and
agitation, the two young girls insisted on accompanying Dagobert, who was
carried fainting into an adjoining apartment. At sight of the soldier, Rodin's face was again violently contracted, for
he had till then believed that the guide of General Simon's daughters was
dead. The missionary, worn out with fatigue, was leaning upon a chair,
and had not yet perceived Rodin. A new personage, a man with a dead yellow complexion, now entered the
room, accompanied by another peasant, who pointed out Gabriel to him. This man, who had just borrowed a smock-frock and a pair of trousers,
approached the missionary, and said to him in French but with a foreign
accent: "Prince Djalma has just been brought in here. His first word was
to ask for you." cried Rodin, in a voice of thunder; for, at the
name of Djalma, he had sprung with one bound to Gabriel's side. "M. Rodin," cried the other shipwrecked person; and from that moment, he
kept his eye fixed on the correspondent of M. Van Dael. said Gabriel, approaching Rodin with an air of
deference, not unmixed with fear. "Did
he not utter the name of Prince Djalma?" "Yes, sir; Prince Djalma was one of the passengers on board the English
ship, which came from Alexandria, and in which we have just been wrecked. This vessel touched at the Azores, where I then was; the ship that
brought me from Charlestown having been obliged to put in there, and
being likely to remain for some time, on account of serious damage, I
embarked on board the 'Black Eagle,' where I met Prince Djalma. We were
bound to Portsmouth, and from thence my intention was to proceed to
France." This new shock had completely
paralyzed his thoughts. At length, like a man who catches at a last hope,
which he knows beforehand to be vain, he said to Gabriel: "Can you tell
me who this Prince Djalma is?" "A young man as good as brave--the son of an East Indian king,
dispossessed of his territory by the English." Then, turning towards the other shipwrecked man, the missionary said to
him with anxious interest: "How is the Prince? "They are serious contusions, but they will not be mortal," answered the
other. said the missionary, addressing Rodin; "here, you
see, is another saved." "So much the better," observed Rodin, in a quick, imperious tone. "I will go see him," said Gabriel, submissively. "You have no orders to
give me?" "Will you be able to leave this place in two or three hours,
notwithstanding your fatigue?" Gabriel only bowed in reply, and Rodin sank confounded into a chair,
while the missionary went out with the peasant. The man with the sallow
complexion still lingered in a corner of the room, unperceived by Rodin. This man was Faringhea, the half-caste, one of the three chiefs of the
Stranglers. Having escaped the pursuit of the soldiers in the ruins of
Tchandi, he had killed Mahal the Smuggler, and robbed him of the
despatches written by M. Joshua Van Dael to Rodin, as also of the letter
by which the smuggler was to have been received as passenger on board the
"Ruyter." When Faringhea left the hut in the ruins of Tchandi, he had not
been seen by Djalma; and the latter, when he met him on shipboard, after
his escape (which we shall explain by and by), not knowing that he
belonged to the sect of Phansegars, treated him during the voyage as a
fellow-countryman. Rodin, with his eye fixed and haggard, his countenance of a livid hue,
biting his nails to the quick in silent rage, did not perceive the half
caste, who quietly approached him and laying his hand familiarly on his
shoulder, said to him: "Your name is Rodin?" asked the other, starting, and raising his head abruptly. "You live in the Rue du Milieu-des-Ursins, Paris?" But, once more, what do you want?" "Nothing now, brother: hereafter, much!" And Faringhea, retiring, with slow steps, left Rodin alarmed at what had
passed; for this man, who scarcely trembled at anything, had quailed
before the dark look and grim visage of the Strangler. [8] We always remember with emotion the end of a letter written, two or
three years ago, by one of these young and valiant missionaries, the son
of poor parents in Beauce. He was writing to his mother from the heart of
Japan, and thus concluded his letter: "Adieu, my dear mother! they say
there is much danger where I am now sent to. Pray for me, and tell all
our good neighbors that I think of them very often." These few words,
addressed from the centre of Asia to poor peasants in a hamlet of France,
are only the more touching from their very simplicity--E. S.




CHAPTER XXVI. The most profound silence reigns throughout Cardoville House. The tempest
has lulled by degrees, and nothing is heard from afar but the hoarse
murmur of the waves, as they wash heavily the shore. Dagobert and the orphans have been lodged in warm and comfortable
apartments on the first-floor of the chateau. Djalma, too severely hurt
to be carried upstairs, has remained in a room below. At the moment of
the shipwreck, a weeping mother had placed her child in his arms. He had
failed in the attempt to snatch this unfortunate infant from certain
death, but his generous devotion had hampered his movements, and when
thrown upon the rocks, he was almost dashed to pieces. Faringhea, who has
been able to convince him of his affection, remains to watch over him. Gabriel, after administering consolation to Djalma, has rescinded to the
chamber allotted to him; faithful to the promise he made to Rodin, to be
ready to set out in two hours, he has not gone to bed; but, having dried
his clothes, he has fallen asleep in a large, high-backed arm-chair,
placed in front of a bright coal-fire. His apartment is situated near
those occupied by Dagobert and the two sisters. Spoil-sport, probably quite at his ease in so respectable a dwelling, has
quitted the door of Rose and Blanche's chamber, to lie down and warm
himself at the hearth, by the side of which the missionary is sleeping. There, with his nose resting on his outstretched paws, he enjoys a
feeling of perfect comfort and repose, after so many perils by land and
sea. We will not venture to affirm, that he thinks habitually of poor old
Jovial; unless we recognize as a token of remembrance on his part, his
irresistible propensity to bite all the white horses he has met with,
ever since the death of his venerable companion, though before, he was
the most inoffensive of dogs with regard to horses of every color. Presently one of the doors of the chamber opened, and the two sisters
entered timidly. Awake for some minutes, they had risen and dressed
themselves, feeling still some uneasiness with respect to Dagobert;
though the bailiff's wife, after showing them to their room, had returned
again to tell them that the village doctor found nothing serious in the
hurt of the old soldier, still they hoped to meet some one belonging to
the chateau, of whom they could make further inquiries about him. The high back of the old-fashioned arm-chair, in which Gabriel was
sleeping, completely screened him from view; but the orphans, seeing
their canine friend lying quietly at his feet, thought it was Dagobert
reposing there, and hastened towards him on tip-toe. To their great
astonishment, they saw Gabriel fast asleep, and stood still in confusion,
not daring to advance or recede, for fear of waking him. The long, light hair of the missionary was no longer wet, and now curled
naturally round his neck and shoulders; the paleness of his complexion
was the more striking, from the contrast afforded by the deep purple of
the damask covering of the arm-chair. His beautiful countenance expressed
a profound melancholy, either caused by the influence of some painful
dream, or else that he was in the habit of keeping down, when awake, some
sad regrets, which revealed themselves without his knowledge when he was
sleeping. Notwithstanding this appearance of bitter grief, his features
preserved their character of angelic sweetness, and seemed endowed with
an inexpressible charm, for nothing is more touching than suffering
goodness. The two young girls cast down their eyes, blushed
simultaneously, and exchanged anxious glances, as if to point out to each
other the slumbering missionary. "He sleeps, sister," said Rose in a low voice. "So much the better," replied Blanche, also in a whisper, making a sign
of caution; "we shall now be able to observe him well." "Yes, for we durst not do so, in coming from the sea hither." "He is just the same as we saw him in our dreams." "But here, at least, he is visible." "Not as it was in the prison at Leipsic, during that dark night." "And so--he has again rescued us." "Without him, we should have perished this morning." "And yet, sister, it seems to me, that in our dreams his countenance
shone with light." "Yes, you know it dazzled us to look at him." "And then he had not so sad a mien." "That was because he came then from heaven; now he is upon earth." "But, sister, had he then that bright red scar round his forehead?" "If he has been wounded, how can he be an archangel?" If he received those wounds in preventing evil, or in
helping the unfortunate, who, like us, were about to perish?" If he did not run any danger for those he protects, it
would be less noble." "What a pity that he does not open his eye!" "Their expression is so good, so tender!" "Why did he not speak of our mother, by the way?" "We were not alone with him; he did not like to do so." "If we were to pray to him to speak to us?" The orphans looked doubtingly at each other, with charming simplicity; a
bright glow suffused their cheeks, and their young bosoms heaved gently
beneath their black dresses. said Blanche, believing rightly, that
Rose felt exactly as she did. "And yet it seems to do us good. It is as
if some happiness were going to befall us." The sisters, having approached the arm-chair on tip-toe, knelt down with
clasped hands, one to the right the other to the left of the young
priest. Turning their lovely faces towards
him, they said in a low whisper, with a soft, sweet voice, well suited to
their youthful appearance: "Gabriel! On this appeal, the missionary gave a slight start, half-opened his eyes,
and, still in a state of semi-consciousness, between sleep and waking,
beheld those two beauteous faces turned towards him, and heard two gentle
voices repeat his name. said he, rousing himself, and raising his head. It was now Gabriel's turn to blush, for he recognized the young girls he
had saved. said he to them; "you should kneel only
unto God." The orphans obeyed, and were soon beside him, holding each other by the
hand. "You know my name, it seems," said the missionary with a smile. "Yes--when you came from our mother." said the missionary, unable to comprehend the words of
the orphans. I saw you to-day for the first time." "Yes--do you not remember?--in our dreams." "In Germany--three months ago, for the first time. Gabriel could not help smiling at the simplicity of Rose and Blanche, who
expected him to remember a dream of theirs; growing more and more
perplexed, he repeated: "In your dreams?" "Certainly; when you gave us such good advice." "And when we were so sorrowful in prison, your words, which we
remembered, consoled us, and gave us courage." "Was it not you, who delivered us from the prison at Leipsic, in that
dark night, when we were not able to see you?" "What other but you would thus have come to our help, and to that of our
old friend?" "We told him, that you would love him, because he loved us, although he
would not believe in angels." "And this morning, during the tempest, we had hardly any fear." "This morning--yes, my sisters--it pleased heaven to send me to your
assistance. I was coming from America, but I have never been in Leipsic. I could not, therefore, have let you out of prison. Tell me, my sisters,"
added he, with a benevolent smile, "for whom do you take me?" "For a good angel whom we have seen already in dreams, sent by our mother
from heaven to protect us." "My dear sisters, I am only a poor priest. It is by mere chance, no
doubt, that I bear some resemblance to the angel you have seen in your
dreams, and whom you could not see in any other manner--for angels are
not visible to mortal eye. said the orphans, looking sorrowfully at each
other. "No matter, my dear sisters," said Gabriel, taking them affectionately by
the hand; "dreams, like everything else, come from above. Since the
remembrance of your mother was mixed up with this dream, it is twice
blessed." At this moment a door opened, and Dagobert made his appearance. Up to
this time, the orphans, in their innocent ambition to be protected by an
archangel, had quite forgotten the circumstance that Dagobert's wife had
adopted a forsaken child, who was called Gabriel, and who was now a
priest and missionary. The soldier, though obstinate in maintaining that his hurt was only a
blank wound (to use a term of General Simon's), had allowed it to be
carefully dressed by the surgeon of the village, and now wore a black
bandage, which concealed one half of his forehead, and added to the
natural grimness of his features. On entering the room, he was not a
little surprised to see a stranger holding the hands of Rose and Blanche
familiarly in his own. This surprise was natural, for Dagobert did not
know that the missionary had saved the lives of the orphans, and had
attempted to save his also. In the midst of the storm, tossed about by the waves, and vainly striving
to cling to the rocks, the soldier had only seen Gabriel very
imperfectly, at the moment when, having snatched the sisters from certain
death, the young priest had fruitlessly endeavored to come to his aid. And when, after the shipwreck, Dagobert had found the orphans in safety
beneath the roof of the Manor House, he fell, as we have already stated,
into a swoon, caused by fatigue, emotion, and the effects of his
wound--so that he had again no opportunity of observing the features of
the missionary. The veteran began to frown from beneath his black bandage and thick, gray
brows, at beholding a stranger so familiar with Rose and Blanche; but the
sisters ran to throw themselves into his arms, and to cover him with
filial caresses. His anger was soon dissipated by these marks of
affection, though he continued, from time to time, to cast a suspicious
glance at the missionary, who had risen from his seat, but whose
countenance he could not well distinguish. "They told us it was not
dangerous." "No, children; the surgeon of the village would bandage me up in this
manner. If my head was carbonadoes with sabre cuts, I could not have more
wrappings. They will take me for an old milksop; it is only a blank
wound, and I have a good mind to--" And therewith the soldier raised one
of his hands to the bandage. "How can you be
so unreasonable--at your age?" I will do what you wish, and keep it on." Then,
drawing the sisters to one end of the room, he said to them in a low
voice, whilst he looked at the young priest from the corner of his eye:
"Who is that gentleman who was holding your hands when I came in? He has
very much the look of a curate. You see, my children, you must be on your
guard; because--"

"He?" cried both sisters at once, turning towards Gabriel. "Without him,
we should not now be here to kiss you." cried the soldier, suddenly drawing up his tall figure,
and gazing full at the missionary. "It is our guardian angel," resumed Blanche. "Without him," said Rose, "we must have perished this morning in the
shipwreck." it is he, who--" Dagobert could say no more. With swelling heart,
and tears in his eyes, he ran to the missionary, offered him both his
hands, and exclaimed in a tone of gratitude impossible to describe: "Sir,
I owe you the lives of these two children. I feel what a debt that
service lays upon me. I will not say more--because it includes
everything!" Then, as if struck with a sudden recollection, he cried: "Stop! when I
was trying to cling to a rock, so as not to be carried away by the waves,
was it not you that held out your hand to me? Yes--that light hair--that
youthful countenance--yes--it was certainly you--now I am sure of it!" "Unhappily, sir, my strength failed me, and I had the anguish to see you
fall back into the sea." "I can say nothing more in the way of thanks than what I have already
said," answered Dagobert, with touching simplicity: "in preserving these
children you have done more for me than if you had saved my own life. added the soldier, with admiration; "and so
young, with such a girlish look!" "And so," cried Blanche, joyfully, "our Gabriel came to your aid also?" said Dagobert interrupting Blanche, and addressing himself to
the priest. asked the soldier, with increasing
astonishment. "An excellent and generous woman, whom I revere as the best of mothers:
for she had pity on me, a deserted infant, and treated me ever as her
son." "Frances Baudoin--was it not?" "It was, sir," answered Gabriel, astonished in his turn. "Yes, of a brave soldier--who, from the most admirable devotion, is even
now passing his life in exile--far from his wife--far from his son, my
dear brother--for I am proud to call him by that name--"

"My Agricola!--my wife!--when did you leave them?" You the father of Agricola?--Oh! I knew not, until
now," cried Gabriel, clasping his hands together, "I knew not all the
gratitude that I owed to heaven!" resumed Dagobert, in a trembling voice; "how are
they? "The accounts I received, three months ago, were excellent." "No; it is too much," cried Dagobert; "it is too much!" The veteran was
unable to proceed; his feelings stifled his words, and fell back
exhausted in a chair. And now Rose and Blanche recalled to mind that portion of their father's
letter which related to the child named Gabriel, whom the wife of
Dagobert had adopted; then they also yielded to transports of innocent
joy. "Our Gabriel is the same as yours--what happiness!" he belongs to you as well as to me. Then, addressing Gabriel, the soldier added with
affectionate warmth: "Your hand, my brave boy! "Yes--that's it--thank me!--after all thou has done for us!" "Does my adopted mother know of your return?" asked Gabriel, anxious to
escape from the praises of the soldier. "I wrote to her five months since, but said that I should come alone;
there was a reason for it, which I will explain by and by. Does she still
live in the Rue Brise-Miche? "In that case, she must have received my letter. I wished to write to her
from the prison at Leipsic, but it was impossible." "Yes; I come straight from Germany, by the Elbe and Hamburg, and I should
be still at Leipsic, but for an event which the Devil must have had a
hand in--a good sort of devil, though." "That would be difficult, for I cannot explain it to myself. These little
ladies," he added, pointing with a smile to Rose and Blanche, "pretended
to know more about it than I did, and were continually repeating: 'It was
the angel that came to our assistance, Dagobert--the good angel we told
thee of--though you said you would rather have Spoil sport to defend
us--'"

"Gabriel, I am waiting for you," said a stern voice, which made the
missionary start. They all turned round instantly, whilst the dog uttered
a deep growl. He stood in the doorway leading to the corridor. His
features were calm and impassive, but he darted a rapid, piercing glance
at the soldier and sisters. said Dagobert, very little prepossessed in favor of
Rodin, whose countenance he found singularly repulsive. "What the
mischief does he want?" "I must go with him," answered Gabriel, in a tone of sorrowful
constraint. Then, turning to Rodin, he added: "A thousand pardons! cried Dagobert, stupefied with amazement, "going the very instant
we have just met? I have too much to
tell you, and to ask in return. It
will be a real treat for me." He is my superior, and I must obey him." "Your superior?--why, he's in citizen's dress." "He is not obliged to wear the ecclesiastical garb." since he is not in uniform, and there is no provost-marshal in
your troop, send him to the--"

"Believe me, I would not hesitate a minute, if it were possible to
remain." "I was right in disliking the phi of that man," muttered Dagobert between
his teeth. Then he added, with an air of impatience and vexation: "Shall
I tell him that he will much oblige us by marching off by himself?" "I beg you not to do so," said Gabriel; "it would be useless; I know my
duty, and have no will but my superior's. As soon as you arrive in Paris,
I will come and see you, as also my adopted mother, and my dear brother,
Agricola." I have been a soldier, and know what subordination
is," said Dagobert, much annoyed. "One must put a good face on bad
fortune. So, the day after to-morrow, in the Rue Brise-Miche, my boy; for
they tell me I can be in Paris by to-morrow evening, and we set out
almost immediately. But I say--there seems to be a strict discipline with
you fellows!" "Yes, it is strict and severe," answered Gabriel, with a shudder, and a
stifled sigh. "Come, shake hands--and let's say farewell for the present. After all,
twenty-four hours will soon pass away." replied the missionary, much moved, whilst he returned
the friendly pressure of the veteran's hand. added the orphans, sighing also, and with tears in
their eyes. said Gabriel--and he left the room with Rodin, who
had not lost a word or an incident of this scene. Two hours after, Dagobert and the orphans had quitted the Castle for
Paris, not knowing that Djalma was left at Cardoville, being still too
much injured to proceed on his journey. The half-caste, Faringhea,
remained with the young prince, not wishing, he said, to desert a fellow
countryman. We now conduct the reader to the Rue Brise-Miche, the residence of
Dagobert's wife. The following scenes occur in Paris, on the morrow of the day when the
shipwrecked travellers were received in Cardoville House. Nothing can be more gloomy than the aspect of the Rue Brise-Miche, one
end of which leads into the Rue Saint-Merry, and the other into the
little square of the Cloister, near the church. At this end, the street,
or rather alley--for it is not more than eight feet wide--is shut in
between immense black, muddy dilapidated walls, the excessive height of
which excludes both air and light; hardly, during the longest days of the
year, is the sun able to throw into it a few straggling beams; whilst,
during the cold damps of winter, a chilling fog, which seems to penetrate
everything, hangs constantly above the miry pavement of this species of
oblong well. It was about eight o'clock in the evening; by the faint, reddish light of
the street lamp, hardly visible through the haze, two men, stopping at
the angle of one of those enormous walls, exchanged a few words together. "So," said one, "you understand all about it. You are to watch in the
street, till you see them enter No. "And when you see 'em enter so as to make quite sure of the game, go up
to Frances Baudoin's room--"

"Under the cloak of asking where the little humpbacked workwoman
lives--the sister of that gay girl, the Queen of the Bacchanals." "Yes--and you must try and find out her address also--from her humpbacked
sister, if possible--for it is very important. Women of her feather
change their nests like birds, and we have lost track of her." "Make yourself easy; I will do my best with Hump, to learn where her
sister hangs out." "And, to give you steam, I'll wait for you at the tavern opposite the
Cloister, and we'll have a go of hot wine on your return." "I'll not refuse, for the night is deucedly cold." This morning the water friz on my sprinkling-brush,
and I turned as stiff as a mummy in my chair at the church-door. a distributor of holy water is not always upon roses!" "Luckily, you have the pickings--"

"Well, well--good luck to you! Don't forget the Fiver, the little passage
next to the dyer's shop." One proceeded to the Cloister Square; the other towards the further end
of the street, where it led into the Rue Saint-Merry. This latter soon
found the number of the house he sought--a tall, narrow building, having,
like all the other houses in the street, a poor and wretched appearance. When he saw he was right, the man commenced walking backwards and
forwards in front of the door of No. If the exterior of these buildings was uninviting, the gloom and squalor
of the interior cannot be described. 5 was, in a special
degree, dirty and dilapidated. The water, which oozed from the wall,
trickled down the dark and filthy staircase. On the second floor, a wisp
of straw had been laid on the narrow landing-place, for wiping the feet
on; but this straw, being now quite rotten, only served to augment the
sickening odor, which arose from want of air, from damp, and from the
putrid exhalations of the drains. The few openings, cut at rare intervals
in the walls of the staircase, could hardly admit more than some faint
rays of glimmering light. In this quarter, one of the most populous in Paris, such houses as these,
poor, cheerless, and unhealthy, are generally inhabited by the working
classes. A dyer occupied the
ground floor; the deleterious vapors arising from his vats added to the
stench of the whole building. On the upper stories, several artisans
lodged with their families, or carried on their different trades. Up four
flights of stairs was the lodging of Frances Baudoin, wife of Dagobert. It consisted of one room, with a closet adjoining, and was now lighted by
a single candle. Agricola occupied a garret in the roof. Old grayish paper, broken here and there by the cracks covered the crazy
wall, against which rested the bed; scanty curtains, running upon an iron
rod, concealed the windows; the brick floor, not polished, but often
washed, had preserved its natural color. At one end of this room was a
round iron stove, with a large pot for culinary purposes. On the wooden
table, painted yellow, marbled with brown, stood a miniature house made
of iron--a masterpiece of patience and skill, the work of Agricola
Baudoin, Dagobert's son. A plaster crucifix hung up against the wall, surrounded by several
branches of consecrated box-tree, and various images of saints, very
coarsely, bore witness to the habits of the soldier's wife. Between the windows stood one of those old walnut-wood presses, curiously
fashioned, and almost black with time; an old arm-chair, covered with
green cotton velvet (Agricola's first present to his mother), a few rush
bottomed chairs, and a worktable on which lay several bags of coarse,
brown cloth, completed the furniture of this room, badly secured by a
worm-eaten door. The adjoining closet contained a few kitchen and
household utensils. Mean and poor as this interior may perhaps appear, it would not seem so
to the greater number of artisans; for the bed was supplied with two
mattresses, clean sheets, and a warm counterpane; the old-fashioned press
contained linen; and, moreover, Dagobert's wife occupied all to herself a
room as large as those in which numerous families, belonging to honest
and laborious workmen, often live and sleep huddled together--only too
happy if the boys and girls can have separate beds, or if the sheets and
blankets are not pledged at the pawnbroker's. Frances Baudoin, seated beside the small stove, which, in the cold and
damp weather, yielded but little warmth, was busied in preparing her son
Agricola's evening meal. Dagobert's wife was about fifty years of age; she wore a close jacket of
blue cotton, with white flowers on it, and a stuff petticoat; a white
handkerchief was tied round her head, and fastened under the chin. Her
countenance was pale and meagre, the features regular, and expressive of
resignation and great kindness. It would have been difficult to find a
better, a more courageous mother. With no resource but her labor, she had
succeeded, by unwearied energy, in bringing up not only her own son
Agricola, but also Gabriel, the poor deserted child, of whom, with
admirable devotion, she had ventured to take charge. In her youth, she had, as it were, anticipated the strength of later
life, by twelve years of incessant toil, rendered lucrative by the most
violent exertions, and accompanied by such privations as made it almost
suicidal. Then (for it was a time of splendid wages, compared to the
present), by sleepless nights and constant labor, she contrived to earn
about two shillings (fifty sous) a day, and with this she managed to
educate her son and her adopted child. At the end of these twelve years, her health was ruined, and her strength
nearly exhausted; but, at all events, her boys had wanted for nothing,
and had received such an education as children of the people can obtain. About this time, M. Francois Hardy took Agricola as an apprentice, and
Gabriel prepared to enter the priest's seminary, under the active
patronage of M. Rodin, whose communications with the confessor of Frances
Baudoin had become very frequent about the year 1820. This woman (whose piety had always been excessive) was one of those
simple natures, endowed with extreme goodness, whose self-denial
approaches to heroism, and who devote themselves in obscurity to a life
of martyrdom--pure and heavenly minds, in whom the instincts of the heart
supply the place of the intellect! The only defect, or rather the necessary consequence of this extreme
simplicity of character, was the invincible determination she displayed
in yielding to the commands of her confessor, to whose influence she had
now for many years been accustomed to submit. She regarded this influence
as most venerable and sacred; no mortal power, no human consideration,
could have prevented her from obeying it. Did any dispute arise on the
subject, nothing could move her on this point; she opposed to every
argument a resistance entirely free from passion--mild as her
disposition, calm as her conscience--but, like the latter, not to be
shaken. In a word, Frances Baudoin was one of those pure, but
uninstructed and credulous beings, who may sometimes, in skillful and
dangerous hands, become, without knowing it, the instruments of much
evil. For some time past, the bad state of her health, and particularly the
increasing weakness of her sight, had condemned her to a forced repose;
unable to work more than two or three hours a day, she consumed the rest
of her time at church. Frances rose from her seat, pushed the coarse bags at which she had been
working to the further end of the table, and proceeded to lay the cloth
for her son's supper, with maternal care and solicitude. She took from
the press a small leathern bag, containing an old silver cup, very much
battered, and a fork and spoon, so worn and thin, that the latter cut
like a knife. These, her only plate (the wedding present of Dagobert) she
rubbed and polished as well as she was able, and laid by the side of her
son's plate. They were the most precious of her possessions, not so much
for what little intrinsic value might attach to them, as for the
associations they recalled; and she had often shed bitter tears, when,
under the pressure of illness or want of employment, she had been
compelled to carry these sacred treasures to the pawnbroker's. Frances next took, from the lower shelf of the press, a bottle of water,
and one of wine about three-quarters full, which she also placed near her
son's plate; she then returned to the stove, to watch the cooking of the
supper. Though Agricola was not much later than usual, the countenance of his
mother expressed both uneasiness and grief; one might have seen, by the
redness of her eyes, that she had been weeping a good deal. After long
and painful uncertainty, the poor woman had just arrived at the
conviction that her eyesight, which had been growing weaker and weaker,
would soon be so much impaired as to prevent her working even the two or
three hours a day which had lately been the extent of her labors. Originally an excellent hand at her needle, she had been obliged, as her
eyesight gradually failed her, to abandon the finer for the coarser sorts
of work, and her earnings had necessarily diminished in proportion; she
had at length been reduced to the necessity of making those coarse bags
for the army, which took about four yards of sewing, and were paid at the
rate of two sous each, she having to find her own thread. This work,
being very hard, she could at most complete three such bags in a day, and
her gains thus amounted to threepence (six sous)! It makes one shudder to think of the great number of unhappy females,
whose strength has been so much exhausted by privations, old age, or
sickness, that all the labor of which they are capable, hardly suffices
to bring them in daily this miserable pittance. Thus do their gains
diminish in exact proportion to the increasing wants which age and
infirmity must occasion. Happily, Frances had an efficient support in her son. A first-rate
workman, profiting by the just scale of wages adopted by M. Hardy, his
labor brought him from four to five shillings a day--more than double
what was gained by the workmen of many other establishments. Admitting
therefore that his mother were to gain nothing, he could easily maintain
both her and himself. But the poor woman, so wonderfully economical that she denied herself
even some of the necessaries of life, had of late become ruinously
liberal on the score of the sacristy, since she had adopted the habit of
visiting daily the parish church. Scarcely a day passed but she had
masses sung, or tapers burnt, either for Dagobert, from whom she had been
so long separated, or for the salvation of her son Agricola, whom she
considered on the high-road to perdition. Agricola had so excellent a
heart, so loved and revered his mother, and considered her actions in
this respect inspired by so touching a sentiment, that he never
complained when he saw a great part of his week's wages (which he paid
regularly over to his mother every Saturday) disappear in pious forms. Yet now and then he ventured to remark to Frances, with as much respect
as tenderness, that it pained him to see her enduring privations
injurious at her age, because she preferred incurring these devotional
expenses. But what answer could he make to this excellent mother, when
she replied with tears: "My child, 'tis for the salvation of your father
and yours too." To dispute the efficacy of masses, would have been venturing on a
subject which Agricola, through respect for his mother's religious faith,
never discussed. He contented himself, therefore, with seeing her
dispense with comforts she might have enjoyed. THE SISTER OF THE BACCHANAL QUEEN. The person who now entered was a girl of about eighteen, short, and very
much deformed. Though not exactly a hunchback, her spine was curved; her
breast was sunken, and her head deeply set in the shoulders. Her face was
regular, but long, thin, very pale, and pitted with the small pox; yet it
expressed great sweetness and melancholy. Her blue eyes beamed with
kindness and intelligence. By a strange freak of nature, the handsomest
woman would have been proud of the magnificent hair twisted in a coarse
net at the back of her head. Though
miserably clad, the care and neatness of her dress revealed a powerful
struggle with her poverty. Notwithstanding the cold, she wore a scanty
frock made of print of an indefinable color, spotted with white; but it
had been so often washed, that its primitive design and color had long
since disappeared. In her resigned, yet suffering face, might be read a
long familiarity with every form of suffering, every description of
taunting. From her birth, ridicule had ever pursued her. We have said
that she was very deformed, and she was vulgarly called "Mother Bunch." Indeed it was so usual to give her this grotesque name, which every
moment reminded her of her infirmity, that Frances and Agricola, though
they felt as much compassion as other people showed contempt for her,
never called her, however, by any other name. Mother Bunch, as we shall therefore call her in future, was born in the
house in which Dagobert's wife had resided for more than twenty years;
and she had, as it were, been brought up with Agricola and Gabriel. There are wretches fatally doomed to misery. Mother Bunch had a very
pretty sister, on whom Perrine Soliveau, their common mother, the widow
of a ruined tradesman, had concentrated all her affection, while she
treated her deformed child with contempt and unkindness. The latter would
often come, weeping, to Frances, on this account, who tried to console
her, and in the long evenings amused her by teaching her to read and sew. Accustomed to pity her by their mother's example, instead of imitating
other children, who always taunted and sometimes even beat her, Agricola
and Gabriel liked her, and used to protect and defend her. She was about fifteen, and her sister Cephyse was about seventeen, when
their mother died, leaving them both in utter poverty. Cephyse was
intelligent, active, clever, but different to her sister; she had the
lively, alert, hoydenish character which requires air, exercise and
pleasures--a good girl enough, but foolishly spoiled by her mother. Cephyse, listening at first to Frances's good advice, resigned herself to
her lot; and, having learnt to sew, worked like her sister, for about a
year. But, unable to endure any longer the bitter privations her
insignificant earnings, notwithstanding her incessant toil, exposed her
to--privations which often bordered on starvation--Cephyse, young,
pretty, of warm temperament, and surrounded by brilliant offers and
seductions--brilliant, indeed, for her, since they offered food to
satisfy her hunger, shelter from the cold, and decent raiment, without
being obliged to work fifteen hours a day in an obscure and unwholesome
hovel--Cephyse listened to the vows of a young lawyer's clerk, who
forsook her soon after. She formed a connection with another clerk, whom
she (instructed by the examples set her), forsook in turn for a bagman,
whom she afterwards cast off for other favorites. In a word, what with
changing and being forsaken, Cephyse, in the course of one or two years,
was the idol of a set of grisettes, students and clerks; and acquired
such a reputation at the balls on the Hampstead Heaths of Paris, by her
decision of character, original turn of mind, and unwearied ardor in all
kinds of pleasures, and especially her wild, noisy gayety, that she was
termed the Bacchanal Queen, and proved herself in every way worthy of
this bewildering royalty. From that time poor Mother Bunch only heard of her sister at rare
intervals. She still mourned for her, and continued to toil hard to gain
her three-and-six a week. The unfortunate girl, having been taught sewing
by Frances, made coarse shirts for the common people and the army. For
these she received half-a-crown a dozen. They had to be hemmed, stitched,
provided with collars and wristbands, buttons, and button holes; and at
the most, when at work twelve and fifteen hours a day, she rarely
succeeded in turning out more than fourteen or sixteen shirts a week--an
excessive amount of toil that brought her in about three shillings and
fourpence a week. And the case of this poor girl was neither accidental
nor uncommon. And this, because the remuneration given for women's work
is an example of revolting injustice and savage barbarism. They are paid
not half as much as men who are employed at the needle: such as tailors,
and makers of gloves, or waistcoats, etc.--no doubt because women can
work as well as men--because they are more weak and delicate--and because
their need may be twofold as great when they become mothers. Well, Mother Bunch fagged on, with three-and-four a week. That is to say,
toiling hard for twelve or fifteen hours every day; she succeeded in
keeping herself alive, in spite of exposure to hunger, cold, and
poverty--so numerous were her privations. The word
privation expresses but weakly that constant and terrible want of all
that is necessary to preserve the existence God gives; namely, wholesome
air and shelter, sufficient and nourishing food and warm clothing. Mortification would be a better word to describe that total want of all
that is essentially vital, which a justly organized state of society
ought--yes--ought necessarily to bestow on every active, honest workman
and workwoman, since civilization has dispossessed them of all
territorial right, and left them no other patrimony than their hands. The savage does not enjoy the advantage of civilization; but he has, at
least, the beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, the fish of the
sea, and the fruits of the earth, to feed him, and his native woods for
shelter and for fuel. The civilized man, disinherited of these gifts,
considering the rights of property as sacred, may, in return for his hard
daily labor, which enriches his country, demand wages that will enable
him to live in the enjoyment of health: nothing more, and nothing less. For is it living, to drag along on the extreme edge which separates life
from the grave, and even there continually struggle against cold, hunger,
and disease? And to show how far the mortification which society imposes
thus inexorably on its millions of honest, industrious laborers (by its
careless disregard of all the questions which concern the just
remuneration of labor), may extend, we will describe how this poor girl
contrived to live on three shillings and sixpence a week. Society, perhaps, may then feel its obligation to so many unfortunate
wretches for supporting, with resignation, the horrible existence which
leaves them just sufficient life to feel the worst pangs of humanity. Yes: to live at such a price is virtue! Yes, society thus organized,
whether it tolerates or imposes so much misery, loses all right to blame
the poor wretches who sell themselves not through debauchery, but because
they are cold and famishing. This poor girl spent her wages as follows:

    Six pounds of bread, second quality..0 8 1/2
    Four pails of water..0 2
    Lard or dripping (butter being out of the question)0 5
    Coarse salt..0 0 3/4
    A bushel of charcoal..0 4
    A quart of dried vegetables..0 3
    Three quarts of potatoes..0 2
    Dips..0 3 1/4
    Thread and needles..0 2 1/2
                                                      ______
                                                       2 7

To save charcoal, Mother Bunch prepared soup only two or three times a
week at most, on a stove that stood on the landing of the fourth story. There remained nine or ten pence a week
for clothes and lodging. By rare good fortune, her situation was in one
respect an exception to the lot of many others. Agricola, that he might
not wound her delicacy, had come to a secret arrangement with the
housekeeper, and hired a garret for her, just large enough to hold a
small bed, a chair, and a table; for which the sempstress had to pay five
shillings a year. But Agricola, in fulfilment of his agreement with the
porter, paid the balance, to make up the actual rent of the garret, which
was twelve and sixpence. The poor girl had thus about eighteenpence a
month left for her other expenses. But many workwomen, whose position is
less fortunate than hers, since they have neither home nor family, buy a
piece of bread and some other food to keep them through the day; and at
night patronize the "twopenny rope," one with another, in a wretched room
containing five or six beds, some of which are always engaged by men, as
male lodgers are by far the most abundant. Yes; and in spite of the
disgust that a poor and virtuous girl must feel at this arrangement, she
must submit to it; for a lodging-house keeper cannot have separate rooms
for females. To furnish a room, however meanly, the poor workwoman must
possess three or four shillings in ready money. But how save this sum,
out of weekly earnings of a couple of florins, which are scarcely
sufficient to keep her from starving, and are still less sufficient to
clothe her? The poor wretch must resign herself to this repugnant
cohabitation; and so, gradually, the instinct of modesty becomes
weakened; the natural sentiment of chastity, that saved her from the "gay
life," becomes extinct; vice appears to be the only means of improving
her intolerable condition; she yields; and the first "man made of money,"
who can afford a governess for his children, cries out against the
depravity of the lower orders! And yet, painful as the condition of the
working woman is, it is relatively fortunate. Should work fail her for
one day, two days, what then? Should sickness come--sickness almost
always occasioned by unwholesome food, want of fresh air, necessary
attention, and good rest; sickness, often so enervating as to render work
impossible; though not so dangerous as to procure the sufferer a bed in
an hospital--what becomes of the hapless wretches then? The mind
hesitates, and shrinks from dwelling on such gloomy pictures. This inadequacy of wages, one terrible source only of so many evils, and
often of so many vices, is general, especially among women; and, again
this is not private wretchedness, but the wretchedness which afflicts
whole classes, the type of which we endeavor to develop in Mother Bunch. It exhibits the moral and physical condition of thousands of human
creatures in Paris, obliged to subsist on a scanty four shillings a week. This poor workwoman, then, notwithstanding the advantages she unknowingly
enjoyed through Agricola's generosity, lived very miserably; and her
health, already shattered, was now wholly undermined by these constant
hardships. Yet, with extreme delicacy, though ignorant of the little
sacrifice already made for her by Agricola, Mother Bunch pretended she
earned more than she really did, in order to avoid offers of service
which it would have pained her to accept, because she knew the limited
means of Frances and her son, and because it would have wounded her
natural delicacy, rendered still more sensitive by so many sorrows and
humiliations. But, singular as it may appear, this deformed body contained a loving and
generous soul--a mind cultivated even to poetry; and let us add, that
this was owing to the example of Agricola Baudoin, with whom she had been
brought up, and who had naturally the gift. This poor girl was the first
confidant to whom our young mechanic imparted his literary essays; and
when he told her of the charm and extreme relief he found in poetic
reverie, after a day of hard toil, the workwoman, gifted with strong
natural intelligence, felt, in her turn, how great a resource this would
be to her in her lonely and despised condition. One day, to Agricola's great surprise, who had just read some verses to
her, the sewing-girl, with smiles and blushes, timidly communicated to
him also a poetic composition. Her verses wanted rhythm and harmony,
perhaps; but they were simple and affecting, as a non-envenomed complaint
entrusted to a friendly hearer. From that day Agricola and she held
frequent consultations; they gave each other mutual encouragement: but
with this exception, no one else knew anything of the girl's poetical
essays, whose mild timidity made her often pass for a person of weak
intellect. This soul must have been great and beautiful, for in all her
unlettered strains there was not a word of murmuring respecting her hard
lot: her note was sad, but gentle--desponding, but resigned; it was
especially the language of deep tenderness--of mournful sympathy--of
angelic charity for all poor creatures consigned, like her, to bear the
double burden of poverty and deformity. Yet she often expressed a sincere
free-spoken admiration of beauty, free from all envy or bitterness; she
admired beauty as she admired the sun. many were the verses of
hers that Agricola had never seen, and which he was never to see. The young mechanic, though not strictly handsome, had an open masculine
face; was as courageous as kind; possessed a noble, glowing, generous
heart, a superior mind, and a frank, pleasing gayety of spirits. The
young girl, brought up with him, loved him as an unfortunate creature can
love, who, dreading cruel ridicule, is obliged to hide her affection in
the depths of her heart, and adopt reserve and deep dissimulation. She
did not seek to combat her love; to what purpose should she do so? Her well known sisterly affection for Agricola
explained the interest she took in all that concerned him; so that no one
was surprised at the extreme grief of the young workwoman, when, in 1830,
Agricola, after fighting intrepidly for the people's flag, was brought
bleeding home to his mother. Dagobert's son, deceived, like others, on
this point, had never suspected, and was destined never to suspect, this
love for him. Such was the poorly-clad girl who entered the room in which Frances was
preparing her son's supper. "Is it you, my poor love," said she; "I have not seen you since morning:
have you been ill? The young girl kissed Agricola's mother, and replied: "I was very busy
about some work, mother; I did not wish to lose a moment; I have only
just finished it. I am going down to fetch some charcoal--do you want
anything while I'm out?" "No, no, my child, thank you. It is half-past
eight, and Agricola is not come home." Then she added, after a sigh: "He
kills himself with work for me. Ah, I am very unhappy, my girl; my sight
is quite going. In a quarter of an hour after I begin working, I cannot
see at all--not even to sew sacks. The idea of being a burden to my son
drives me distracted." "Oh, don't, ma'am, if Agricola heard you say that--"

"I know the poor boy thinks of nothing but me, and that augments my
vexation. Only I think that rather than leave me, he gives up the
advantages that his fellow-workmen enjoy at Hardy's, his good and worthy
master--instead of living in this dull garret, where it is scarcely light
at noon, he would enjoy, like the other workmen, at very little expense,
a good light room, warm in winter, airy in summer, with a view of the
garden. not to mention that this place is so
far from his work, that it is quite a toil to him to get to it." "Oh, when he embraces you he forgets his fatigue, Mrs. Baudoin," said
Mother Bunch; "besides, he knows how you cling to the house in which he
was born. M. Hardy offered to settle you at Plessy with Agricola, in the
building put up for the workmen." "Yes, my child; but then I must give up church. "But--be easy, I hear him," said the hunchback, blushing. A sonorous, joyous voice was heard singing on the stairs. "At least, I'll not let him see that I have been crying," said the good
mother, drying her tears. "This is the only moment of rest and ease from
toil he has--I must not make it sad to him." AGRICOLA BAUDOIN. Our blacksmith poet, a tall young man, about four-and-twenty years of
age, was alert and robust, with ruddy complexion, dark hair and eyes, and
aquiline nose, and an open, expressive countenance. His resemblance to
Dagobert was rendered more striking by the thick brown moustache which he
wore according to the fashion; and a sharp-pointed imperial covered his
chin. His cheeks, however, were shaven, Olive color velveteen trousers, a
blue blouse, bronzed by the forge smoke, a black cravat, tied carelessly
round his muscular neck, a cloth cap with a narrow vizor, composed his
dress. The only thing which contrasted singularly with his working
habiliments was a handsome purple flower, with silvery pistils, which he
held in his hand. "Good-evening, mother," said he, as he came to kiss Frances immediately. Then, with a friendly nod, he added, "Good-evening, Mother Bunch." "You are very late, my child," said Frances, approaching the little stove
on which her son's simple meal was simmering; "I was getting very
anxious." "Anxious about me, or about my supper, dear mother?" you won't excuse me for keeping the nice little supper
waiting that you get ready for me, for fear it should be spoilt, eh?" So saying, the blacksmith tried to kiss his mother again. "Have done, you naughty boy; you'll make me upset the pan." "That would be a pity, mother; for it smells delightfully. "I'll swear, now, you have some of the fried potatoes and bacon I'm so
fond of." said Frances, in a tone of mild reproach. "True," rejoined Agricola, exchanging a smile of innocent cunning with
Mother Bunch; "but, talking of Saturday, mother, here are my wages." "Thank ye, child; put the money in the cupboard." cried the young sempstress, just as Agricola was about to put
away the money, "what a handsome flower you have in your hand, Agricola. "See there, mother," said Agricola, taking the flower to her; "look at
it, admire it, and especially smell it. You can't have a sweeter perfume;
a blending of vanilla and orange blossom." "Indeed, it does smell nice, child. said
Frances, admiringly; "where did you find it?" repeated Agricola, smilingly: "do you think
folks pick up such things between the Barriere du Maine and the Rue
Brise-Miche?" inquired the sewing girl, sharing in Frances's
curiosity. Well, I'll satisfy you, and explain why I
came home so late; for something else detained me. It has been an evening
of adventures, I promise you. I was hurrying home, when I heard a low,
gentle barking at the corner of the Rue de Babylone; it was just about
dusk, and I could see a very pretty little dog, scarce bigger than my
fist, black and tan, with long, silky hair, and ears that covered its
paws." "Lost, poor thing, I warrant," said Frances. I took up the poor thing, and it began to lick my hands. Round its neck was a red satin ribbon, tied in a large bow; but as that
did not bear the master's name, I looked beneath it, and saw a small
collar, made of a gold plate and small gold chains. So I took a Lucifer
match from my 'bacco-box, and striking a light, I read, 'FRISKY belongs
to Hon. Miss Adrienne de Cardoville, No. "Why, you were just in the street," said Mother Bunch. Taking the little animal under my arm, I looked about me till I
came to a long garden wall, which seemed to have no end, and found a
small door of a summer-house, belonging no doubt to the large mansion at
the other end of the park; for this garden looked just like a park. So,
looking up I saw 'No. 7,' newly painted over a little door with a grated
slide. I rang; and in a few minutes, spent, no doubt, in observing me
through the bars (for I am sure I saw a pair of eyes peeping through),
the gate opened. And now, you'll not believe a word I have to say." said Mother Bunch, as if she was really her namesake of
elfish history. I am quite astounded, even now, at my
adventure; it is like the remembrance of a dream." "Well, let us have it," said the worthy mother, so deeply interested that
she did not perceive her son's supper was beginning to burn. "First," said the blacksmith, smiling at the curiosity he had excited, "a
young lady opened the door to me, but so lovely, so beautifully and
gracefully dressed, that you would have taken her for a beautiful
portrait of past times. Before I could say a word, she exclaimed, 'Ah! dear me, sir, you have brought back Frisky; how happy Miss Adrienne will
be! Come, pray come in instantly; she would so regret not having an
opportunity to thank you in person!' And without giving me time to reply,
she beckoned me to follow her. Oh, dear mother, it is quite out of my
power to tell you, the magnificence I saw, as I passed through a small
saloon, partially lighted, and full of perfume! A door opened,--Oh, such a sight! I
was so dazzled I can remember nothing but a great glare of gold and
light, crystal and flowers; and, amidst all this brilliancy, a young lady
of extreme beauty--ideal beauty; but she had red hair, or rather hair
shining like gold! She had black eyes, ruddy lips, and her skin seemed white as
snow. This is all I can recollect: for, as I said before, I was so
dazzled, I seemed to be looking through a veil. 'Madame,' said the young
woman, whom I never should have taken for a lady's-maid, she was dressed
so elegantly, 'here is Frisky. This gentleman found him, and brought him
back.' 'Oh, sir,' said the young lady with the golden hair, in a sweet
silvery voice, 'what thanks I owe you! I am foolishly attached to
Frisky.' Then, no doubt, concluding from my dress that she ought to thank
me in some other way than by words, she took up a silk purse, and said to
me, though I must confess with some hesitation--'No doubt, sir, it gave
you some trouble to bring my pet back. You have, perhaps, lost some
valuable time--allow me--' She held forth her purse." "Oh, Agricola," said Mother Bunch, sadly; "how people may be deceived!" "Hear the end, and you will perhaps forgive the young lady. Seeing by my
looks that the offer of the purse hurt me, she took a magnificent
porcelain vase that contained this flower, and, addressing me in a tone
full of grace and kindness, that left me room to guess that she was vexed
at having wounded me, she said--'At least, sir, you will accept this
flower.'" "You are right, Agricola," said the girl, smiling sadly; "an involuntary
error could not be repaired in a nicer way. "Worthy young lady," said Frances, wiping her eyes; "how well she
understood my Agricola!" But just as I was taking the flower, without daring
to raise my eyes (for, notwithstanding the young lady's kind manner,
there was something very imposing about her) another handsome girl, tall
and dark, and dressed to the top of fashion, came in and said to the
red-haired young lady, 'He is here, Madame.' She immediately rose and
said to me, 'A thousand pardons, sir. I shall never forget that I am
indebted to you for a moment of much pleasure. Pray remember, on all
occasions, my address and name--Adrienne de Cardoville.' I could not find a word to say in reply. The same young
woman showed me to the door, and curtseyed to me very politely. And there
I stood in the Rue de Babylone, as dazzled and astonished as if I had
come out of an enchanted palace." "Indeed, my child, it is like a fairy tale. "Yes, ma'am," said Mother Bunch, in an absent manner that Agricola did
not observe. "What affected me most," rejoined Agricola, "was, that the young lady, on
seeing her little dog, did not forget me for it, as many would have done
in her place, and took no notice of it before me. That shows delicacy and
feeling, does it not? Indeed, I believe this young lady to be so kind and
generous, that I should not hesitate to have recourse to her in any
important case." "Yes, you are right," replied the sempstress, more and more absent. She felt no jealousy, no hatred,
towards this young stranger, who, from her beauty, wealth, and delicacy,
seemed to belong to a sphere too splendid and elevated to be even within
the reach of a work, girl's vision; but, making an involuntary comparison
of this fortunate condition with her own, the poor thing had never felt
more cruelly her deformity and poverty. Yet such were the humility and
gentle resignation of this noble creature, that the only thing which made
her feel ill-disposed towards Adrienne de Cardoville was the offer of the
purse to Agricola; but then the charming way in which the young lady had
atoned for her error, affected the sempstress deeply. She could not restrain her tears as she contemplated the
magnificent flower--so rich in color and perfume, which, given by a
charming hand, was doubtless very precious to Agricola. "Now, mother," resumed the young man smilingly, and unaware of the
painful emotion of the other bystander, "you have had the cream of my
adventures first. I have told you one of the causes of my delay; and now
for the other. Just now, as I was coming in, I met the dyer at the foot
of the stairs, his arms a beautiful pea-green. Stopping me he said, with
an air full of importance, that he thought he had seen a chap sneaking
about the house like a spy, 'Well, what is that to you, Daddy Loriot?' said I: 'are you afraid he will nose out the way to make the beautiful
green, with which you are dyed up to the very elbows?'" "But who could that man be, Agricola?" "On my word, mother, I don't know and scarcely care; I tried to persuade
Daddy Loriot, who chatters like a magpie, to return to his cellar, since
it could signify as little to him as to me, whether a spy watched him or
not." So saying, Agricola went and placed the little leathern sack,
containing his wages, on a shelf, in the cupboard. As Frances put down the saucepan on the end of the table, Mother Bunch,
recovering from her reverie, filled a basin with water, and, taking it to
the blacksmith, said to him in a gentle tone-"Agricola--for your hands." Then with a most unaffected
gesture and tone, he added, "There is my fine flower for your trouble." cried the sempstress, with emotion, while a vivid
blush  her pale and interesting face. "Do you give me this
handsome flower, which a lovely rich young lady so kindly and graciously
gave you?" And the poor thing repeated, with growing astonishment, "Do
you give it to me?" "What the deuce should I do with it? Wear it on my heart, have it set as
a pin?" "It is true I was very much impressed by
the charming way in which the young lady thanked me. I am delighted to
think I found her little dog, and very happy to be able to give you this
flower, since it pleases you. You see the day has been a happy one." While Mother Bunch, trembling with pleasure, emotion, and surprise, took
the flower, the young blacksmith washed his hands, so black with smoke
and steel filings that the water became dark in an instant. Agricola,
pointing out this change to the sempstress, said to her in a whisper,
laughing,-"Here's cheap ink for us paper-stainers! I finished some verses
yesterday, which I am rather satisfied with. With this, Agricola wiped his hands naturally on the front of his blouse,
while Mother Bunch replaced the basin on the chest of drawers, and laid
the flower against the side of it. "Can't you ask for a towel," said Frances, shrugging her shoulders,
"instead of wiping your hands on your blouse?" "After being scorched all day long at the forge, it will be all the
better for a little cooling to-night, won't it? Scold me, then, if you dare! Frances made no reply; but, placing her hands on either side of her son's
head, so beautiful in its candor, resolution and intelligence, she
surveyed him for a moment with maternal pride, and kissed him repeatedly
on the forehead. "Come," said she, "sit down: you stand all day at your forge, and it is
late." "So,--your arm-chair again!" said Agricola.--"Our usual quarrel every
evening--take it away, I shall be quite as much at ease on another." You ought at least to rest after your hard toil." "Well, I preach like a
good apostle; but I am quite at ease in your arm-chair, after all. Since
I sat down on the throne in the Tuileries, I have never had a better
seat." Frances Baudoin, standing on one side of the table, cut a slice of bread
for her son, while Mother Bunch, on the other, filled his silver mug. There was something affecting in the attentive eagerness of the two
excellent creatures, for him whom they loved so tenderly. "Thank you, Agricola," replied the sempstress, looking down, "I have only
just dined." "Oh, I only ask you for form's sake--you have your whims--we can never
prevail on you to eat with us--just like mother; she prefers dining all
alone; and in that way she deprives herself without my knowing it." It is better for my health to dine early. Oh, I am very fond of
stockfish; I should have been born a Newfoundland fisherman." This worthy lad, on the contrary, was but poorly refreshed, after a hard
day's toil, with this paltry stew,--a little burnt as it had been, too,
during his story; but he knew he pleased his mother by observing the fast
without complaining. He affected to enjoy his meal; and the good woman
accordingly observed with satisfaction:

"Oh, I see you like it, my dear boy; Friday and Saturday next we'll have
some more." "Thank you, mother,--only not two days together. One gets tired of
luxuries, you know! And now, let us talk of what we shall do
to-morrow--Sunday. We must be very merry, for the last few days you seem
very sad, dear mother, and I can't make it out--I fancy you are not
satisfied with me." "Oh, my dear child!--you--the pattern of--"

"Well, well! Prove to me that you are happy, then, by taking a little
amusement. Perhaps you will do us the honor of accompanying us, as you
did last time," added Agricola, bowing to Mother Bunch. The latter blushed and looked down; her face assumed an expression of
bitter grief, and she made no reply. "I have the prayers to attend all day, you know, my dear child," said
Frances to her son. I don't propose the theatre; but they say
there is a conjurer to be seen whose tricks are very amusing. "I am obliged to you, my son; but that is a kind of theatre." "My dear child, do I ever hinder others from doing what they like?" Well, then, if it should be fine, we will
simply take a walk with Mother Bunch on the Boulevards. It is nearly
three months since she went out with us; and she never goes out without
us." "No, no; go alone, my child. "You know very well, Agricola," said the sempstress, blushing up to the
eyes, "that I ought not to go out with you and your mother again." May I ask, without impropriety, the cause of this
refusal?" The poor girl smiled sadly, and replied, "Because I will not expose you
to a quarrel on my account, Agricola." "Forgive me," said Agricola, in a tone of sincere grief, and he struck
his forehead vexedly. To this Mother Bunch alluded sometimes, but very rarely, for she observed
punctilious discretion. The girl had gone out with Agricola and his
mother. Such occasions were, indeed, holidays for her. Many days and
nights had she toiled hard to procure a decent bonnet and shawl, that she
might not do discredit to her friends. The five or six days of holidays,
thus spent arm in arm with him whom she adored in secret, formed the sum
of her happy days. Taking their last walk, a coarse, vulgar man elbowed her so rudely that
the poor girl could not refrain from a cry of terror, and the man
retorted it by saying,-"What are you rolling your hump in my way for,
stoopid?" Agricola, like his father, had the patience which force and courage give
to the truly brave; but he was extremely quick when it became necessary
to avenge an insult. Irritated at the vulgarity of this man, Agricola
left his mother's arm to inflict on the brute, who was of his own age,
size, and force, two vigorous blows, such as the powerful arm and huge
fist of a blacksmith never before inflicted on human face. The villain
attempted to return it, and Agricola repeated the correction, to the
amusement of the crowd, and the fellow slunk away amidst a deluge of
hisses. This adventure made Mother Bunch say she would not go out with
Agricola again, in order to save him any occasion of quarrel. We may
conceive the blacksmith's regret at having thus unwittingly revived the
memory of this circumstance,--more painful, alas! for Mother Bunch than
Agricola could imagine, for she loved him passionately, and her infirmity
had been the cause of that quarrel. Notwithstanding his strength and
resolution, Agricola was childishly sensitive; and, thinking how painful
that thought must be to the poor girl, a large tear filled his eyes, and,
holding out his hands, he said, in a brotherly tone, "Forgive my
heedlessness! And he gave her thin, pale cheeks two
hearty kisses. The poor girl's lips turned pale at this cordial caress; and her heart
beat so violently that she was obliged to lean against the corner of the
table. "Come, you forgive me, do you not?" she said, trying to subdue her emotion; "but the recollection
of that quarrel pains me--I was so alarmed on your account; if the crowd
had sided with that man!" said Frances, coming to the sewing-girl's relief, without knowing
it, "I was never so afraid in all my life!" "Oh, mother," rejoined Agricola, trying to change a conversation which
had now become disagreeable for the sempstress, "for the wife of a horse
grenadier of the Imperial Guard, you have not much courage. Oh, my brave
father; I can't believe he is really coming! The very thought turns me
topsy-turvy!" "Heaven grant he may come," said Frances, with a sigh. Lord knows, you
have had masses enough said for his return." "Agricola, my child," said Frances, interrupting her son, and shaking her
head sadly, "do not speak in that way. Besides, you are talking of your
father." "Well, I'm in for it this evening. 'Tis your turn now; positively, I am
growing stupid, or going crazy. That's the
only word I can get out to-night. You know that, when I do let out on
certain subjects, it is because I can't help it; for I know well the pain
it gives you." "You do not offend me, my poor, dear, misguided boy." "It comes to the same thing; and there is nothing so bad as to offend
one's mother; and, with respect to what I said about father's return, I
do not see that we have any cause to doubt it." "But we have not heard from him for four months." "You know, mother, in his letter--that is, in the letter which he
dictated (for you remember that, with the candor of an old soldier, he
told us that, if he could read tolerably well, he could not write); well,
in that letter he said we were not to be anxious about him; that he
expected to be in Paris about the end of January, and would send us word,
three or four days before, by what road he expected to arrive, that I
might go and meet him." "True, my child; and February is come, and no news yet." "The greater reason why we should wait patiently. But I'll tell you more:
I should not be surprised if our good Gabriel were to come back about the
same time. His last letter from America makes me hope so. What pleasure,
mother, should all the family be together!" "And that day will soon come, trust me." "Do you remember your father, Agricola?" "To tell the truth, I remember most his great grenadier's shako and
moustache, which used to frighten me so, that nothing but the red ribbon
of his cross of honor, on the white facings of his uniform, and the
shining handle of his sabre, could pacify me; could it, mother? What he must suffer at being separated from us at
his age--sixty and past! my child, my heart breaks, when I think
that he comes home only to change one kind of poverty for another." Isn't there a room here for you and for him;
and a table for you too? Only, my good mother, since we are talking of
domestic affairs," added the blacksmith, imparting increased tenderness
to his tone, that he might not shock his mother, "when he and Gabriel
come home, you won't want to have any more masses said, and tapers burned
for them, will you? Well, that saving will enable father to have tobacco
to smoke, and his bottle of wine every day. Then, on Sundays, we will
take a nice dinner at the eating-house." Instead of doing so, some one half-opened the door,
and, thrusting in an arm of a pea-green color, made signs to the
blacksmith. "'Tis old Loriot, the pattern of dyers," said Agricola; "come in, Daddy,
no ceremony." "Impossible, my lad; I am dripping with dye from head to foot; I should
cover missus's floor with green." It will remind me of the fields I like so much." "Without joking, Agricola, I must speak to you immediately." Oh, be easy; what's he to us?" "No; I think he's gone; at any rate, the fog is so thick I can't see him. But that's not it--come, come quickly! It is very important," said the
dyer, with a mysterious look; "and only concerns you." "Go and see, my child," said Frances. "Yes, mother; but the deuce take me if I can make it out." And the blacksmith left the room, leaving his mother with Mother Bunch. In five minutes Agricola returned; his face was pale and agitated--his
eyes glistened with tears, and his hands trembled; but his countenance
expressed extraordinary happiness and emotion. He stood at the door for a
moment, as if too much affected to accost his mother. Frances's sight was so bad that she did not immediately perceive the
change her son's countenance had undergone. "Well, my child--what is it?" Before the blacksmith could reply, Mother Bunch, who had more
discernment, exclaimed: "Goodness, Agricola--how pale you are! "Mother," said the artisan, hastening to Frances, without replying to the
sempstress,--"mother, expect news that will astonish you; but promise me
you will be calm." Mother Bunch was
right--you are quite pale." and Agricola, kneeling before Frances, took both her
hands in his--"you must--you do not know,--but--"

The blacksmith could not go on. 'What is the matter?--you
terrify me!" "Oh, no, I would not terrify you; on the contrary," said Agricola, drying
his eyes--"you will be so happy. But, again, you must try and command
your feelings, for too much joy is as hurtful as too much grief." "Did I not say true, when I said he would come?" She rose from her seat; but her surprise and
emotion were so great that she put one hand to her heart to still its
beating, and then she felt her strength fail. Her son sustained her, and
assisted her to sit down. Mother Bunch, till now, had stood discreetly apart, witnessing from a
distance the scene which completely engrossed Agricola and his mother. But she now drew near timidly, thinking she might be useful; for Frances
changed color more and more. "Come, courage, mother," said the blacksmith; "now the shock is over, you
have only to enjoy the pleasure of seeing my father." Oh, I cannot believe it,"
said Frances, bursting into tears. "So true, that if you will promise me to keep as calm as you can, I will
tell you when you may see him." "He may arrive any minute--to-morrow--perhaps to-day." Well, I must tell you all--he has arrived." "He--he is--" Frances could not articulate the word. Before coming up, he sent the dyer to
apprise me that I might prepare you; for my brave father feared the
surprise might hurt you." "And now," cried the blacksmith, in an accent of indescribable joy--"he
is there, waiting! for the last ten minutes I have scarcely
been able to contain myself--my heart is bursting with joy." And running
to the door, he threw it open. Dagobert, holding Rose and Blanche by the hand, stood on the threshold. Instead of rushing to her husband's arms, Frances fell on her knees in
prayer. She thanked heaven with profound gratitude for hearing her
prayers, and thus accepting her offerings. During a second, the actors of
this scene stood silent and motionless. Agricola, by a sentiment of
respect and delicacy, which struggled violently with his affection, did
not dare to fall on his father's neck. He waited with constrained
impatience till his mother had finished her prayer. The soldier experienced the same feeling as the blacksmith; they
understood each other. The first glance exchanged by father and son
expressed their affection--their veneration for that excellent woman, who
in the fulness of her religious fervor, forgot, perhaps, too much the
creature for the Creator. Rose and Blanche, confused and affected, looked with interest on the
kneeling woman; while Mother Bunch, shedding in silence tears of joy at
the thought of Agricola's happiness, withdrew into the most obscure
corner of the room, feeling that she was a stranger, and necessarily out
of place in that family meeting. Frances rose, and took a step towards
her husband, who received her in his arms. There was a moment of solemn
silence. Dagobert and Frances said not a word. Nothing could be heard but
a few sighs, mingled with sighs of joy. And, when the aged couple looked
up, their expression was calm, radiant, serene; for the full and complete
enjoyment of simple and pure sentiments never leaves behind a feverish
and violent agitation. "My children," said the soldier, in tones of emotion, presenting the
orphans to Frances, who, after her first agitation, had surveyed them
with astonishment, "this is my good and worthy wife; she will be to the
daughters of General Simon what I have been to them." "Then, madame, you will treat us as your children," said Rose,
approaching Frances with her sister. cried Dagobert's wife, more and more
astonished. "Yes, my dear Frances; I have brought them from afar not without some
difficulty; but I will tell you that by and by." One would take them for two angels, exactly alike!" said Frances, contemplating the orphans with as much interest as
admiration. "Now--for us," cried Dagobert, turning to his son. We must renounce all attempts to describe the wild joy of Dagobert and
his son, and the crushing grip of their hands, which Dagobert interrupted
only to look in Agricola's face; while he rested his hands on the young
blacksmith's broad shoulders that he might see to more advantage his
frank masculine countenance, and robust frame. Then he shook his hand
again, exclaiming, "He's a fine fellow--well built--what a good-hearted
look he has!" From a corner of the room Mother Bunch enjoyed Agricola's happiness; but
she feared that her presence, till then unheeded, would be an intrusion. She wished to withdraw unnoticed, but could not do so. Dagobert and his
son were between her and the door; and she stood unable to take her eyes
from the charming faces of Rose and Blanche. She had never seen anything
so winsome; and the extraordinary resemblance of the sisters increased
her surprise. Then, their humble mourning revealing that they were poor,
Mother Bunch involuntarily felt more sympathy towards them. They are cold; their little hands are frozen, and,
unfortunately, the fire is out," said Frances, She tried to warm the
orphans' hands in hers, while Dagobert and his son gave themselves up to
the feelings of affection, so long restrained. As soon as Frances said that the fire was out, Mother Bunch hastened to
make herself useful, as an excuse for her presence; and, going to the
cupboard, where the charcoal and wood were kept, she took some small
pieces, and, kneeling before the stove, succeeded, by the aid of a few
embers that remained, in relighting the fire, which soon began to draw
and blaze. Filling a coffee-pot with water, she placed it on the stove,
presuming that the orphans required some warm drink. The sempstress did
all this with so much dexterity and so little noise--she was naturally so
forgotten amidst the emotions of the scene--that Frances, entirely
occupied with Rose and Blanche, only perceived the fire when she felt its
warmth diffusing round, and heard the boiling water singing in the
coffee-pot. This phenomenon--fire rekindling of itself--did not astonish
Dagobert's wife then, so wholly was she taken up in devising how she
could lodge the maidens; for Dagobert as we have seen, had not given her
notice of their arrival. Suddenly a loud bark was heard three or four times at the door. there's Spoil-sport," said Dagobert, letting in his dog; "he
wants to come in to brush acquaintance with the family too." The dog came in with a bound, and in a second was quite at home. After
having rubbed Dagobert's hand with his muzzle, he went in turns to greet
Rose and Blanche, and also Frances and Agricola; but seeing that they
took but little notice of him, he perceived Mother Bunch, who stood
apart, in an obscure corner of the room, and carrying out the popular
saying, "the friends of our friends are our friends," he went and licked
the hands of the young workwoman, who was just then forgotten by all. By
a singular impulse, this action affected the girl to tears; she patted
her long, thin, white hand several times on the head of the intelligent
dog. Then, finding that she could be no longer useful (for she had done
all the little services she deemed in her power), she took the handsome
flower Agricola had given her, opened the door gently, and went away so
discreetly that no one noticed her departure. After this exchange of
mutual affection, Dagobert, his wife, and son, began to think of the
realities of life. "Poor Frances," said the soldier, glancing at Rose and Blanche, "you did
not expect such a pretty surprise!" "I am only sorry, my friend," replied Frances, "that the daughters of
General Simon will not have a better lodging than this poor room; for
with Agricola's garret--"

"It composes our mansion," interrupted Dagobert; "there are handsomer, it
must be confessed. But be at ease; these young ladies are drilled into
not being hard to suit on that score. To-morrow, I and my boy will go arm
and arm, and I'll answer for it he won't walk the more upright and
straight of the two, and find out General Simon's father, at M. Hardy's
factory, to talk about business." "To-morrow," said Agricola to Dagobert, "you will not find at the factory
either M. Hardy or Marshall Simon's father." "What is that you say, my lad?" cried Dagobert, hastily, "the Marshal!" "To be sure; since 1830, General Simon's friends have secured him the
title and rank which the emperor gave him at the battle of Ligny." cried Dagobert, with emotion, "but that ought not to surprise
me; for, after all, it is just; and when the emperor said a thing, the
least they can do is to let it abide. But it goes all the same to my
heart; it makes me jump again." Addressing the sisters, he said: "Do you hear that, my children? You
arrive in Paris the daughters of a Duke and Marshal of France. One would
hardly think it, indeed, to see you in this room, my poor little
duchesses! Ah, father Simon must have
been very glad to hear that his son was restored to his rank! "He told us he would renounce all kinds of ranks and titles to see his
son again; for it was during the general's absence that his friends
obtained this act of justice. But they expect Marshal Simon every moment,
for the last letter from India announced his departure." At these words Rose and Blanche looked at each other; and their eyes
filled with tears. These children rely on his return; but why shall we
not find M. Hardy and father Simon at the factory to-morrow?" "Ten days ago, they went to examine and study an English mill established
in the south; but we expect them back every day." that's vexing; I relied on seeing the general's father, to
talk over some important matters with him. At any rate, they know where
to write to him. So to-morrow you will let him know, my lad, that his
granddaughters are arrived. In the mean time, children," added the
soldier, to Rose and Blanche, "my good wife will give you her bed and you
must put up with the chances of war. they will not be worse
off here than they were on the journey." "You know we shall always be well off with you and madame," said Rose. "Besides, we only think of the pleasure of being at length in Paris,
since here we are to find our father," added Blanche. "That hope gives you patience, I know," said Dagobert, "but no matter! After all you have heard about it, you ought to be finely surprised, my
children. As yet, you have not found it the golden city of your dreams,
by any means. But, patience, patience; you'll find Paris not so bad as it
looks." "Besides," said Agricola, "I am sure the arrival of Marshal Simon in
Paris will change it for you into a golden city." "You are right, Agricola," said Rose, with a smile, "you have, indeed,
guessed us." "Certainly, Agricola, we often talked about you with Dagobert; and
latterly, too, with Gabriel," added Blanche. cried Agricola and his mother, at the same time. "Yes," replied Dagobert, making a sign of intelligence to the orphans,
"we have lots to tell you for a fortnight to come; and among other
things, how we chanced to meet with Gabriel. All I can now say is that,
in his way, he is quite as good as my boy (I shall never be tired of
saying'my boy'); and they ought to love each other like brothers. Oh, my
brave, brave wife!" said Dagobert, with emotion, "you did a good thing,
poor as you were, taking the unfortunate child--and bringing him up with
your own." "Don't talk so much about it, my dear; it was such a simple thing." "You are right; but I'll make you amends for it by and by. 'Tis down to
your account; in the mean time, you will be sure to see him to-morrow
morning." cried the blacksmith; "who'll say, after
this, that there are not days set apart for happiness? How came you to
meet him, father?" "I'll tell you all, by and by, about when and how we met Gabriel; for if
you expect to sleep, you are mistaken. You'll give me half your room, and
a fine chat we'll have. Spoil-sport will stay outside of this door; he is
accustomed to sleep at the children's door." "Dear me, love, I think of nothing. But, at such a moment, if you and the
young ladies wish to sup, Agricola will fetch something from the
cook-shop." "No, thank you, Dagobert, we are not hungry; we are too happy." "You will take a little wine and water, sweetened, nice and hot, to warm
you a little, my dear young ladies," said Frances; "unfortunately, I have
nothing else to offer you." "You are right, Frances; the dear children are tired, and want to go to
bed; while they do so, I'll go to my boy's room, and, before Rose and
Blanche are awake, I will come down and converse with you, just to give
Agricola a respite." "It is good Mother Bunch come to see if we want her," said Agricola. "But I think she was here when my husband came in," added Frances. "Right, mother; and the good girl left lest she should be an intruder:
she is so thoughtful. But no--no--it is not she who knocks so loud." "Go and see who it is, then, Agricola." Before the blacksmith could reach the door, a man decently dressed, with
a respectable air, entered the room, and glanced rapidly round, looking
for a moment at Rose and Blanche. "Allow me to observe, sir," said Agricola, "that after knocking, you
might have waited till the door was opened, before you entered. "Pray excuse me, sir," said the man, very politely, and speaking slowly,
perhaps to prolong his stay in the room: "I beg a thousand pardons--I
regret my intrusion--I am ashamed--"

"Well, you ought to be, sir," said Agricola, with impatience, "what do
you want?" "Pray, sir, does not Miss Soliveau, a deformed needlewoman, live here?" "No, sir; upstairs," said Agricola. "Really, sir," cried the polite man, with low bows, "I am quite abroad at
my blunder: I thought this was the room of that young person. I brought
her proposals for work from a very respectable party." "It is very late, sir," said Agricola, with surprise. "But that young
person is as one of our family. Call to-morrow; you cannot see her to
night; she is gone to bed." "Then, sir, I again beg you to excuse--"

"Enough, sir," said Agricola, taking a step towards the door. "I hope, madame and the young ladies, as well as this gent, will be
assured that--"

"If you go on much longer making excuses, sir, you will have to excuse
the length of your excuses; and it is time this came to an end!" Rose and Blanche smiled at these words of Agricola; while Dagobert rubbed
his moustache with pride. "But that does not
astonish you--you are used to it." During this speech, the ceremonious person withdrew, having again
directed a long inquiring glance to the sisters, and to Agricola and
Dagobert. In a few minutes after, Frances having spread a mattress on the ground
for herself, and put the whitest sheets on her bed for the orphans,
assisted them to undress with maternal solicitude, Dagobert and Agricola
having previously withdrawn to their garret. Just as the blacksmith, who
preceded his father with a light, passed before the door of Mother
Bunch's room, the latter, half concealed in the shade, said to him
rapidly, in a low tone:

"Agricola, great danger threatens you: I must speak to you." These words were uttered in so hasty and low a voice that Dagobert did
not hear them; but as Agricola stopped suddenly, with a start, the old
soldier said to him,

"Well, boy, what is it?" "Nothing, father," said the blacksmith, turning round; "I feared I did
not light you well." "Oh, stand at ease about that; I have the legs and eyes of fifteen to
night;" and the soldier, not noticing his son's surprise, went into the
little room where they were both to pass the night. On leaving the house, after his inquiries about Mother Bunch, the over
polite Paul Pry slunk along to the end of Brise-Miche Street. He advanced
towards a hackney-coach drawn up on the Cloitre Saint-Merry Square. In this carriage lounged Rodin, wrapped in a cloak. "The two girls and the man with gray moustache went directly to Frances
Baudoin's; by listening at the door, I learnt that the sisters will sleep
with her, in that room, to-night; the old man with gray moustache will
share the young blacksmith's room." "I did not dare insist on seeing the deformed workwoman this evening on
the subject of the Bacchanal Queen; I intend returning to-morrow, to
learn the effect of the letter she must have received this evening by the
post about the young blacksmith." And now you will call, for me, on Frances Baudoin's
confessor, late as it is; you will tell him that I am waiting for him at
Rue du Milieu des Ursins--he must not lose a moment. Should I not be returned, he will wait for me. You will tell him it
is on a matter of great moment." "All shall be faithfully executed," said the ceremonious man, cringing to
Rodin, as the coach drove quickly away. AGRICOLA AND MOTHER BUNCH. Within one hour after the different scenes which have just been described
the most profound silence reigned in the soldier's humble dwelling. A
flickering light, which played through two panes of glass in a door,
betrayed that Mother Bunch had not yet gone to sleep; for her gloomy
recess, without air or light, was impenetrable to the rays of day, except
by this door, opening upon a narrow and obscure passage, connected with
the roof. A sorry bed, a table, an old portmanteau, and a chair, so
nearly filled this chilling abode, that two persons could not possibly be
seated within it, unless one of them sat upon the side of the bed. The magnificent and precious flower that Agricola had given to the girl
was carefully stood up in a vessel of water, placed upon the table on a
linen cloth, diffusing its sweet odor around, and expanding its purple
calix in the very closet, whose plastered walls, gray and damp, were
feebly lighted by the rays of an attenuated candle. The sempstress, who
had taken off no part of her dress, was seated upon her bed--her looks
were downcast, and her eyes full of tears. She supported herself with one
hand resting on the bolster; and, inclining towards the door, listened
with painful eagerness, every instant hoping to hear the footsteps of
Agricola. The heart of the young sempstress beat violently; her face,
usually very pale, was now partially flushed--so exciting was the emotion
by which she was agitated. Sometimes she cast her eyes with terror upon a
letter which she held in her hand, a letter that had been delivered by
post in the course of the evening, and which had been placed by the
housekeeper (the dyer) upon the table, while she was rendering some
trivial domestic services during the recognitions of Dagobert and his
family. After some seconds, Mother Bunch heard a door, very near her own, softly
opened. "I waited till my father went to sleep," said the blacksmith, in a low
voice, his physiognomy evincing much more curiosity than uneasiness. "But
what is the matter, my good sister? said she, her voice trembling with emotion, while she
hastily presented to him the open letter. Agricola held it towards the
light, and read what follows:

"A person who has reasons for concealing himself, but who knows the
sisterly interest you take in the welfare of Agricola Baudoin, warns you. That young and worthy workman will probably be arrested in the course of
to-morrow." exclaimed Agricola, looking at Mother Bunch with an air of stupefied
amazement. quickly replied the sempstress, clasping her hands. Agricola resumed reading, scarcely believing the evidence of his
eyes:-"The song, entitled 'Working-men Freed,' has been declared
libellous. Numerous copies of it have been found among the papers of a
secret society, the leaders of which are about to be incarcerated, as
being concerned in the Rue des Prouvaires conspiracy." said the girl, melting into tears, "now I see it all. The man who
was lurking about below, this evening, who was observed by the dyer, was,
doubtless, a spy, lying in wait for you coming home." My verses
breathe nothing but philanthropy. Am I to blame, if they have been found
among the papers of a secret society?" Agricola disdainfully threw the
letter upon the table. "If you wish it," said Agricola, "I will; no time is lost." He resumed the reading of the letter:

"A warrant is about to be issued against Agricola Baudoin. There is mo
doubt of his innocence being sooner or later made clear; but it will be
well if he screen himself for a time as much as possible from pursuit, in
order that he may escape a confinement of two or three months previous to
trial--an imprisonment which would be a terrible blow for his mother,
whose sole support he is. "A SINCERE FRIEND, who is compelled to remain unknown." After a moment's silence, the blacksmith raised his head; his countenance
resumed its serenity; and laughing, he said: "Reassure yourself, good
Mother Bunch, these jokers have made a mistake by trying their games on
me. It is plainly an attempt at making an April-fool of me before the
time." "Agricola, for the love of heaven!" said the girl, in a supplicating
tone; "treat not the warning thus lightly. Believe in my forebodings, and
listen to my advice." "I tell you again, my good girl," replied Agricola, "that it is two
months since my song was published. It is not in any way political;
indeed, if it were, they would not have waited till now before coming
down on me." "But," said the other, "you forget that new events have arisen. It is
scarcely two days since the conspiracy was discovered, in this very
neighborhood, in the Rue des Prouvaires. And," continued she, "if the
verses, though perhaps hitherto unnoticed, have now been found in the
possession of the persons apprehended for this conspiracy, nothing more
is necessary to compromise you in the plot." in which I only praise the
love of labor and of goodness! If so, justice
would be but a blind noodle. That she might grope her way, it would be
necessary to furnish her with a dog and a pilgrim's staff to guide her
steps." "Agricola," resumed Mother Bunch; overwhelmed with anxiety and terror on
hearing the blacksmith jest at such a moment, "I conjure you to listen to
me! No doubt you uphold in the verses the sacred love of labor; but you
do also grievously deplore and deprecate the unjust lot of the poor
laborers, devoted as they are, without hope, to all the miseries of life;
you recommend, indeed, only fraternity among men; but your good and noble
heart vents its indignation, at the same time, against the selfish and
the wicked. In fine, you fervently hasten on, with the ardor of your
wishes, the emancipation of all the artisans who, less fortunate than
you, have not generous M. Hardy for employer. Say, Agricola, in these
times of trouble, is there anything more necessary to compromise you than
that numerous copies of your song have been found in possession of the
persons who have been apprehended?" Agricola was moved by these affectionate and judicious expressions of an
excellent creature, who reasoned from her heart; and he began to view
with more seriousness the advice which she had given him. Perceiving that she had shaken him, the sewing-girl went on to say: "And
then, bear your fellow-workman, Remi, in recollection." "Yes," resumed the sempstress; "a letter of his, a letter in itself quite
insignificant, was found in the house of a person arrested last year for
conspiracy; and Remi, in consequence, remained a month in prison." "That is true, but the injustice of his implication was easily shown, and
he was set at liberty." "Yes, Agricola: but not till he had lain a month in prison; and that has
furnished the motive of the person who advised you to conceal yourself! These words made a powerful impression upon Agricola. He took up the
letter and again read it attentively. "And the man who has been lurking all this evening about the house?" "I constantly recall that circumstance, which cannot be
naturally accounted for. what a blow it would be for your father,
and poor mother, who is incapable of earning anything. consider, then, what would become of them
without you--without your labor!" "It would indeed be terrible," said Agricola, impatiently casting the
letter upon the table. "What you have said concerning Remi is too true. He was as innocent as I am: yet an error of justice, an involuntary error
though it be, is not the less cruel. But they don't commit a man without
hearing him." "But they arrest him first, and hear him afterwards," said Mother Bunch,
bitterly; "and then, after a month or two, they restore him his liberty. And if he have a wife and children, whose only means of living is his
daily labor, what becomes of them while their only supporter is in
prison? They suffer hunger, they endure cold, and they weep!" At these simple and pathetic words, Agricola trembled. "A month without work," he said, with a sad and thoughtful air. "And my
mother, and father, and the two young ladies who make part of our family
until the arrival in Paris of their father, Marshal Simon. That thought, in spite of myself, affrights me!" exclaimed the girl impetuously; "suppose you apply to M.
Hardy; he is so good, and his character is so much esteemed and honored,
that, if he offered bail for you, perhaps they would give up their
persecution?" "Unfortunately," replied Agricola, "M. Hardy is absent; he is on a
journey with Marshal Simon." After a silence of some time, Agricola, striving to surmount his fear,
added: "But no! After all, I had
rather await what may come. I'll at least have the chance of proving my
innocence on my first examination: for indeed, my good sister, whether it
be that I am in prison or that I fly to conceal myself, my working for my
family will be equally prevented." that is true," said the poor girl; "what is to be done! "My brave father," said Agricola to himself, "if this misfortune happen
to-morrow, what an awakening it will be for him, who came here to sleep
so joyously!" The blacksmith buried his face in his hands. Unhappily Mother Bunch's fears were too well-founded, for it will be
recollected that at that epoch of the year 1832, before and after the Rue
des Prouvaires conspiracy, a very great number of arrests had been made
among the working classes, in consequence of a violent reaction against
democratical ideas. Suddenly, the girl broke the silence which had been maintained for some
seconds. A blush  her features, which bore the impressions of an
indefinable expression of constraint, grief, and hope. "The young lady, so beautiful, so good, who gave you this flower" (she
showed it to the blacksmith) "who has known how to make reparation with
so much delicacy for having made a painful offer, cannot but have a
generous heart. You must apply to her--"

With these words which seemed to be wrung from her by a violent effort
over herself, great tears rolled down her cheeks. For the first time in
her life she experienced a feeling of grievous jealousy. Another woman
was so happy as to have the power of coming to the relief of him whom she
idolized; while she herself, poor creature, was powerless and wretched. "But what could be done
with this young lady?" "Did she not say to you," answered Mother Bunch, "'Remember my name; and
in all circumstances address yourself to me?'" "This young lady, in her exalted position, ought to have powerful
connections who will be able to protect and defend you. Go to her to
morrow morning; tell her frankly what has happened, and request her
support." "But tell me, my good sister, what it is you wish me to do?" I remember that, in former times, my father told us that he had
saved one of his friends from being put in prison, by becoming surety for
him. It will be easy for you so to convince this young lady of your
innocence, that she will be induced to become surety; and after that, you
will have nothing more to fear." said Agricola, "to ask so great a service from a person
to whom one is almost unknown is hard." "Believe me, Agricola," said the other sadly, "I would never counsel what
could possibly lower you in the eyes of any one, and above all--do you
understand?--above all, in the eyes of this young lady. I do not propose
that you should ask money from her; but only that she should give surety
for you, in order that you may have the liberty of continuing at your
employment, so that the family may not be without resources. Believe me,
Agricola, that such a request is in no respect inconsistent with what is
noble and becoming upon your part. The heart of the young lady is
generous. The required surety will be
as nothing to her; while to you it will be everything, and will even be
the very life to those who depend upon you." "You are right, my good sister," said Agricola, with sadness and
dejection. "It is perhaps worth while to risk taking this step. If the
young lady consent to render me this service, and if giving surety will
indeed preserve me from prison, I shall be prepared for every event. added he, rising, "I'd never dare to make the request to her! What is the insignificant service that I
rendered her, when compared with that which I should solicit from her?" "Do you imagine then, Agricola, that a generous spirit measures the
services which ought to be rendered, by those previously received? Trust
to me respecting a matter which is an affair of the heart. I am, it is
true, but a lowly creature, and ought not to compare myself with any
other person. I am nothing, and I can do nothing. Nevertheless, I am
sure--yes, Agricola, I am sure--that this young lady, who is so very far
above me, will experience the same feelings that I do in this affair;
yes, like me, she will at once comprehend that your position is a cruel
one; and she will do with joy, with happiness, with thankfulness, that
which I would do, if, alas! I could do anything more than uselessly
consume myself with regrets." In spite of herself, she pronounced the last words with an expression so
heart-breaking--there was something so moving in the comparison which
this unfortunate creature, obscure and disdained, infirm and miserable,
made of herself with Adrienne de Cardoville, the very type of resplendent
youth, beauty, and opulence--that Agricola was moved even to tears; and,
holding out one of his hands to the speaker, he said to her, tenderly,
"How very good you are; how full of nobleness, good feeling, and
delicacy!" "Unhappily," said the weeping girl, "I can do nothing more than advise." "And your counsels shall be followed out, my sister dear. They are those
of a soul the most elevated I have ever known. Yes, you have won me over
into making this experiment, by persuading me that the heart of Miss de
Cardoville is perhaps equal in value to your own!" At this charming and sincere assimilation of herself to Miss Adrienne,
the sempstress forgot almost everything she had suffered, so exquisitely
sweet and consoling were her emotions. If some poor creatures, fatally
devoted to sufferings, experience griefs of which the world knows naught,
they sometimes, too, are cheered by humble and timid joys, of which the
world is equally ignorant. The least word of true tenderness and
affection, which elevates them in their own estimation, is ineffably
blissful for these unfortunate beings, habitually consigned, not only to
hardships and to disdain, but even to desolating doubts, and distrust of
themselves. "Then it is agreed that you will go, to-morrow morning to this young
lady's house?" exclaimed Mother Bunch, trembling with a new-born hope. "And," she quickly added, "at break of day I'll go down to watch at the
street-door, to see if there be anything suspicious, and to apprise you
of what I perceive." "It will be necessary to endeavor to set off before the wakening of your
father," said the hunchback. "The quarter in which the young lady dwells,
is so deserted, that the mere going there will almost serve for your
present concealment." "I think I hear the voice of my father," said Agricola suddenly. In truth, the little apartment was so near Agricola's garret, that he and
the sempstress, listening, heard Dagobert say in the dark:

"Agricola, is it thus that you sleep, my boy? Why, my first sleep is
over; and my tongue itches deucedly." said Mother Bunch; "your absence would disquiet
him. On no account go out to-morrow morning, before I inform you whether
or not I shall have seen anything suspicious." "Why, Agricola, you are not here?" resumed Dagobert, in a louder voice. "Here I am, father," said the smith, while going out of the sempstress's
apartment, and entering the garret, to his father. "I have been to fasten the shutter of a loft that the wind agitated, lest
its noise should disturb you." "Thanks, my boy; but it is not noise that wakes me," said Dagobert,
gayly; "it is an appetite, quite furious, for a chat with you. Oh, my
dear boy, it is the hungering of a proud old man of a father, who has not
seen his son for eighteen years." "Shall I light a candle, father?" "No, no; that would be luxurious; let us chat in the dark. It will be a
new pleasure for me to see you to-morrow morning at daybreak. It will be
like seeing you for the first time twice." The door of Agricola's garret
being now closed, Mother Bunch heard nothing more. The poor girl, without undressing, threw herself upon the bed, and closed
not an eye during the night, painfully awaiting the appearance of day, in
order that she might watch over the safety of Agricola. However, in spite
of her vivid anxieties for the morrow, she sometimes allowed herself to
sink into the reveries of a bitter melancholy. She compared the
conversation she had just had in the silence of night, with the man whom
she secretly adored, with what that conversation might have been, had she
possessed some share of charms and beauty--had she been loved as she
loved, with a chaste and devoted flame! But soon sinking into belief that
she should never know the ravishing sweets of a mutual passion, she found
consolation in the hope of being useful to Agricola. At the dawn of day,
she rose softly, and descended the staircase with little noise, in order
to see if anything menaced Agricola from without. The weather, damp and foggy during a portion of the night, became clear
and cold towards morning. Through the glazed skylight of Agricola's
garret, where he lay with his father, a corner of the blue sky could be
seen. The apartment of the young blacksmith had an aspect as poor as the
sewing-girl's. For its sole ornament, over the deal table upon which
Agricola wrote his poetical inspirations, there hung suspended from a
nail in the wall a portrait of Beranger--that immortal poet whom the
people revere and cherish, because his rare and transcendent genius has
delighted to enlighten the people, and to sing their glories and their
reverses. Although the day had only begun to dawn, Dagobert and Agricola had
already risen. The latter had sufficient self command to conceal his
inquietude, for renewed reflection had again increased his fears. The recent outbreak in the Rue des Prouvaires had caused a great number
of precautionary arrests; and the discovery of numerous copies of
Agricola's song, in the possession of one of the chiefs of the
disconcerted plot, was, in truth, calculated slightly to compromise the
young blacksmith. His father, however, as we have already mentioned,
suspected not his secret anguish. Seated by the side of his son, upon the
edge of their mean little bed, the old soldier, by break of day, had
dressed and shaved with military care; he now held between his hands both
those of Agricola, his countenance radiant with joy, and unable to
discontinue the contemplation of his boy. "You will laugh at me, my dear boy," said Dagobert to his son; "but I
wished the night to the devil, in order that I might gaze upon you in
full day, as I now see you. But all in good time; I have lost nothing. Here is another silliness of mine; it delights me to see you wear
moustaches. What a splendid horse-grenadier you would have made! Tell me;
have you never had a wish to be a soldier?" "That's right," said Dagobert: "and besides, I believe, after all, look
ye, that the time of the sword has gone by. We old fellows are now good
for nothing, but to be put in a corner of the chimney. Like rusty old
carbines, we have had our day." "Yes; your days of heroism and of glory," said Agricola with excitement;
and then he added, with a voice profoundly softened and agitated, "it is
something good and cheering to be your son!" "As to the good, I know nothing of that," replied Dagobert; "but as for
the cheering, it ought to be so; for I love you proudly. And I think this
is but the beginning! I am like the famished
wretches who have been some days without food. It is but by little and
little that they recover themselves, and can eat. Now, you may expect to
be tasted, my boy, morning and evening, and devoured during the day. No,
I wish not to think that--not all the day--no, that thought dazzles and
perplexes me; and I am no longer myself." These words of Dagobert caused a painful feeling to Agricola. He believed
that they sprang from a presentiment of the separation with which he was
menaced. "Well," continued Dagobert; "you are quite happy; M. Hardy is always good
to you." replied Agricola: "there is none in the world better, or more
equitable and generous! If you knew what wonders he has brought about in
his factory! Compared to all others, it is a paradise beside the stithies
of Lucifer!" "You shall see," resumed Agricola, "what welfare, what joy, what
affection, are displayed upon the countenances of all whom he employs;
who work with an ardent pleasure. "This M. Hardy of yours must be an out-and-out magician," said Dagobert. "He is, father, a very great magician. He has known how to render labor
pleasant and attractive. As for the pleasure, over and above good wages,
he accords to us a portion of his profits according to our deserts;
whence you may judge of the eagerness with which we go to work. And that
is not all: he has caused large, handsome buildings to be erected, in
which all his workpeople find, at less expense than elsewhere, cheerful
and salubrious lodgings, in which they enjoy all the advantages of an
association. But you shall see--I repeat--you shall see!" "They have good reason to say, that Paris is the region of wonders,"
observed Dagobert. "Well, behold me here again at last, never more to quit you, nor good
mother!" "No, father, we will never separate again," said Agricola, stifling a
sigh. "My mother and I will both try to make you forget all that you have
suffered." exclaimed Dagobert, "who the deuce has suffered? Look me well
in the face; and see if I have a look of suffering! Since I have put my foot here, I feel myself quite a young man again! You
shall see me march soon: I bet that I tire you out! I wager that in
beholding your black moustache and my gray one, folks will say, behold
father and son! But let us settle what we are to do with the day. You
will write to the father of Marshal Simon, informing him the his
grand-daughters have arrived, and that it is necessary that he should
hasten his return to Paris; for he has charged himself with matters which
are of great importance for them. While you are writing, I will go down
to say good-morning to my wife, and to the dear little ones. Your mother will go to mass; for I perceive that she likes
to be regular at that: the good soul! and
during her absence, we will make a raid together." "Father," said Agricola, with embarrassment, "this morning it is out of
my power to accompany you." said Dagobert; "recollect this is Monday!" "Yes, father," said Agricola, hesitatingly; "but I have promised to
attend all the morning in the workshop, to finish a job that is required
in a hurry. If I fail to do so, I shall inflict some injury upon M.
Hardy. "That alters the case," said Dagobert, with a sigh of regret. "I thought
to make my first parade through Paris with you this morning; but it must
be deferred in favor of your work. It is sacred: since it is that which
sustains your mother. Nevertheless, it is vexatious, devilish vexatious. See how quickly one gets habituated to and
spoilt by happiness. I growl like a true grumbler, at a walk being put
off for a few hours! I who, during eighteen years, have only
hoped to see you once more, without daring to reckon very much upon it! Vive l'amour et cogni--I mean--my
Agricola!" And, to console himself, the old soldier gayly slapped his
son's shoulder. This seemed another omen of evil to the blacksmith; for he dreaded one
moment to another lest the fears of Mother Bunch should be realized. "Now
that I have recovered myself," said Dagobert, laughing, "let us speak of
business. Know you where I find the addresses of all the notaries in
Paris?" "I don't know; but nothing is more easy than to discover it." "My reason is," resumed Dagobert, "that I sent from Russia by post, and
by order of the mother of the two children that I have brought here, some
important papers to a Parisian notary. As it was my duty to see this
notary immediately upon my arrival, I had written his name and his
address in a portfolio, of which however, I have been robbed during my
journey; and as I have forgotten his devil of a name, it seems to me,
that if I should see it again in the list of notaries, I might recollect
it." Two knocks at the door of the garret made Agricola start. He
involuntarily thought of a warrant for his apprehension. His father, who, at the sound of the knocking turned round his head, had
not perceived his emotion, and said with a loud voice: "Come in!" He wore a black cassock and a broad brimmed
hat. To recognize his brother by adoption, and to throw himself into his arms,
were two movements performed at once by Agricola--as quick as
thought.--"My brother!" Such were the words exchanged between the blacksmith and the missionary,
while they were locked in a close embrace. Dagobert, moved and charmed by these fraternal endearments, felt his eyes
become moist. There was something truly touching in the affection of the
young men--in their hearts so much alike, and yet of characters and
aspects so very different--for the manly countenance of Agricola
contrasted strongly with the delicacy and angelic physiognomy of Gabriel. "I was forewarned by my father of your arrival," said the blacksmith at
length. "I have been expecting to see you; and my happiness has been a
hundred times the greater, because I have had all the pleasures of hoping
for it." asked Gabriel, in affectionately grasping the hands
of Dagobert. "I trust that you have found her in good health." replied Dagobert; "and her health will have become a
hundred times better, now that we are all together. Then addressing himself to Agricola, who, forgetting
his fear of being arrested, regarded the missionary with an expression of
ineffable affection, Dagobert added:

"Let it be remembered, that, with the soft cheek of a young girl, Gabriel
has the courage of a lion; I have already told with what intrepidity he
saved the lives of Marshal Simon's daughters, and tried to save mine
also." suddenly exclaimed
Agricola, who for a few seconds had been attentively examining the
missionary. Gabriel, having thrown aside his hat on entering, was now directly
beneath the skylight of the garret apartment, the bright light through
which shone upon his sweet, pale countenance: and the round scar, which
extended from one eyebrow to the other, was therefore distinctly visible. In the midst of the powerful and diversified emotion, and of the exciting
events which so rapidly followed the shipwreck on the rocky coast near
Cardoville House, Dagobert, during the short interview he then had with
Gabriel, had not perceived the scar which seamed the forehead of the
young missionary. Now, partaking, however, of the surprise of his son,
Dagobert said:

"Aye, indeed! "And on his hands, too; see, dear father!" exclaimed the blacksmith, with
renewed surprise, while he seized one of the hands which the young priest
held out towards him in order to tranquillize his fears. "Gabriel, my brave boy, explain this to us!" added Dagobert; "who has
wounded you thus?" and in his turn, taking the other hand of the
missionary, he examined the scar upon it with the eye of a judge of
wounds, and then added, "In Spain, one of my comrades was found and taken
down alive from a cross, erected at the junction of several roads, upon
which the monks had crucified, and left him to die of hunger, thirst, and
agony. Ever afterwards he bore scars upon his hands, exactly similar to
this upon your hand." "It is evident that your hands
have been pierced through! and Agricola became
grievously agitated. "Do not think about it," said Gabriel, reddening with the embarrassment
of modesty. "Having gone as a missionary amongst the savages of the Rocky
Mountains, they crucified me, and they had begun to scalp me, when
Providence snatched me from their hands." "Unfortunate youth," said Dagobert; "without arms then? You had not a
sufficient escort for your protection?" "It is not for such as me to carry arms." said Gabriel, sweetly smiling;
"and we are never accompanied by any escort." "Well, but your companions, those who were along with you, how came it
that they did not defend you?" "Yes, alone; without even a guide." exclaimed Dagobert,
scarcely crediting a step so unmilitary, and almost distrusting his own
sense of hearing. "The Christian faith," said Gabriel, with mild simplicity, "cannot be
implanted by force or violence. It is only by the power of persuasion
that the gospel can be spread amongst poor savages." "Why, then, dear brother, one has but to die for the belief that is in
him, pitying those who have rejected it, and who have refused the
blessings it offers to mankind." There was a period of profound silence after the reply of Gabriel, which
was uttered with simple and touching pathos. Dagobert was in his own nature too courageous not to comprehend a heroism
thus calm and resigned; and the old soldier, as well as his son, now
contemplated Gabriel with the most earnest feelings of mingled admiration
and respect. Gabriel, entirely free from the affection of false modesty, seemed quite
unconscious of the emotions which he had excited in the breasts of his
two friends; and he therefore said to Dagobert, "What ails you?" exclaimed the brave old soldier, with great emotion:
"After having been for thirty years in the wars, I had imagined myself to
be about as courageous as any man. "Thunder, don't you know that the brave wounds there" (the veteran took
with transport both of Gabriel's hands), "that these wounds are as
glorious--are more glorious than our--than all ours, as warriors by
profession!" exclaimed Agricola; and he added,
with enthusiasm, "Oh, for such priests! How I am elevated by their charity, their courage, their
resignation!" "I entreat you not to extol me thus," said Gabriel with embarrassment. When I have
gone into the heat of action, did I rush into it alone? Was I not under
the eyes of my commanding officer? Were not my comrades there along with
me? In default of true courage, had I not the instinct of self
preservation to spur me on, without reckoning the excitement of the
shouts and tumult of battle, the smell of the gunpowder, the flourishes
of the trumpets, the thundering of the cannon, the ardor of my horse,
which bounded beneath me as if the devil were at his tail? Need I state
that I also knew that the emperor was present, with his eye upon every
one--the emperor, who, in recompense for a hole being made in my tough
hide, would give me a bit of lace or a ribbon, as plaster for the wound. Thanks to all these causes, I passed for game. But are you
not a thousand times more game than I, my brave boy; going alone,
unarmed, to confront enemies a hundred times more ferocious than those
whom we attacked--we, who fought in whole squadrons, supported by
artillery, bomb-shells, and case-shot?" cried Agricola, "how noble of you to render to
Gabriel this justice!" "Oh, dear brother," said Gabriel, "his kindness to me makes him magnify
what was quite natural and simple!" said the veteran soldier; "yes, natural for gallants who have
hearts of the true temper: but that temper is rare." "Oh, yes, very rare," said Agricola; "for that kind of courage is the
most admirable of all. Most bravely did you seek almost certain death,
alone, bearing the cross in hand as your only weapon, to preach charity
and Christian brotherhood. They seized you, tortured you; and you await
death and partly endure it, without complaint, without remonstrance,
without hatred, without anger, without a wish for vengeance; forgiveness
issuing from your mouth, and a smile of pity beaming upon your lips; and
this in the depths of forests, where no one could witness your
magnanimity,--none could behold you--and without other desire, after you
were rescued than modestly to conceal blessed wounds under your black
robe! can you still contend that you are not
as brave as he?" "And besides, too," resumed Dagobert, "the dear boy did all that for a
thankless paymaster; for it is true, Agricola, that his wounds will never
change his humble black robe of a priest into the rich robe of a bishop!" "I am not so disinterested as I may seem to be," said Gabriel to
Dagobert, smiling meekly. "If I am deemed worthy, a great recompense
awaits me on high." "As to all that, my boy," said Dagobert, "I do not understand it; and I
will not argue about it. I maintain it, that my old cross of honor would
be at least as deservedly affixed to your cassock as upon my uniform." "But these recompenses are never conferred upon humble priests like
Gabriel," said Agricola, "and if you did know, dear father, how much
virtue and valor is among those whom the highest orders in the priesthood
insolently call the inferior clergy,--the unseen merit and the blind
devotedness to be found amongst worthy, but obscure, country curates, who
are inhumanly treated and subjugated to a pitiless yoke by the lordly
lawnsleeves! Like us, those poor priests are worthy laborers in their
vocation; and for them, also, all generous hearts ought to demand
enfranchisement! Sons of common people, like ourselves, and useful as we
are, justice ought to be rendered both to them and to us. You will not contradict it; for you have told me, that your
ambition would have been to obtain a small country curacy; because you
understand the good that you could work within it." "My desire is still the same," said Gabriel sadly: "but unfortunately--"
and then, as if he wished to escape from a painful thought, and to change
the conversation, he, addressing himself to Dagobert, added: "Believe me:
be more just than to undervalue your own courage by exalting mine. Your
courage must be very great--very great; for, after a battle, the
spectacle of the carnage must be truly terrible to a generous and feeling
heart. We, at least, though we may be killed, do not kill." At these words of the missionary, the soldier drew himself up erect,
looked upon Gabriel with astonishment, and said, "This is most
surprising!" "What Gabriel has just told us," replied Dagobert, "brings to my mind
what I experienced in warfare on the battlefield in proportion as I
advanced in years. Listen, my children: more than once, on the night
after a general engagement, I have been mounted as a vidette,--alone,--by
night,--amid the moonlight, on the field of battle which remained in our
possession, and upon which lay the bodies of seven or eight thousand of
the slain, amongst whom were mingled the slaughtered remains of some of
my old comrades: and then this sad scene, when the profound silence has
restored me to my senses from the thirst for bloodshed and the delirious
whirling of my sword (intoxicated like the rest), I have said to myself,
'for what have these men been killed?--FOR WHAT--FOR WHAT?' But this
feeling, well understood as it was, hindered me not, on the following
morning, when the trumpets again sounded the charge, from rushing once
more to the slaughter. But the same thought always recurred when my arm
became weary with carnage; and after wiping my sabre upon the mane of my
horse, I have said to myself, 'I have killed!--killed!!--killed!!! The missionary and the blacksmith exchanged looks on hearing the old
soldier give utterance to this singular retrospection of the past. said Gabriel to him, "all generous hearts feel as you did during
the solemn moments, when the intoxication of glory has subsided, and man
is left alone to the influence of the good instincts planted in his
bosom." "And that should prove, my brave boy," rejoined Dagobert, "that you are
greatly better than I; for those noble instincts, as you call them, have
never abandoned you. * * * * But how the deuce did you escape from the
claws of the infuriated savages who had already crucified you?" At this question of Dagobert, Gabriel started and reddened so visibly,
that the soldier said to him: "If you ought not or cannot answer my
request, let us say no more about it." "I have nothing to conceal, either from you or from my brother," replied
the missionary with altered voice. "Only; it will be difficult for me to
make you comprehend what I cannot comprehend myself." "Surely," said Gabriel, reddening more deeply, "I must have been deceived
by a fallacy of my senses, during that abstracted moment in which I
awaited death with resignation. My enfeebled mind, in spite of me, must
have been cheated by an illusion; or that, which to the present hour has
remained inexplicable, would have been more slowly developed; and I
should have known with greater certainty that it was the strange woman--"

Dagobert, while listening to the missionary, was perfectly amazed; for he
also had vainly tried to account for the unexpected succor which had
freed him and the two orphans from the prison at Leipsic. "Of her who saved me," was the reply. "A woman saved you from the hands of the savages?" "Yes," replied Gabriel, though absorbed in his reflections, "a woman,
young and beautiful!" When I asked her, she replied, 'I am the sister of the
distressed!'" asked Dagobert, singularly
interested. "'I go wheresoever there is suffering,' she replied," answered
the missionary; "and she departed, going towards the north of
America--towards those desolate regions in which there is eternal snow,
where the nights are without end." "As in Siberia," said Dagobert, who had become very thoughtful. "But," resumed Agricola, addressing himself to Gabriel, who seemed also
to have become more and more absorbed, "in what manner or by what means
did this woman come to your assistance?" The missionary was about to reply to the last question, when there was
heard a gentle tap at the door of the garret apartment, which renewed the
fears that Agricola had forgotten since the arrival of his adopted
brother. "Agricola," said a sweet voice outside the door, "I wish to
speak with you as soon as possible." The blacksmith recognized Mother Bunch's voice, and opened the door. But
the young sempstress, instead of entering, drew back into the dark
passage, and said, with a voice of anxiety: "Agricola, it is an hour
since broad day, and you have not yet departed! I have
been watching below, in the street, until now, and have seen nothing
alarming; but they may come any instant to arrest you. Hasten, I conjure
you, your departure for the abode of Miss de Cardoville. "Had it not been for the arrival of Gabriel, I should have been gone. But
I could not resist the happiness of remaining some little time with him." said Mother Bunch, with sweet surprise; for, as has been
stated, she had been brought up with him and Agricola. "Yes," answered Agricola, "for half an hour he has been with my father
and me." "What happiness I shall have in seeing him again," said the sewing-girl. "He doubtless came upstairs while I had gone for a brief space to your
mother, to ask if I could be useful in any way on account of the young
ladies; but they have been so fatigued that they still sleep. Your mother
has requested me to give you this letter for your father. "Well," resumed Mother Bunch, "now that you have seen Gabriel, do not
delay long. Think what a blow it would be for your father, if they came
to arrest you in his very presence mon Dieu!" "You are right," said Agricola; "it is indispensable that I should
depart--while near Gabriel in spite of my anxiety, my fears were
forgotten." "Go quickly, then; and if Miss de Cardoville should grant this favor,
perhaps in a couple of hours you will return, quite at ease both as to
yourself and us." a very few minutes more; and I'll come down." I'll come up
again to apprise you. Mother Bunch hurriedly descended the staircase,
to resume her watch at the street door, and Agricola re-entered his
garret. "Dear father," he said to Dagobert, "my mother has just received
this letter, and she requests you to read it." "Very well; read it for me, my boy." And Agricola read as follows:

"MADAME.--I understand that your husband has been charged by General Simon
with an affair of very great importance. Will you, as soon as your
husband arrives in Paris, request him to come to my office at Chartres
without a moment's delay. I am instructed to deliver to himself, and to
no other person, some documents indispensable to the interests of General
Simon. "DURAND, Notary at Chartres." Dagobert looked at his son with astonishment, and said to him, "Who can
have told this gentleman already of my arrival in Paris?" "Perhaps, father," said Agricola, "this is the notary to whom you
transmitted some papers, and whose address you have lost." "But his name was not Durand; and I distinctly recollect that his address
was Paris, not Chartres. And, besides," said the soldier, thoughtfully,
"if he has some important documents, why didn't he transmit them to me?" "It seems to me that you ought not to neglect going to him as soon as
possible," said Agricola, secretly rejoiced that this circumstance would
withdraw his father for about two days, during which time his
(Agricola's) fate would be decided in one way or other. "Your counsel is good," replied his father. "This thwarts your intentions in some degree?" "Rather, my lads; for I counted upon passing the day with you. Having come happily from Siberia to Paris, it
is not for me to fear a journey from Paris to Chartres, when it is
required on an affair of importance. In twice twenty-four hours I shall
be back again. But the deuce take me if I expected to leave Paris for
Chartres to-day. Luckily, I leave Rose and Blanche with my good wife; and
Gabriel, their angel, as they call him, will be here to keep them
company." "That is, unfortunately, impossible," said the missionary, sadly. "This
visit on my arrival is also a farewell visit." exclaimed Dagobert and Agricola both at once. said Dagobert; "surely it is not
possible?" "I must answer no question upon this subject," said Gabriel, suppressing
a sigh: "but from now, for some time, I cannot, and ought not, come again
into this house." "Why, my brave boy," resumed Dagobert with emotion, "there is something
in thy conduct that savors of constraint, of oppression. He you call superior, whom I saw for some moments after the
shipwreck at Cardoville Castle, has a bad look; and I am sorry to see you
enrolled under such a commander." exclaimed Agricola, struck with the identity of
the name with that of the young lady of the golden hair; "was it in
Cardoville Castle that you were received after your shipwreck?" "Yes, my boy; why, does that astonish you?" "Nothing father; but were the owners of the castle there at the time?" "No; for the steward, when I applied to him for an opportunity to return
thanks for the kind hospitality we had experienced, informed me that the
person to whom the house belonged was resident at Paris." "What a singular coincidence," thought Agricola, "if the young lady
should be the proprietor of the dwelling which bears her name!" This reflection having recalled to Agricola the promise which he had made
to Mother Bunch, he said to Dagobert; "Dear father, excuse me; but it is
already late, and I ought to be in the workshop by eight o'clock." This party is adjourned till my
return from Chartres. Embrace me once more, and take care of yourself." Since Dagobert had spoken of constraint and oppression to Gabriel, the
latter had continued pensive. At the moment when Agricola approached him
to shake hands, and to bid him adieu, the missionary said to him
solemnly, with a grave voice, and in a tone of decision that astonished
both the blacksmith and the soldier: "My dear brother, one word more. I
have come here to say to you also that within a few days hence I shall
have need of you; and of you also, my father (permit me so to call you),"
added Gabriel, with emotion, as he turned round to Dagobert. exclaimed Agricola; "what is the matter?" "Yes," replied Gabriel, "I need the advice and assistance of two men of
honor--of two men of resolution;--and I can reckon upon you two--can I
not? At any hour, on whatever day it may be, upon a word from me, will
you come?" Dagobert and his son regarded each other in silence, astonished at the
accents of the missionary. If
he should be a prisoner when his brother should require his assistance,
what could be done? "At every hour, by night or by day, my brave boy, you may depend upon
us," said Dagobert, as much surprised as interested--"You have a father
and a brother; make your own use of them." "Thanks, thanks," said Gabriel, "you set me quite at ease." "I'll tell you what," resumed the soldier, "were it not for your priest's
robe, I should believe, from the manner in which you have spoken to us,
that you are about to be engaged in a duel--in a mortal combat." "Yes; it may be a duel--uncommon and
fearful--at which it is necessary to have two witnesses such as you--A
FATHER and A BROTHER!" Some instants afterwards, Agricola, whose anxiety was continually
increasing, set off in haste for the dwelling of Mademoiselle de
Cardoville, to which we now beg leave to take the reader. Dizier House was one of the largest and handsomest in the Rue Babylone,
in Paris. Nothing could be more severe, more imposing, or more depressing
than the aspect of this old mansion. Several immense windows, filled with
small squares of glass, painted a grayish white, increased the sombre
effect of the massive layers of huge stones, blackened by time, of which
the fabric was composed. This dwelling bore a resemblance to all the others that had been erected
in the same quarter towards the middle of the last century. It was
surmounted in front by a pediment; it had an elevated ground floor, which
was reached from the outside by a circular flight of broad stone steps. One of the fronts looked on an immense court-yard, on each side of which
an arcade led to the vast interior departments. The other front
overlooked the garden, or rather park, of twelve or fifteen roods; and,
on this side, wings, approaching the principal part of the structure,
formed a couple of lateral galleries. Like nearly all the other great
habitations of this quarter, there might be seen at the extremity of the
garden, what the owners and occupiers of each called the lesser mansion. This extension was a Pompadour summer-house, built in the form of a
rotunda, with the charming though incorrect taste of the era of its
erection. It presented, in every part where it was possible for the
stones to be cut, a profusion of endives, knots of ribbons, garlands of
flowers, and chubby cupids. This pavilion, inhabited by Adrienne de
Cardoville was composed of a ground floor, which was reached by a
peristyle of several steps. A small vestibule led to a circular hall,
lighted from the roof. Four principal apartments met here; and ranges of
smaller rooms, concealed in the upper story, served for minor purposes. These dependencies of great habitations are in our days disused, or
transformed into irregular conservatories; but by an uncommon exception,
the black exterior of the pavilion had been scraped and renewed, and the
entire structure repaired. The white stones of which it was built
glistened like Parian marble; and its renovated, coquettish aspect
contrasted singularly with the gloomy mansion seen at the other extremity
of an extensive lawn, on which were planted here and there gigantic
clumps of verdant trees. The following scene occurred at this residence on the morning following
that of the arrival of Dagobert, with the daughters of Marshal Simon, in
the Rue Brise-Miche. The hour of eight had sounded from the steeple of a
neighboring church; a brilliant winter sun arose to brighten a pure blue
sky behind the tall leafless trees, which in summer formed a dome of
verdure over the summer-house. The door in the vestibule opened, and the
rays of the morning sun beamed upon a charming creature, or rather upon
two charming creatures, for the second one, though filling a modest place
in the scale of creation, was not less distinguished by beauty of its
own, which was very striking. In plain terms two individuals, one of them
a young girl, and the other a tiny English dog, of great beauty, of that
breed of spaniels called King Charles's, made their appearance under the
peristyle of the rotunda. The name of the young girl was Georgette; the
beautiful little spaniel's was Frisky. Georgette was in her eighteenth
year. Never had Florine or Manton, never had a lady's maid of Marivaux, a
more mischievous face, an eye more quick, a smile more roguish, teeth
more white, cheeks more roseate, figure more coquettish, feet smaller, or
form smarter, attractive, and enticing. Though it was yet very early,
Georgette was carefully and tastefully dressed. A tiny Valenciennes cap,
with flaps and flap-band, of half peasant fashion, decked with
rose- ribbons, and stuck a little backward upon bands of beautiful
fair hair, surrounded her fresh and piquant face; a robe of gray
levantine, and a cambric neck-kerchief, fastened to her bosom by a large
tuft of rose- ribbons, displayed her figure elegantly rounded; a
hollands apron, white as snow, trimmed below by three large hems,
surmounted by a Vandyke-row, encircled her waist, which was as round and
flexible as a reed; her short, plain sleeves, edged with bone lace,
allowed her plump arms to be seen, which her long Swedish gloves,
reaching to the elbow, defended from the rigor of the cold. When
Georgette raised the bottom of her dress, in order to descend more
quickly the steps, she exhibited to Frisky's indifferent eyes a beautiful
ankle, and the beginning of the plump calf of a fine leg, encased in
white silk, and a charming little foot, in a laced half-boot of Turkish
satin. When a blonde like Georgette sets herself to be ensnaring; when
vivid glances sparkle from her eyes of bright yet tender blue; when a
joyous excitement suffuses her transparent skin, she is more resistless
for the conquest of everything before her than a brunette. This bewitching and nimble lady's-maid, who on the previous evening had
introduced Agricola to the pavilion, was first waiting woman to the
Honorable Miss Adrienne de Cardoville, niece of the Princess Saint
Dizier. Frisky, so happily found and brought back by the blacksmith, uttered weak
but joyful barks, and bounded, ran, and frolicked upon the turf. She was
not much bigger than one's fist; her curled hair, of lustrous black,
shone like ebony, under the broad, red satin ribbon which encircled her
neck; her paws, fringed with long silken fur, were of a bright and fiery
tan, as well as her muzzle, the nose of which was inconceivably pug; her
large eyes were full of intelligence; and her curly ears so long that
they trailed upon the ground. Georgette seemed to be as brisk and
petulant as Frisky, and shared her sportiveness,--now scampering after
the happy little spaniel, and now retreating, in order to be pursued upon
the greensward in her turn. All at once, at the sight of a second person,
who advanced with deliberate gravity, Georgette and Frisky were suddenly
stopped in their diversion. The little King Charles, some steps in
advance of Georgette, faithful to her name, and bold as the devil, held
herself firmly upon her nervous paws, and fiercely awaited the coming up
of the enemy, displaying at the same time rows of little teeth, which,
though of ivory, were none the less pointed and sharp. The enemy
consisted of a woman of mature age, accompanied by a very fat dog, of the
color of coffee and milk; his tail was twisted like a corkscrew; he was
pot-bellied; his skin was sleek; his neck was turned little to one side;
he walked with his legs inordinately spread out, and stepped with the air
of a doctor. His black muzzle, quarrelsome and scowling showed two fangs
sallying forth, and turning up from the left side of the mouth, and
altogether he had an expression singularly forbidding and vindictive. This disagreeable animal, a perfect type of what might be called a
"church-goer's pug," answered to the name of "My Lord." His mistress, a
woman of about fifty years of age, corpulent and of middle size, was
dressed in a costume as gloomy and severe as that of Georgette was gay
and showy. It consisted of a brown robe, a black silk mantle, and a hat
of the same dye. The features of this woman might have been agreeable in
her youth; and her florid cheeks, her correct eyebrows, her black eyes,
which were still very lively, scarcely accorded with the peevish and
austere physiognomy which she tried to assume. This matron, of slow and
discreet gait, was Madame Augustine Grivois, first woman to the Princess
Saint-Dizier. Not only did the age, the face, and the dress of these two
women present a striking contrast; but the contrast extended itself even
to the animals which attended them. There were similar differences
between Frisky and My Lord, as between Georgette and Mrs. When
the latter perceived the little King Charles, she could not restrain a
movement of surprise and repugnance, which escaped not the notice of the
young lady's maid. Frisky, who had not retreated one inch, since the
apparition of My Lord, regarded him valiantly, with a look of defiance,
and even advanced towards him with an air so decidedly hostile, that the
cur, though thrice as big as the little King Charles, uttered a howl of
distress and terror, and sought refuge behind Mrs. Grivois, who bitterly
said to Georgette:

"It seems to me, miss, that you might dispense with exciting your dog
thus, and setting him upon mine." "It was doubtless for the purpose of protecting this respectable but ugly
animal from similar alarms, that you tried to make us lose Frisky
yesterday, by driving her into the street through the little garden gate. But fortunately an honest young man found Frisky in the Rue de Babylone,
and brought her back to my mistress. However," continued Georgette, "to
what, madame, do I owe the pleasure of seeing you this morning?" "I am commanded by the Princess," replied Mrs. Grivois, unable to conceal
a smile of triumphant satisfaction, "immediately to see Miss Adrienne. It
regards a very important affair, which I am to communicate only to
herself." At these words Georgette became purple, and could not repress a slight
start of disquietude, which happily escaped Grivois, who was occupied
with watching over the safety of her pet, whom Frisky continued to snarl
at with a very menacing aspect; and Georgette, having quickly overcome
her temporary emotion, firmly answered: "Miss Adrienne went to rest very
late last night. She has forbidden me to enter her apartment before mid
day." "That is very possible: but as the present business is to obey an order
of the Princess her aunt, you will do well if you please, miss, to awaken
your mistress immediately." "My mistress is subject to no one's orders in her own house; and I will
not disturb her till mid-day, in pursuance of her commands," replied
Georgette. "Then I shall go myself," said Mrs. "Florine and Hebe will not admit you. Indeed, here is the key of the
saloon; and through the saloon only can the apartments of Miss Adrienne
be entered." do you dare refuse me permission to execute the orders of the
Princess?" "Yes; I dare to commit the great crime of being unwilling to awaken my
mistress!" such are the results of the blind affection of the Princess for her
niece," said the matron, with affected grief: "Miss Adrienne no longer
respects her aunt's orders; and she is surrounded by young hare-brained
persons, who, from the first dawn of morning, dress themselves out as if
for ball-going." how came you to revile dress, who were formerly the greatest
coquette and the most frisky and fluttering of all the Princess's women. At least, that is what is still spoken of you in the hotel, as having
been handed down from time out of mind, by generation to generation, even
unto ours!" do you mean to insinuate that I am a
hundred years old, Miss Impertinence?" "I speak of the generations of waiting-women; for, except you, it is the
utmost if they remain two or three years in the Princess's house, who has
too many tempers for the poor girls!" "I forbid you to speak thus of my mistress, whose name some people ought
not to pronounce but on their knees." "However," said Georgette, "if one wished to speak ill of--"

"Do you dare!" "No longer ago than last night, at half past eleven o'clock--"

"Last night?" "A four-wheeler," continued Georgette, "stopped at a few paces from the
house. A mysterious personage, wrapped up in a cloak, alighted from it,
and directly tapped, not at the door, but on the glass of the porter's
lodge window; and at one o'clock in the morning, the cab was still
stationed in the street, waiting for the mysterious personage in the
cloak, who, doubtless, during all that time, was, as you say, pronouncing
the name of her Highness the Princess on his knees." Grivois had not been instructed as to a visit made to the
Princess Saint-Dizier by Rodin (for he was the man in the cloak), in the
middle of the night, after he had become certain of the arrival in Paris
of General Simon's daughters; or whether Mrs. Grivois thought it
necessary to appear ignorant of the visit, she replied, shrugging her
shoulders disdainfully: "I know not what you, mean, madame. I have not
come here to listen to your impertinent stuff. Once again I ask you--will
you, or will you not, introduce me to the presence of Miss Adrienne?" "I repeat, madame, that my mistress sleeps, and that she has forbidden me
to enter her bed-chamber before mid-day." This conversation took place at some distance from the summer-house, at a
spot from which the peristyle could be seen at the end of a grand avenue,
terminating in trees arranged in form of a V. All at once Mrs. Grivois,
extending her hand in that direction, exclaimed: "Great heavens! "I saw her run up the porch steps. I perfectly recognized her by her
gait, by her hat, and by her mantle. To come home at eight o'clock in the
morning!" Grivois: "it is perfectly incredible!" and Georgette burst out into
fits of laughter: and then said: "Oh! you wish to out-do my
story of the four-wheeler last night! Grivois, "that I have this moment seen--"

"Oh! Grivois: if you speak seriously, you are mad!" The little gate that
open's on the street lets one into the quincunx near the pavilion. It is
by that door, doubtless, that mademoiselle has re-entered. her presentiments
have not yet been mistaken. See to what her weak indulgence of her
niece's caprices has led her! It is monstrous!--so monstrous, that,
though I have seen her with my own eyes, still I can scarcely believe
it!" "Since you've gone so far, ma'am, I now insist upon conducting you into
the apartment of my lady, in order that you may convince yourself, by
your own senses, that your eyes have deceived you!" "Oh, you are very cunning, my dear, but not more cunning than I! Yes, yes, I believe you: you are certain that by
this time I shall find her in her apartment!" "But, madame, I assure you--"

"All that I can say to you is this: that neither you, nor Florine, nor
Hebe, shall remain here twenty-four hours. The Princess will put an end
to this horrible scandal; for I shall immediately inform her of what has
passed. Re-enter at eight o'clock in the morning! Why, I am all in a whirl! Certainly, if I had not seen it with my own
eyes, I could not have believed it! Still, it is only what was to be
expected. All those to whom I am
going to relate it, will say, I am quite sure, that it is not at all
astonishing! Grivois returned precipitately towards the mansion, followed by her
fat pug, who appeared to be as embittered as herself. Georgette, active and light, ran, on her part, towards the pavilion, in
order to apprise Miss de Cardoville that Mrs. Grivois had seen her, or
fancied she had seen her, furtively enter by the little garden gate. ADRIENNE AT HER TOILET. Grivois had seen or pretended to
have seen Adrienne de Cardoville re-enter in the morning the extension of
Saint-Dizier House. It is for the purpose, not of excusing, but of rendering intelligible,
the following scenes, that it is deemed necessary to bring out into the
light some striking peculiarities in the truly original character of Miss
de Cardoville. This originality consisted in an excessive independence of mind, joined
to a natural horror of whatsoever is repulsive or deformed, and to an
insatiable desire of being surrounded by everything attractive and
beautiful. The painter most delighted with coloring and beauty, the
sculptor most charmed by proportions of form, feel not more than Adrienne
did the noble enthusiasm which the view of perfect beauty always excites
in the chosen favorites of nature. And it was not only the pleasures of sight which this young lady loved to
gratify: the harmonious modulations of song, the melody of instruments,
the cadences of poetry, afforded her infinite pleasures; while a harsh
voice or a discordant noise made her feel the same painful impression, or
one nearly as painful as that which she involuntarily experienced from
the sight of a hideous object. Passionately fond of flowers, too, and of
their sweet scents, there are some perfumes which she enjoyed equally
with the delights of music or those of plastic beauty. It is necessary,
alas, to acknowledge one enormity: Adrienne was dainty in her food! She
valued more than any one else the fresh pulp of handsome fruit, the
delicate savor of a golden pheasant, cooked to a turn, and the odorous
cluster of a generous vine. But Adrienne enjoyed all these pleasures with an exquisite reserve. She
sought religiously to cultivate and refine the senses given her. She
would have deemed it black ingratitude to blunt those divine gifts by
excesses, or to debase them by unworthy selections of objects upon which
to exercise them; a fault from which, indeed, she was preserved by the
excessive and imperious delicacy of her taste. The BEAUTIFUL and the UGLY occupied for her the places which GOOD and
EVIL holds for others. Her devotion to grace, elegance, and physical beauty, had led her also to
the adoration of moral beauty; for if the expression of a low and bad
passion render uncomely the most beautiful countenances, those which are
in themselves the most ugly are ennobled, on the contrary, by the
expression of good feelings and generous sentiments. In a word, Adrienne was the most complete, the most ideal personification
of SENSUALITY--not of vulgar, ignorant, non intelligent, mistaken
sensuousness which is always deceit ful and corrupted by habit or by the
necessity for gross and ill-regulated enjoyments, but that exquisite
sensuality which is to the senses what intelligence is to the soul. The independence of this young lady's character was extreme. Certain
humiliating subjections imposed upon her success by its social position,
above all things were revolting to her, and she had the hardihood to
resolve to withdraw herself from them. She was a woman, the most womanish
that it is possible to imagine--a woman in her timidity as well as in her
audacity--a woman in her hatred of the brutal despotism of men, as well
as in her intense disposition to self-devoting herself, madly even and
blindly, to him who should merit such a devotion from her--a woman whose
piquant wit was occasionally paradoxical--a superior woman, in brief, who
entertained a well-grounded disdain and contempt for certain men either
placed very high or greatly adulated, whom she had from time to time met
in the drawing-room of her aunt, the Princess Saint-Dizier, when she
resided with her. These indispensable explanations being given, we usher, the reader into
the presence of Adrienne de Cardoville, who had just come out of the
bath. It would require all the brilliant colorings of the Venetian school to
represent that charming scene, which would rather seem to have occurred
in the sixteenth century, in some palace of Florence or Bologna, than in
Paris, in the Faubourg Saint-Germain, in the month of February, 1832. Adrienne's dressing-room was a kind of miniature temple seemingly one
erected and dedicated to the worship of beauty, in gratitude to the Maker
who has lavished so many charms upon woman, not to be neglected by her,
or to cover and conceal them with ashes, or to destroy them by the
contact of her person with sordid and harsh haircloth; but in order that,
with fervent gratitude for the divine gifts wherewith she is endowed, she
may enhance her charms with all the illusions of grace and all the
splendors of apparel, so as to glorify the divine work of her own
perfections in the eyes of all. Daylight was admitted into this
semicircular apartment, through one of those double windows, contrived
for the preservation of heat, so happily imported from Germany. The walls
of the pavilion being constructed of stone of great thickness, the depth
of the aperture for the windows was therefore very great. That of
Adrienne's dressing-room was closed on the outside by a sash containing a
single large pane of plate glass, and within, by another large plate of
ground glass. In the interval or space of about three feet left between
these two transparent enclosures, there was a case or box filled with
furze mould, whence sprung forth climbing plants, which, directed round
the ground glass, formed a rich garland of leaves and flowers. A garnet
damask tapestry, rich with harmoniously blended arabesques, in the purest
style, covered the walls and a thick carpet of similar color was extended
over the floor: and this sombre ground, presented by the floor and walls,
marvellously enhanced the effects of all the harmonious ornaments and
decorations of the chamber. Under the window, opposite to the south, was placed Adrienne's dressing
case, a real masterpiece of the skill of the goldsmith. Upon a large
tablet of lapis-lazuli, there were scattered boxes of jewels, their lids
precisely enamelled; several scent boxes of rock crystal, and other
implements and utensils of the toilet, some formed of shells, some of
mother-of-pearl, and others of ivory, covered with ornaments of gold in
extraordinary taste. Two large figures, modelled in silver with antique
purity; supported an oval swing mirror, which had for its rim, in place
of a frame curiously carved, a fresh garland of natural flowers, renewed
every day like a nosegay for a ball. Two enormous Japanese vases, of purple and gold, three feet each in
diameter, were placed upon the carpet on each side of the toilet, and,
filled with camellias, ibiscures, and cape jasmine, in full flower formed
a sort of grove, diversified with the most brilliant colors. At the
farther end of the apartment, opposite the casement, was to be seen,
surrounded by another mass of flowers, a reduction in white marble of the
enchanting group of Daphnis and Chloe, the more chaste ideal of graceful
modesty and youthful beauty. Two golden lamps burned perfumes upon the same pedestal which supported
those two charming figures. A coffer of frosted silver, set off with
small figures in jewelry and precious stones, and supported on four feet
of gilt bronze, contained various necessaries for the toilette; two
frosted Psyches, decorated with diamond ear-rings; some excellent
drawings from Raphael and Titian, painted by Adrienne herself, consisting
of portraits of both men and women of exquisite beauty; several consoles
of oriental jasper, supporting ewers and basins of silver and of silver
gilt, richly chased and filled with scented waters; a voluptuously rich
divan, some seats, and an illuminated gilt fable, completed the furniture
of this chamber, the atmosphere of which was impregnated with the
sweetest perfumes. Adrienne, whom her attendants had just helped from the bath, was seated
before her toilette, her three women surrounding her. By a caprice, or
rather by a necessary and logical impulse of her soul, filled as it was
with the love of beauty and of harmony in all things, Adrienne had wished
the young women who served her to be very pretty, and be dressed with
attention and with a charming originality. We have already seen
Georgette, a piquante blonde, attired in her attractive costume of an
intriguing lady's maid of Marivaux; and her two companions were quite
equal to her both in gracefulness and gentility. One of them, named Florine, a tall, delicately slender, and elegant girl,
with the air and form of Diana Huntress, was of a pale brown complexion. Her thick black hair was turned up behind, where it was fastened with a
long golden pin. Like the two other girls, her arms were uncovered to
facilitate the performance of her duties about and upon the person of her
charming mistress. She wore a dress of that gay green so familiar to the
Venetian painters. Her slender waist curved
in from under the plaits of a tucker of white cambric, plaited in five
minute folds, and fastened by five gold buttons. The third of Adrienne's
women had a face so fresh and ingenuous, a waist so delicate, so
pleasing, and so finished, that her mistress had given her the name of
Hebe. Her dress of a delicate rose color, and Grecian cut, displayed her
charming neck, and her beautiful arms up to the very shoulders. The
physiognomy of these three young women was laughter loving and happy. On
their features there was no expression of that bitter sullenness, willing
and hated obedience, or offensive familiarity, or base and degraded
deference, which are the ordinary results of a state of servitude. In the
zealous eagerness of the cares and attentions which they lavished upon
Adrienne, there seemed to be at least as much of affection as of
deference and respect. They appeared to derive an ardent pleasure from
the services which they rendered to their lovely mistress. One would have
thought that they attached to the dressing and embellishment of her
person all the merits and the enjoyment arising from the execution of a
work of art, in the accomplishing of which, fruitful of delights, they
were stimulated by the passions of love, of pride, and of joy. The sun beamed brightly upon the toilet-case, placed in front of the
window. Adrienne was seated on a chair, its back elevated a little more
than usual. She was enveloped in a long morning-gown of blue silk,
embroidered with a leaf of the same color, which was fitted close to her
waist, as exquisitely slender and delicate as that of a child of twelve
years, by a girdle with floating tags. Her neck, delicately slender and
flexible as a bird's, was uncovered, as were also her shoulders and arms,
and all were of incomparable beauty. Despite the vulgarity of the
comparison, the purest ivory alone can give an idea of the dazzling
whiteness of her polished satin skin, of a texture so fresh and so firm,
that some drops of water, collected and still remaining about the roots
of her hair from the bath, rolled in serpentine lines over her shoulders,
like pearls, or beads, of crystal, over white marble. And what gave enhanced lustre to this wondrous carnation, known but to
auburn-headed beauties, was the deep purple of her, humid lips,--the
roseate transparency of her small ears, of her dilated nostrils, and her
nails, as bright and glossy, as if they had been varnished. In every
spot, indeed, where her pure arterial blood, full of animation and heat,
could make its way to the skin and shine through the surface, it
proclaimed her high health and the vivid life and joyous buoyancy of her
glorious youth. Her eyes were very large, and of a velvet softness. Now
they glanced, sparkling and shining with comic humor or intelligence and
wit; and now they widened and extended themselves, languishing and
swimming between their double fringes of long crisp eyelashes, of as deep
a black as her finely-drawn and exquisitely arched eyebrows; for, by a
delightful freak of nature, she had black eyebrows and eyelashes to
contrast with the golden red of her hair. Her forehead, small like those
of ancient Grecian statues, formed with the rest of her face a perfect
oval. Her nose, delicately curved, was slightly aquiline; the enamel of
her teeth glistened when the light fell upon them; and her vermeil mouth
voluptuously sensual, seemed to call for sweet kisses, and the gay smiles
and delectations of dainty and delicious pleasure. It is impossible to
behold or to conceive a carriage of the head freer, more noble, or more
elegant than hers; thanks to the great distance which separated the neck
and the ear from their attachment to her outspread and dimpled shoulders. We have already said that Adrienne was red-haired; but it was the redness
of many of the admirable portraits of women by Titian and Leonardo da
Vinci,--that is to say, molten gold presents not reflections more
delightfully agreeable or more glittering, than the naturally undulating
mass of her very long hair, as soft and fine as silk, so long, that, when
let loose, it reached the floor; in it, she could wholly envelop herself,
like another Venus arising from the sea. At the present moment,
Adrienne's tresses were ravishing to behold; Georgette, her arms bare,
stood behind her mistress, and had carefully collected into one of her
small white hands, those splendid threads whose naturally ardent
brightness was doubled in the sunshine. When the pretty lady's-maid
pulled a comb of ivory into the midst of the undulating and golden waves
of that enormously magnificent skein of silk, one might have said that a
thousand sparks of fire darted forth and coruscated away from it in all
directions. The sunshine, too, reflected not less golden and fiery rays
from numerous clusters of spiral ringlets, which, divided upon Adrienne's
forehead, fell over her cheeks, and in their elastic flexibility caressed
the risings of her snowy bosom, to whose charming undulations they
adapted and applied themselves. Whilst Georgette, standing, combed the
beautiful locks of her mistress, Hebe, with one knee upon the floor, and
having upon the other the sweet little foot of Miss Cardoville, busied
herself in fitting it with a remarkably small shoe of black satin, and
crossed its slender ties over a silk stocking of a pale yet rosy flesh
color, which imprisoned the smallest and finest ankle in the world. Florine, a little farther back, presented to her mistress, in a jeweled
box, a perfumed paste, with which Adrienne slightly rubbed her dazzling
hands and outspread fingers, which seemed tinted with carmine to their
extremities. Let us not forget Frisky, who, couched in the lap of her
mistress, opened her great eyes with all her might, and seemed to observe
the different operations of Adrienne's toilette with grave and reflective
attention. A silver bell being sounded from without, Florine, at a sign
from her mistress, went out and presently returned, bearing a letter upon
a small silver-gilt salve. Adrienne, while her women continued fitting on
her shoes, dressing her hair, and arranging her in her habiliments, took
the letter, which was written by the steward of the estate of Cardoville,
and read aloud as follows:

"HONORED MADAME,

"Knowing your goodness of heart and generosity, I venture to address you
with respectful confidence. During twenty years I served the late Count
and Duke of Cardoville, your noble father, I believe I may truly say,
with probity and zeal. The castle is now sold; so that I and my wife, in
our old age, behold ourselves about to be dismissed, and left destitute
of all resources: which, alas! said Adrienne, interrupting herself in reading: "my
father, certainly, always prided himself upon their devotion to him, and
their probity." She continued:

"There does, indeed, remain to us a means of retaining our place here;
but it would constrain us to be guilty of baseness; and, be the
consequences to us what they may, neither I nor my wife wish to purchase
our bread at such a price." "Good, very good," said Adrienne, "always the same--dignity even in
poverty--it is the sweet perfume of a flower, not the less sweet because
it has bloomed in a meadow." "In order to explain to you, honored madame, the unworthy task exacted
from us, it is necessary to inform you, in the first place, that M. Rodin
came here from Paris two days ago." said Mademoiselle de Cardoville, interrupting herself
anew; "the secretary of Abbe d'Aigrigny! I am not at all surprised at him
being engaged in a perfidious or black intrigue. "M. Rodin came from Paris to announce to us that the estate was sold, and
that he was sure of being able to obtain our continuance in our place, if
we would assist him in imposing a priest not of good character upon the
new proprietress as her future confessor; and if, the better to attain
this end, we would consent to calumniate another priest, a deserving and
excellent man, much loved and much respected in the country. I was required to write twice or thrice a week to M. Rodin, and
to relate to him everything that should occur in the house. I ought to
acknowledge, honored madame, that these infamous proposals were as much
as possible disguised and dissimulated under sufficiently specious
pretexts; but, notwithstanding the aspect which with more or less skill
it was attempted to give to the affair, it was precisely and
substantially what I have now had the honor of stating to you." "Corruption, calumny, and false and treacherous impeachment!" said
Adrienne, with disgust: "I cannot think of such wretches without
involuntarily feeling my mind shocked by dismal ideas of black, venomous,
and vile reptiles, of aspects most hideous indeed. How much more do I
love to dwell upon the consoling thought of honest Dupont and his wife!" Adrienne proceeded:

"Believe me, we hesitated not an instant. We quit Cardoville, which has
been our home for the last twenty years;--but we shall quit it like
honest people, and with the consciousness of our integrity. And now,
honored madame, if, in the brilliant circle in which you move--you, who
are so benevolent and amiable--could find a place for us by your
recommendation, then, with endless gratitude to you, we shall escape from
a position of most cruel embarrassment." "Surely, surely," said Adrienne, "they shall not in vain appeal to me. To
wrest excellent persons from the grip of M. Rodin, is not only a duty but
a pleasure: for it is at once a righteous and a dangerous enterprise; and
dearly do I love to brave powerful oppressors!" Adrienne again went on
reading:

"After having thus spoken to you of ourselves, honored madame, permit us
to implore your protection for other unfortunates; for it would be wicked
to think only of one's self. Three days ago, two shipwrecks took place
upon our ironbound coast. A few passengers only were saved, and were
conducted hither, where I and my wife gave them all necessary attentions. All these passengers have departed for Paris, except one, who still
remains, his wounds having hitherto prevented him from leaving the house,
and, indeed, they will constrain him to remain for some days to come. He
is a young East Indian prince, of about twenty years of age, and he
appears to be as amiable and good as he is handsome, which is not a
little to say, though he has a tawny skin, like the rest of his
countrymen, as I understand." exclaimed Adrienne, gayly; "this is quite delightful, and not at all of
an ordinary or vulgar nature! this Indian prince has already awakened
all my sympathies! But what can I do with this Adonis from the banks of
the Ganges, who has come to wreck himself upon the Picardy coast?" Adrienne's three women looked at her with much astonishment, though they
were accustomed to the singular eccentricities of her character. Georgette and Hebe even indulged in discreet and restrained smiles. Florine, the tall and beautiful pale brown girl, also smiled like her
pretty companions; but it was after a short pause of seeming reflection,
as if she had previously been entirely engrossed in listening to and
recollecting the minutest words of her mistress, who, though powerfully
interested by the situation of the "Adonis from Ganges banks," as she had
called him, continued to read Dupont's letter:

"One of the countrymen of the Indian prince, who has also remained to
attend upon him, has given me to understand that the youthful prince has
lost in the shipwreck all he possessed, and knows not how to get to
Paris, where his speedy presence is required by some affairs of the very
greatest importance. It is not from the prince himself that I have
obtained this information: no; he appears to be too dignified and proud
to proclaim of his fate: but his countryman, more communicative,
confidentially told me what I have stated, adding, that his young
compatriot has already been subjected to great calamities, and that his
father, who was the sovereign of an Indian kingdom, has been killed by
the English, who have also dispossessed his son of his crown." "This is very singular," said Adrienne, thoughtfully. "These
circumstances recall to my mind that my father often mentioned that one
of our relations was espoused in India by a native monarch; and that
General Simon: (whom they have created a marshal) had entered into his
service." Then interrupting herself to indulge in a smile, she added,
"Gracious! this affair will be quite odd and fantastical! Such things
happen to nobody but me; and then people say that I am the uncommon
creature! But it seems to me that it is not I, but Providence, which, in
truth, sometimes shows itself very eccentric! But let us see if worthy
Dupont gives the name of this handsome prince?" "We trust, honored madame, that you will pardon our boldness: but we
should have thought ourselves very selfish, if, while stating to you our
own griefs, we had not also informed you that there is with us a brave
and estimable prince involved in so much distress. In fine, lady, trust
to me; I am old; and I have had much experience of men; and it was only
necessary to see the nobleness of expression and the sweetness of
countenance of this young Indian, to enable me to judge that he is worthy
of the interest which I have taken the liberty to request in his behalf. It would be sufficient to transmit to him a small sum of money for the
purchase of some European clothing; for he has lost all his Indian
vestments in the shipwreck." Heaven preserve him from that; and me also! Chance has sent
hither from the heart of India, a mortal so far favored as never to have
worn the abominable European costume--those hideous habits, and frightful
hats, which render the men so ridiculous, so ugly, that in truth there is
not a single good quality to be discovered in them, nor one spark of what
can either captivate or attract! There comes to me at last a handsome
young prince from the East, where the men are clothed in silk and
cashmere. Most assuredly I'll not miss this rare and unique opportunity
of exposing myself to a very serious and formidable temptation! not a European dress for me, though poor Dupont requests it! But the
name--the name of this dear prince! Once more, what a singular event is
this! If it should turn out to be that cousin from beyond the Ganges! During my childhood, I have heard so much in praise of his royal father! I shall be quite ravished to give his son the kind reception which he
merits!" And then she read on:

"If, besides this small sum, honored madame, you are so kind as to give
him, and also his companion, the means of reaching Paris, you will confer
a very great service upon this poor young prince, who is at present so
unfortunate. "To conclude, I know enough of your delicacy to be aware that it would
perhaps be agreeable to you to afford this succor to the prince without
being known as his benefactress; in which case, I beg that you will be
pleased to command me; and you may rely upon my discretion. If, on the
contrary, you wish to address it directly to himself, his name is, as it
has been written for me by his countrymen, Prince Djalma, son of Radja
sing, King of Mundi." said Adrienne, quickly, and appearing to call up her
recollections, "Radja-sing! These are the very names
that my father so often repeated, while telling me that there was nothing
more chivalric or heroic in the world than the old king, our relation by
marriage; and the son has not derogated, it would seem, from that
character. Yes, Djalma, Radja-sing--once more, that is it--such names are
not so common," she added, smiling, "that one should either forget or
confound them with others. above all, he has never worn the horrid
European dress! Quick, quick let us improvise a pretty
fairy tale, of which the handsome and beloved prince shall be the hero! The poor bird of the golden and azure plumage has wandered into our
dismal climate; but he will find here, at least, something to remind him
of his native region of sunshine and perfumes!" Then, addressing one of
her women, she said: "Georgette, take paper and write, my child!" The
young girl went to the gilt, illuminated table, which contained materials
for writing; and, having seated herself, she said to her mistress: "I
await orders." Adrienne de Cardoville, whose charming countenance was radiant with the
gayety of happiness and joy, proceeded to dictate the following letter to
a meritorious old painter, who had long since taught her the arts of
drawing and designing; in which arts she excelled, as indeed she did in
all others:

"MY DEAR TITIAN, MY GOOD VERONESE, MY WORTHY RAPHAEL. "You can render me a very great service,--and you will do it, I am sure,
with that perfect and obliging complaisance by which you are ever
distinguished. "It is to go immediately and apply yourself to the skillful hand who
designed my last costumes of the fifteenth century. But the present
affair is to procure modern East Indian dresses for a young man--yes,
sir--for a young man,--and according to what I imagine of him, I fancy
that you can cause his measure to be taken from the Antinous, or rather,
from the Indian Bacchus; yes--that will be more likely. "It is necessary that these vestments be at once of perfect propriety and
correctness, magnificently rich, and of the greatest elegance. You will
choose the most beautiful stuffs possible; and endeavor, above all
things, that they be, or resemble, tissues of Indian manufacture; and you
will add to them, for turbans and sashes, six splendid long cashmere
shawls, two of them white, two red, and two orange; as nothing suits
brown complexions better than those colors. "This done (and I allow you at the utmost only two or three days), you
will depart post in my carriage for Cardoville Manor House, which you
know so well. The steward, the excellent Dupont, one of your old friends,
will there introduce you to a young Indian Prince, named Djalma; and you
will tell that most potent grave, and reverend signior, of another
quarter of the globe, that you have come on the part of an unknown
friend, who, taking upon himself the duty of a brother, sends him what is
necessary to preserve him from the odious fashions of Europe. You will
add, that his friend expects him with so much impatience that he conjures
him to come to Paris immediately. If he objects that he is suffering, you
will tell him that my carriage is an excellent bed-closet; and you will
cause the bedding, etc., which it contains, to be fitted up, till he
finds it quite commodious. Remember to make very humble excuses for the
unknown friend not sending to the prince either rich palanquins, or even,
modestly, a single elephant; for alas! palanquins are only to be seen at
the opera; and there are no elephants but those in the menagerie,--though
this must make us seem strangely barbarous in his eyes. "As soon as you shall have decided on your departure, perform the journey
as rapidly as possible, and bring here, into my house, in the Rue de
Babylone (what predestination! that I should dwell in the street of
BABYLON,--a name which must at least accord with the ear of an
Oriental),--you will bring hither, I say, this dear prince, who is so
happy as to have been born in a country of flowers, diamonds, and sun! "Above all, you will have the kindness, my old and worthy friend, not to
be at all astonished at this new freak, and refrain from indulging in
extravagant conjectures. Seriously, the choice which I have made of you
in this affair,--of you, whom I esteem and most sincerely honor,--is
because it is sufficient to say to you that, at the bottom of all this,
there is something more than a seeming act of folly." In uttering these last words, the tone of Adrienne was as serious and
dignified as it had been previously comic and jocose. But she quickly
resumed, more gayly, dictating to Georgette. I am something like that commander of ancient
days, whose heroic nose and conquering chin you have so often made me
draw: I jest with the utmost freedom of spirit even in the moment of
battle: yes, for within an hour I shall give battle, a pitched battle--to
my dear pew-dwelling aunt. Fortunately, audacity and courage never failed
me, and I burn with impatience for the engagement with my austere
princess. "A kiss, and a thousand heartfelt recollections to your excellent wife. If I speak of her here, who is so justly respected, you will please to
understand, it is to make you quite at ease as to the consequences of
this running away with, for my sake, a charming young prince,--for it is
proper to finish well where I should have begun, by avowing to you that
he is charming indeed! Then, addressing Georgette, said she, "Have you done writing, chit?" "P.S.--I send you draft on sight on my banker for all expenses. You know I am quite a grand seigneur. I must use this masculine
expression, since your sex have exclusively appropriated to yourselves
(tyrants as you are) a term, so significant as it is of noble
generosity." "Now, Georgette," said Adrienne; "bring me an envelope, and the letter,
that I may sign it." Mademoiselle de Cardoville took the pen that
Georgette presented to her, signed the letter, and enclosed in it an
order upon her banker, which was expressed thus:

"Please pay M. Norval, on demand without grace, the sum of money he may
require for expenses incurred on my account. "ADRIENNE DE CARDOVILLE." During all this scene, while Georgette wrote, Florine and Hebe had
continued to busy themselves with the duties of their mistress's
toilette, who had put off her morning gown, and was now in full dress, in
order to wait upon the princess, her aunt. From the sustained and
immovably fixed attention with which Florine had listened to Adrienne's
dictating to Georgette her letter to M. Norval, it might easily have been
seen that, as was her habit indeed, she endeavored to retain in her
memory even the slightest words of her mistress. "Now, chit," said Adrienne to Hebe, "send this letter immediately to M. The same silver bell was again rung from without. Hebe moved towards the
door of the dressing-room, to go and inquire what it was, and also to
execute the order of her mistress as to the letter. But Florine
precipitated herself, so to speak, before her, and so as to prevent her
leaving the apartment; and said to Adrienne:

"Will it please my lady for me to send this letter? I have occasion to go
to the mansion." "Go, Florine, then," said Adrienne, "seeing that you wish it. Georgette,
seal the letter." At the end of a second or two, during which Georgette had sealed the
letter, Hebe returned. "Madame," said she, re-entering, "the working-man who brought back Frisky
yesterday, entreats you to admit him for an instant. He is very pale, and
he appears quite sad." "Would that he may already have need of me! "Show the excellent young man into the little saloon. And, Florine, despatch this letter immediately." Miss de Cardoville, followed by Frisky, entered the
little reception-room, where Agricola awaited her. When Adrienne de Cardoville entered the saloon where Agricola expected
her, she was dressed with extremely elegant simplicity. A robe of deep
blue, perfectly fitted to her shape, embroidered in front with
interlacings of black silk, according to the then fashion, outlined her
nymph-like figure, and her rounded bosom. A French cambric collar,
fastened by a large Scotch pebble, set as a brooch, served her for a
necklace. Her magnificent golden hair formed a framework for her fair
countenance, with an incredible profusion of long and light spiral
tresses, which reached nearly to her waist. Agricola, in order to save explanations with his father, and to make him
believe that he had indeed gone to the workshop of M. Hardy, had been
obliged to array himself in his working dress; he had put on a new blouse
though, and the collar of his shirt, of stout linen, very white, fell
over upon a black cravat, negligently tied; his gray trousers allowed his
well polished boots to be seen; and he held between his muscular hands a
cap of fine woolen cloth, quite new. To sum up, his blue blouse,
embroidered with red, showing off the nervous chest of the young
blacksmith, and indicating his robust shoulders, falling down in graceful
folds, put not the least constraint upon his free and easy gait, and
became him much better than either frock-coat or dress-coat would have
done. While awaiting Miss de Cardoville, Agricola mechanically examined a
magnificent silver vase, admirably graven. A small tablet, of the same
metal, fitted into a cavity of its antique stand, bore the words--"Chased
by JEAN MARIE, working chaser, 1831." Adrienne had stepped so lightly upon the carpet of her saloon, only
separated from another apartment by the doors, that Agricola had not
perceived the young lady's entrance. He started, and turned quickly
round, upon hearing a silver and brilliant voice say to him-"That is a
beautiful vase, is it not, sir?" "Very beautiful, madame," answered Agricola greatly embarrassed. "You may see from it that I like what is equitable." added Miss de
Cardoville, pointing with her finger to the little silver tablet;--"an
artist puts his name upon his painting; an author publishes his on the
title-page of his book; and I contend that an artisan ought also to have
his name connected with his workmanship." "Oh, madame, so this name?" "Is that of the poor chaser who executed this masterpiece, at the order
of a rich goldsmith. When the latter sold me the vase, he was amazed at
my eccentricity, he would have almost said at my injustice, when, after
having made him tell me the name of the author of this production, I
ordered his name to be inscribed upon it, instead of that of the
goldsmith, which had already been affixed to the stand. In the absence of
the rich profits, let the artisan enjoy the fame of his skill. It would have been impossible for Adrienne to commence the conversation
more graciously: so that the blacksmith, already beginning to feel a
little more at ease, answered:

"Being a mechanic myself, madame, I cannot but be doubly affected by such
a proof of your sense of equity and justice." "Since you are a mechanic, sir," resumed Adrienne, "I cannot but
felicitate myself on having so suitable a hearer. With a gesture full of affability, she pointed to an armchair of purple
silk embroidered with gold, sitting down herself upon a tete-a-tete of
the same materials. Seeing Agricola's hesitation, who again cast down his eyes with
embarrassment, Adrienne, to encourage him, showed him Frisky, and said to
him gayly: "This poor little animal, to which I am very much attached,
will always afford me a lively remembrance of your obliging complaisance,
sir. And this visit seems to me to be of happy augury; I know not what
good presentiment whispers to me, that perhaps I shall have the pleasure
of being useful to you in some affair." "Madame," said Agricola, resolutely, "my name is Baudoin: a blacksmith in
the employment of M. Hardy, at Pressy, near the city. Yesterday you
offered me your purse and I refused it: to-day, I have come to request of
you perhaps ten or twenty times the sum that you had generously proposed. I have said thus much all at once, madame, because it causes me the
greatest effort. The words blistered my lips, but now I shall be more at
ease." "I appreciate the delicacy of your scruples, sir," said Adrienne; "but if
you knew me, you would address me without fear. "I do not know, madame," answered Agricola. "No madame; and I come to you to request, not only the sum necessary to
me, but also information as to what that sum is." "Let us see, sir," said Adrienne, smiling, "explain this to me. In spite
of my good will, you feel that I cannot divine, all at once, what it is
that is required." "Madame, in two words, I can state the truth. I have a food old mother,
who in her youth, broke her health by excessive labor, to enable her to
bring me up; and not only me, but a poor abandoned child whom she had
picked up. It is my turn now to maintain her; and that I have the
happiness of doing. But in order to do so, I have only my labor. If I am
dragged from my employment, my mother will be without support." "Your mother cannot want for anything now, sir, since I interest myself
for her." "You will interest yourself for her, madame?" "But you don't know her," exclaimed the blacksmith. said Agricola, with emotion, after a moment's silence. said Adrienne, looking at Agricola with a very surprised
air; for what he said to her was an enigma. The blacksmith, who blushed not for his friends, replied frankly. "Madame, permit me to explain, to you. Mother Bunch is a poor and very
industrious young workwoman, with whom I have been brought up. She is
deformed, which is the reason why she is called Mother Bunch. But though,
on the one hand, she is sunk, as low as you are highly elevated on the
other, yet as regards the heart--as to delicacy--oh, lady, I am certain
that your heart is of equal worth with hers! That was at once her own
thought, after I had related to her in what manner, yesterday, you had
presented me with that beautiful flower." "I can assure you, sir," said Adrienne, sincerely touched, "that this
comparison flatters and honors me more than anything else that you could
say to me,--a heart that remains good and delicate, in spite of cruel
misfortunes, is so rare a treasure; while it is very easy to be good,
when we have youth and beauty, and to be delicate and generous, when we
are rich. I accept, then, your comparison; but on condition that you will
quickly put me in a situation to deserve it. In spite of the gracious cordiality of Miss de Cardoville, there was
always observable in her so much of that natural dignity which arises
from independence of character, so much elevation of soul and nobleness
of sentiment that Agricola, forgetting the ideal physical beauty of his
protectress, rather experienced for her the emotions of an affectionate
and kindly, though profound respect, which offered a singular and
striking contrast with the youth and gayety of the lovely being who
inspired him with this sentiment. "If my mother alone, madame, were exposed to the rigor which I dread. I
should not be so greatly disquieted with the fear of a compulsory
suspension of my employment. Among poor people, the poor help one
another; and my mother is worshipped by all the inmates of our house, our
excellent neighbors, who would willingly succor her. But, they themselves
are far from being well off; and as they would incur privations by
assisting her, their little benefit would still be more painful to my
mother than the endurance even of misery by herself. And besides, it is
not only for my mother that my exertions are required, but for my father,
whom we have not seen for eighteen years, and who has just arrived from
Siberia, where he remained during all that time, from zealous devotion to
his former general, now Marshal Simon." said Adrienne, quickly, with an expression of much
surprise. "Do you know the marshal, madame?" "I do not personally know him, but he married a lady of our family." exclaimed the blacksmith, "then the two young ladies, his
daughters, whom my father has brought from Russia, are your relations!" asked Adrienne, more and more
astonished and interested. "Yes, madame, two little angels of fifteen or sixteen, and so pretty, so
sweet; they are twins so very much alike, as to be mistaken for one
another. Their mother died in exile; and the little she possessed having
been confiscated, they have come hither with my father, from the depths
of Siberia, travelling very wretchedly; but he tried to make them forget
so many privations by the fervency of his devotion and his tenderness. you will not believe, madame, that, with the courage of
a lion, he has all the love and tenderness of a mother." "And where are the dear children, sir?" It is that which renders my position so very hard;
that which has given me courage to come to you; it is not but that my
labor would be sufficient for our little household, even thus augmented;
but that I am about to be arrested." "Pray, madame, have the goodness to read this letter, which has been sent
by some one to Mother Bunch." Agricola gave to Miss de Cardoville the anonymous letter which had been
received by the workwoman. After having read the letter, Adrienne said to the blacksmith, with
surprise, "It appears, sir, you are a poet!" "I have neither the ambition nor the pretension to be one, madame. Only,
when I return to my mother after a day's toil, and often, even while
forging my iron, in order to divert and relax my attention, I amuse
myself with rhymes, sometimes composing an ode, sometimes a song." "And your song of the Freed Workman, which is mentioned in this letter,
is, therefore, very disaffected--very dangerous?" "Oh, no, madame; quite the contrary. For myself, I have the good fortune
to be employed in the factory of M. Hardy, who renders the condition of
his workpeople as happy as that of their less fortunate comrades is the
reverse; and I had limited myself to attempt, in favor of the great mass
of the working classes, an equitable, sincere, warm, and earnest
claim--nothing more. But you are aware, perhaps, Madame, that in times of
conspiracy, and commotion, people are often incriminated and imprisoned
on very slight grounds. Should such a misfortune befall me, what will
become of my mother, my father, and the two orphans whom we are bound to
regard as part of our family until the return of their father, Marshal
Simon? It is on this account, madame, that, if I remain, I run the risk
of being arrested. I have come to you to request you to provide surety
for me; so that I should not be compelled to exchange the workshop for
the prison, in which case I can answer for it that the fruits of my labor
will suffice for all." said Adrienne, gayly, "this affair will arrange itself
quite easily. Poet, you shall draw your inspirations in
the midst of good fortune instead of adversity. But first of
all, bonds shall be given for you." "Oh, madame, you have saved us!" "To continue," said Adrienne, "the physician of our family is intimately
connected with a very important minister (understand that, as you like,"
said she, smiling, "you will not deceive yourself much). The doctor
exercises very great influence over this great statesman; for he has
always had the happiness of recommending to him, on account of his
health; the sweets and repose of private life, to the very eve of the day
on which his portfolio was taken from him. Keep yourself, then, perfectly
at ease. If the surety be insufficient, we shall be able to devise some
other means. "Madame," said Agricola, with great emotion, "I am indebted to you for
the repose, perhaps for the life of my mother. It is proper that those
who have too much should have the right of coming to the aid of those who
have too little. Marshal Simon's daughters are members of my family, and
they will reside here with me, which will be more suitable. You will
apprise your worthy mother of this; and in the evening, besides going to
thank her for the hospitality which she has shown to my young relations,
I shall fetch them home." At this moment Georgette, throwing open the door which separated the room
from an adjacent apartment, hurriedly entered, with an affrighted look,
exclaiming:

"Oh, madame, something extraordinary is going on in the street." "I went to conduct my dressmaker to the little garden-gate," said
Georgette; "where I saw some ill-looking men, attentively examining the
walls and windows of the little out-building belonging to the pavilion,
as if they wished to spy out some one." "Madame," said Agricola, with chagrin, "I have not been deceived. "I thought I was followed, from the moment when I left the Rue St. Merry:
and now it is beyond doubt. They must have seen me enter your house; and
are on the watch to arrest me. Well, now that your interest has been
acquired for my mother,--now that I have no farther uneasiness for
Marshal Simon's daughters,--rather than hazard your exposure to anything
the least unpleasant, I run to deliver myself up." "Beware of that sir," said Adrienne, quickly. "Liberty is too precious to
be voluntarily sacrificed. Besides, Georgette may have been mistaken. But
in any case, I entreat you not to surrender yourself. Take my advice, and
escape being arrested. That, I think, will greatly facilitate my
measures; for I am of opinion that justice evinces a great desire to keep
possession of those upon whom she has once pounced." "Madame," said Hebe, now also entering with a terrified look, "a man
knocked at the little door, and inquired if a young man in a blue blouse
has not entered here. He added, that the person whom he seeks is named
Agricola Baudoin, and that he has something to tell him of great
importance." "That's my name," said Agricola; "but the important information is a
trick to draw me out." "Evidently," said Adrienne; "and therefore we must play off trick for
trick. added she, addressing herself to
Hebe. "I answered, that I didn't know what he was talking about." "Quite right," said Adrienne: "and the man who put the question?" "Without doubt to come back again, soon," said Agricola. "That is very probable," said Adrienne, "and therefore, sir, it is
necessary for you to remain here some hours with resignation. I am
unfortunately obliged to go immediately to the Princess Saint-Dizier, my
aunt, for an important interview, which can no longer be delayed, and is
rendered more pressing still by what you have told me concerning the
daughters of Marshal Simon. Remain here, then, sir; since if you go out,
you will certainly be arrested." "Madame, pardon my refusal; but I must say once more that I ought not to
accept this generous offer." "They have tried to draw me out, in order to avoid penetrating with the
power of the law into your dwelling but if I go not out, they will come
in; and never will I expose you to anything so disagreeable. Now that I
am no longer uneasy about my mother, what signifies prison?" "And the grief that your mother will feel, her uneasiness, and her
fears,--nothing? Think of your father; and that poor work-woman who loves
you as a brother, and whom I value as a sister;--say, sir, do you forget
them also? Believe me, it is better to spare those torments to your
family. Remain here; and before the evening I am certain, either by
giving surety, or some other means, of delivering you from these
annoyances." "But, madame, supposing that I do accept your generous offer, they will
come and find me here." There is in this pavilion, which was formerly the abode of a
nobleman's left-handed wife,--you see, sir," said Adrienne, smiling,
"that live in a very profane place--there is here a secret place of
concealment, so wonderfully well-contrived, that it can defy all
searches. You will be very well
accommodated. You will even be able to write some verses for me, if the
place inspire you." "Oh, sir, I will tell you. Admitting that your character and your
position do not entitle you to any interest;--admitting that I may not
owe a sacred debt to your father for the touching regards and cares he
has bestowed upon the daughters of Marshal Simon, my relations--do you
forget Frisky, sir?" asked Adrienne, laughing,--"Frisky, there, whom you
have restored to my fondles? Seriously, if I laugh," continued this
singular and extravagant creature, "it is because I know that you are
entirely out of danger, and that I feel an increase of happiness. Therefore, sir, write for me quickly your address, and your mother's, in
this pocket-book; follow Georgette; and spin me some pretty verses, if
you do not bore yourself too much in that prison to which you fly." While Georgette conducted the blacksmith to the hiding-place, Hebe
brought her mistress a small gray beaver hat with a gray feather; for
Adrienne had to cross the park to reach the house occupied by the
Princess Saint-Dizier. A quarter of an hour after this scene, Florine entered mysteriously the
apartment of Mrs. Grivois, the first woman of the princess. "Here are the notes which I have taken this morning," said Florine,
putting a paper into the duenna's hand. "Happily, I have a good memory." "At what time exactly did she return home this morning?" "She did not go out, madame. We put her in the bath at nine o'clock." "But before nine o'clock she came home, after having passed the night out
of her house. Eight o'clock was the time at which she returned, however." Grivois with profound astonishment, and said-"I do
not understand you, madame." Madame did not come home this morning at eight o'clock? "I was ill yesterday, and did not come down till nine this morning, in
order to assist Georgette and Hebe help our young lady from the bath. I
know nothing of what passed previously, I swear to you, madame." You must ferret out what I allude to from your
companions. They don't distrust you, and will tell you all." "What has your mistress done this morning since you saw her?" "Madame dictated a letter to Georgette for M. Norval, I requested
permission to send it off, as a pretext for going out, and for writing
down all I recollected." "Jerome had to go out, and I gave it him to put in the post-office." Grivois: "couldn't you bring it to me?" "But, as madame dictated it aloud to Georgette, as is her custom, I knew
the contents of the letter; and I have written it in my notes." It is likely there was need to delay sending
off this letter; the princess will be very much displeased." "I thought I did right, madame." "I know that it is not good will that fails you. For these six months I
have been satisfied with you. But this time you have committed a very
great mistake." Grivois looked fixedly at her, and said in a sardonic tone:

"Very well, my dear, do not continue it. If you have scruples, you are
free. "You well know that I am not free, madame," said Florine, reddening; and
with tears in her eyes she added: "I am dependent upon M. Rodin, who
placed me here." "In spite of one's self, one feels remorse. Madame is so good, and so
confiding." But you are not here to sing her
praises. "The working-man who yesterday found and brought back Frisky, came early
this morning and requested permission to speak with my young lady." "And is this working-man still in her house?" He came in when I was going out with the letter." "You must contrive to learn what it was this workingman came about." "Has your mistress seemed preoccupied, uneasy, or afraid of the interview
which she is to have to-day with the princess? She conceals so little of
what she thinks, that you ought to know." said the tire-woman, muttering between her teeth,
without Florine being able to hear her: "'They laugh most who laugh
last.' In spite of her audacious and diabolical character, she would
tremble, and would pray for mercy, if she knew what awaits her this day." Then addressing Florine, she continued-"Return, and keep yourself, I
advise you, from those fine scruples, which will be quite enough to do
you a bad turn. "I cannot forget that I belong not to myself, madame." Florine quitted the mansion and crossed the park to regain the summer
house, while Mrs Grivois went immediately to the Princess Saint-Dizier. Blore, tell Willis to get the chaise out. [_BLORE hurries out._

THE DEAN. Salome, child, you and I will drive into Durnstone--we may be in time
to bring your Aunt over. [_The clang of the gate
bell is heard in the distance._] The bell! [_Looking out of window._]
No--yes--it can't be! [_Speaking in an altered voice._] Children! I
wonder if this is your Aunt Georgiana? [_BLORE appears with a half-frightened, surprised look._

BLORE. _GEORGIANA TIDMAN enters. She is a jovial, noisy woman, very "horsey"
in manners and appearance, and dressed in pronounced masculine style,
with billy cock hat and coaching coat. The girls cling to each other;
THE DEAN recoils._

GEORGIANA. Well, Gus, my boy, how are you? [_Patting THE DEAN'S cheeks._] You're putting on too much flesh,
Augustin; they should give you a ten-miler daily in a blanket. [_With dignity._] My dear sister! [_To SALOME._] Kiss your Aunt! [_She
kisses SALOME with a good hearty smack._] [_To SHEBA._] Kiss your
Aunt! [_She embraces SHEBA, then stands between the two girls and
surveys them critically, touching them alternately with the end of her
cane._] Lord bless you both! [_Looking at SHEBA._] Why, little 'un, your stable companion could
give you a stone and then get her nose in front! [_Who has been impatiently fuming._] Georgiana, I fear these poor
innocents don't follow your well-intentioned but inappropriate
illustrations. Oh, we'll soon wake 'em up. Well, Augustin, my boy, it's nearly twenty
years since you and I munched our corn together. Since then we've both run many races, though we've never met in the
same events. The world has ridden us both pretty hard at times, Gus,
hasn't it? We've been punished and pulled and led down pretty often,
but here we are [_tapping him sharply in the chest with her cane_]
sound in the wind yet. You're doing well, Gus, and they say you're
going up the hill neck-and-neck with your Bishop. I've dropped out of
it--the mares don't last, Gus--and it's good and kind of you to give
me a dry stable and a clean litter, and to keep me out of the shafts
of a "Shrewsbury and Talbot." [_In a whisper to SALOME._] Salome, I don't quite understand her--but
I like Aunt. So do I. But she's not my idea of a weary fragment or a chastened
widow. My dear Georgiana, I rejoice that you meet me in this affectionate
spirit, and when--pardon me--when you have a little caught the _tone_
of the Deanery----

GEORGIANA. Oh, I'll catch it; if I don't the Deanery will a little catch _my_
tone--the same thing. [_SHEBA laughs._

THE DEAN. [_Reprovingly._] Toy-child! Trust George Tidd for setting things quite square in a palace or a
puddle. I am George Tidd--that was my racing name. Ask after George Tidd at
Newmarket--they'll tell you all about me. [_Producing her pocket-handkerchief, which is crimson and black._

THE DEAN. [_The girls go into the Library._

THE DEAN. [_Tapping the handkerchief._] I understand distinctly from your letter
that all this is finally abandoned? They'll never see my colors at the post again! And the contemplation of sport generally as a mental distraction----? Oh, yes--I dare say you'll manage to wean me from that, too, in time. [_The gate bell is heard again, the girls re-enter._

GEORGIANA. I'll tootle upstairs and have a groom down. [_To
SALOME and SHEBA._] Make the running, girls. At what time do we feed,
Augustin? There is luncheon at one o'clock. The air here is so fresh I sha'n't be sorry to get my nose-bag
on. [_She stalks out, accompanied by the girls._

THE DEAN. My sister, Georgiana--my widowed sister, Georgiana. Surely, surely the serene atmosphere of the Deanery
will work a change. If not, what a grave mistake I
have made. No, no, I won't think of it! Still, it is a
little unfortunate that poor Georgiana should arrive here on the very
eve of these terrible races at St. _BLORE enters with a card._

THE DEAN. [_Reading the card._] "Sir Tristram Mardon." [_BLORE goes out._] Mardon--why,
Mardon and I haven't met since Oxford. [_BLORE re-enters, showing in SIR TRISTRAM MARDON, a well-preserved
man of about fifty, with a ruddy face and jovial manner, the type of
the thorough English sporting gentleman. BLORE goes out._

SIR TRISTRAM. Hullo, Jedd, how are you? My dear Mardon--are we boys again? [_Boisterously._] Of course we are! [_He hits THE DEAN violently in the chest._

THE DEAN. [_Breathing heavily--to himself._] I quite forgot how rough Mardon
used to be. I'm still a bachelor--got terribly jilted by a woman years ago and
have run in blinkers ever since. [_With dignity._] I have been a widower for fifteen years. awfully sorry--can't be helped though, can it? [_Seizing THE
DEAN'S hand and squeezing it._] Forgive me, old chap. [_Withdrawing his hand with pain._] O-o-oh! I've re-opened an old wound--damned stupid of me! What do you think I'm down here for? For the benefit of your health, Mardon? Never had an ache in my life; sha'n't come and hear you preach
next Sunday, Gus. Hush, my dear Mardon, my girls----

SIR TRISTRAM. May I trot 'em into the paddock to-morrow? You've seen the list of Starters for the Durnstone
Handicap----? Sir Tristram Mardon's Dandy Dick, nine stone two, Tom
Gallawood up! [_Digging THE DEAN in the ribs._] Look out for my colors--black and
white, and a pink cap--first past the post to-morrow. Really, my dear Mardon----

SIR TRISTRAM. Jedd, they talk about Bonny Betsy. The tongue of scandal----

SIR TRISTRAM. [_Taking THE DEAN'S arm and walking him about._] Do you imagine, sir,
for one moment, that Bonny Betsy, with a boy on her back, can get down
that bill with those legs of hers? George Tidd knew what she was about when she stuck to
Dandy Dick to the very last. [_Aghast._] George--Tidd? Dandy came out of her stable after she smashed. My dear Mardon, I am of course heartily pleased to revive in this way
our old acquaintance. I wish it were in my power to offer you the
hospitality of the Deanery--but----

SIR TRISTRAM. My horse and I are over the way at "The Swan." Marvells----

SIR TRISTRAM. You mean that the colors you ride
in don't show up well on the hill yonder or in the stable of the
"Swan" Inn. You must remember----

SIR TRISTRAM. I remember that in your young days you made the heaviest book on the
Derby of any of our fellows. I always lost, Mardon; indeed, I always lost! I remember that you once matched a mare of your own against another of
Lord Beckslade's for fifty pounds! Yes, but she wasn't in it, Mardon--I mean she was dreadfully beaten. [_Shaking his head sorrowfully._] Oh Jedd, Jedd--other times, other
manners. You're not--you're not offended, Mardon? [_Taking THE DEAN'S hand._] Offended! No--only sorry, Dean, damned
sorry, to see a promising lad come to an end like this. [_GEORGIANA
enters with SALOME on one side of her and SHEBA on the other--all
three laughing and chatting, apparently the best of friends._] By
Jove! [_They shake hands warmly._

SIR TRISTRAM. Of all places in the world, to find "Mr. [_Roaring with
laughter._] Ho! Why, Dean, you've been chaffing me, have you? Yes, you have--you've been roasting your old friend! Tidd is a pal of yours, eh? Yes, I've been running a bit dark, Mardon, but that stout,
well-seasoned animal over there and this skittish creature come of the
same stock and were foaled in the same stable. [_Pointing to SALOME
and SHEBA._] There are a couple of yearlings here, you don't know. My
nieces--Salome and Sheba. [_Bowing._] How do you do? [_Heartily taking GEORGIANA'S hand again._]
Well, I don't care whose sister you are, but I'm jolly glad to see
you, George, my boy. Gracious, Tris, don't squeeze my hand so! [_In horror._] Salome, Sheba, children! [_To himself._] Oh, what shall I do with my widowed
sister? [_He goes into the garden._

SHEBA. [_To SALOME._] That's like pa, just as we were getting interested. [_They go out by the window._

SIR TRISTRAM. You know your brother and I were at Oxford together,
George? Well, then, you just lay a thousand sovereigns to a gooseberry
that in this house I'm a Dean, too! I suppose he's thinking of the Canons--and the Bishop--and those
chaps. Lord bless your heart, they're all right when you cheer them up a bit! If I'm here till the autumn meeting you'll find me lunching on the
hill, with the Canons marking my card and the dear old Bishop mixing
the salad. So say the word, Tris--I'll make it all right with
Augustin. The fact is I'm fixed at the "Swan" with--what
do you think, George?--with Dandy Dick. I brought him down with me in lavender. You know he runs for the
Durnstone Handicap to-morrow. There's precious little that horse does that I don't know, and
what I don't know I dream. As a fiddle--shines like a mirror--not an ounce too much or too
little. [_Mysteriously._] Tris, Dandy Dick doesn't belong to you--not _all_ of
him. At your sale he was knocked down to John
Fielder the trainer. No, it doesn't, it belongs to _me!_

SIR TRISTRAM. Yes, directly I saw Dandy Dick marched out before the auctioneer I
asked John Fielder to help me, and he did, like a Briton. For I can't
live without horseflesh, if it's only a piece of cat's meat on a
skewer. But when I condescended to keep company with the Canons and
the Bishop here I promised Augustin that I wouldn't own anything on
four legs, so John sold you half of Dick, and I can swear I don't own
a horse--and I don't--not a whole one. But half a horse is better than
no bread, Tris--and we're partners. [_Roaring with laughter._] Ho! _SALOME and SHEBA enter unperceived._

SIR TRISTRAM. [_Still laughing._] I--ho! ho!--I beg your pardon, George--ha! Well, now you know he's fit, of course, you're going to back Dandy
Dick for the Durnstone Handicap. For every penny I've got in the world. That isn't much, but
if I'm not a richer woman by a thousand pounds to-morrow night I shall
have had a bad day. [_The girls come towards the Library._

GEORGIANA. [_Discovering them._] Hush! [_To the girls._] Hallo! [_The girls go into the Library._

SIR TRISTRAM. Keep your eye on the old horse, Tristram. [_SIR TRISTRAM bursts out laughing again, she
joining in the laughter._] Oh, do be quiet! Oh, say good-bye for me to the Dean! [_She gives
him a push and he goes out._

_SHEBA and SALOME immediately re-enter from the Library._

SHEBA. Aunt--dear Aunt----

GEORGIANA. Aunt--Salome has something to say to you. [_Catching hold of SHEBA._] Hallo,
little 'un! Aunt--dear Aunt Georgiana--we heard you say something about a thousand
pounds. And, oh, Aunt, a thousand pounds is such a
lot, and we poor girls want such a little. I haven't, any more than you have, Sheba. Well, I'm in debt too, but I only meant to beg for Salome; but now I
ask for both of us. Oh, Aunt Tidman, papa has told us that you have
known troubles. Because Salome and I are weary fragments too--we're
everything awful but chastened widows. Why, you ought to be ashamed of yourselves, you girls! To cry and go on like this about forty pounds! But we've only got fifteen and threepence of our own in the world! And, oh, Aunt, you know something about the Races, don't you? If you do, help two poor creatures to win forty pounds, nineteen. Aunt
Georgiana, what's "Dandy Dick" you were talking to that gentleman
about? Then let Dandy Dick win _us_ some money. Do, and we'll love you for ever and ever, Aunt Georgiana. [_She embraces them heartily._] Bless your little innocent
faces! Do you want to win _fifty_ pounds? [_Taking her betting book from her pocket._] Very well, then, put your
very petticoats on Dandy Dick! [_The girls stand clutching their skirts, frightened._

SALOME. The morning-room at the Deanery, with the fire and the lamps lighted. SHEBA is playing the piano, SALOME lolling upon the settee, and
GEORGIANA pouring out tea. I call you Sally, Salome--the evening's too short for
your name. All right, Aunt George--two lumps, please. [_To SHEBA._] Little 'un? Two lumps and one in the saucer, to eat. Quite a relief to shake off the gentlemen, isn't it? Oh, _I_ don't think so. Now I understand why my foot was always in the way under the
dinner-table. [_She holds out two cups, which the girls take from her._

SALOME. Well, it was Cook's first attempt at custards. Now we _know_ the chimney wants
sweeping. But it was a frightfully jolly dinner--take it all round. What made us all so sad and silent--taking us all round? Dear Papa was as lively as an owl with neuralgia. Major Tarver isn't a conversational cracker. Gerald Tarver has no liver--to speak of. He might have spoken about his lungs or something, to cheer us up. Darbey was about to make a witty remark once. Yes, and then the servant handed him a dish and he shied at it. Still, we ought to congratulate ourselves upon--upon a----

SHEBA. Upon a--upon a----

GEORGIANA. [_Taking her betting book from her
pocket._] Excuse me, girls. If Dandy
Dick hasn't fed better at the "Swan" than we have at the Deanery, he
won't be in the first three. [_Reckoning._] Let me see. [_To SHEBA._] All's settled, Sheba, isn't it? [_To SALOME._] Yes--everything. Directly the house is silent we let
ourselves out at the front door. It has a patent safety fastening, so it can be opened
with a hairpin. Yes, I don't consider we're ordinary young ladies, at all. If we had known Aunt a little longer we might have confided in her and
taken her with us. Poor Aunt--we mustn't spoil her. [_Speaking outside._] I venture to differ with you, my dear Dean. [_She joins the girls as DARBEY enters through the Library,
patronizing THE DEAN, who accompanies him._

DARBEY. I've just been putting the Dean right about a little army
question, Mrs.--Mrs.---- I can't catch your name. Don't try--you'd come out in spots, like measles. [DARBEY _stands by her, blankly, then attempts a conversation._

THE DEAN. [_To SALOME and SHEBA._] Children, it is useless to battle against it
much longer. Oh, Papsey--think what Wellington was at his age. _MAJOR TARVER enters, pale and haggard._

_SALOME meets him._

SALOME. But what would you do if the trumpet summoned you to battle? Oh, I suppose I should pack up a few charcoal biscuits and toddle out,
you know. [_To DARBEY._] I've never studied the Army Guide. You're thinking of----

GEORGIANA. I mean, the Army keeps a string of trained
nurses, doesn't it? I was wondering whether your Colonel will send one with a
perambulator to fetch you at about half-past eight. [_She leaves DARBEY and goes to THE DEAN. SHEBA joins DARBEY at the
piano._

GEORGIANA. Well, Gus, my boy, you seem out of condition. I'm rather anxious for the post to bring to-day's "Times." You know
I've offered a thousand pounds to our Restoration Fund. BLORE enters to remove the tea-tray._

TARVER. [_Jumping up excitedly--to SALOME._] Eh? [_Singing to himself._] "Come into the garden, Maud, for the black
bat----"

SALOME. I'm always dreadfully excited when I'm asked to sing. It's as good as
a carbonate of soda lozenge to me to be asked to sing. [_To BLORE._]
My music is in my overcoat pocket. [_BLORE crosses to the door._

SHEBA. [_In a rage, glaring at DARBEY._] Hah! [_To BLORE._] You'll find it in the hall. SALOME and SHEBA talk to
GEORGIANA at the table._

TARVER. [_To himself._] He always presumes with his confounded fiddle when I'm
going to entertain. He knows that his fiddle's never hoarse and that I
am, sometimes. [_To himself._] Tarver always tries to cut me out with his elderly
Chest C. He ought to put it on the Retired List. I'll sing him off his legs to-night--I'm in lovely voice. [_He walks into the Library and is heard trying his voice, singing
"Come into the garden, Maud. [_To himself._] He needn't bother himself. While he was dozing in the
carriage I threw his music out of the window. _TARVER re-enters triumphantly._

_BLORE re-enters, carrying a violin-case and a leather music roll. DARBEY takes the violin-case, opens it, and produces his violin and
music. BLORE hands the music roll to TARVER and goes out._

TARVER. [_To SALOME, trembling with excitement._] My tones are like a
beautiful bell this evening. I'm so glad, for all our sakes. [_As he
takes the leather music roll from BLORE._] Thank you, that's it. I've begun with "Corne into the garden,
Maud" for years and years. [_He opens the music roll--it is empty._]
Oh! Miss Jedd, I've forgotten my music! [_TARVER with a groan of despair sinks on to the settee._

SHEBA. [_Tuning his violin._] Will you accompany me? [_Raising her eyes._] To the end of the world. [_She sits at the piano._

DARBEY. My mother says that my bowing is something like Joachim's, and she
ought to know. Oh, because she's heard Joachim. [_DARBEY plays and SHEBA accompanies him. SALOME sits beside TARVER._

GEORGIANA. [_To herself._] Well, after all, George, my boy, you're not stabled in
such a bad box! Here is a regular pure, simple, English Evening at
Home! [_Mumbling to himself._] A thousand pounds to the Restoration Fund and
all those bills to settle--oh dear! [_To herself._] I hope my ball-dress will drive all the other women
mad! [_To himself--glaring at DARBEY._] I feel I should like to garrote him
with his bass string. [_Frowning at her betting book._] I think I shall hedge a bit over the
Crumbleigh Stakes. [_As he plays, glancing at TARVER._] I wonder how old Tarver's Chest C
likes a holiday. [_As she plays._] We must get Pa to bed early. Dear Papa's always so
dreadfully in the way. [_Looking around._] No--there's nothing like it in any other country. A regular, pure, simple, English Evening at Home! _BLORE enters quickly, cutting "The Times" with a paper-knife as he
enters._

BLORE. [_The music stops abruptly--all the ladies glare at BLORE and hush him
down._

GEORGIANA, SALOME, _and_ SHEBA. [_Taking the paper from BLORE._] This is my fault--there may be
something in "The Times" of special interest to me. [_BLORE goes out._

TARVER. [_Scanning the paper._] Oh, I can't believe it! TARVER _and_ DARBEY. My munificent offer has produced the
desired result. Seven wealthy people, including three brewers, have come forward with
a thousand pounds apiece in aid of the restoration of the Minster
Spire! That means a cool thousand out of your pocket, Gus. [_Reading._] "The anxiety to which The Dean of St. Marvells has
so long been a victim will now doubtless be relieved." [_With his hand
to his head._] I suppose I shall feel the relief to-morrow. It _is_ a little out of repair--but hardly sufficiently so to warrant
the presumptuous interference of three brewers. Excuse me, I think
I'll enjoy the fresh air for a moment. [_He goes to the window and
draws back the curtains--a bright red glare is seen in the sky._]
Bless me! GEORGIANA, SALOME, _and_ SHEBA. [_Clinging to TARVER._] Where is it? [_Clinging to DARBEY._] Where is it? _BLORE enters with a scared look._

THE DEAN. [_To BLORE._] Where is it? [_The gate-bell is heard ringing violently in the distance. BLORE goes
out._

GEORGIANA. [_Uttering a loud screech._] The Swan Inn! [_Madly._] You girls, get
me a hat and coat. [_SALOME, SHEBA, and TARVER go to the window._

THE DEAN. [_To TARVER._] Lend me your boots! If I once get cold extremities----

GEORGIANA. [_She is going, THE DEAN stops her._

THE DEAN. Respect yourself, Georgiana--where are you going? I'm going to help clear the stables at The Swan! Remember what you are--my sister--a lady! George Tidd's a man, every inch of her! [_SIR TRISTRAM rushes
in breathlessly. GEORGIANA rushes at him and clutches his coat._] Tris
Mardon, speak! That old horse has backed himself to win the handicap. TARVER and DARBEY with SALOME and SHEBA
stand looking out of the window._

SIR TRISTRAM. George, his tail is singed a bit. The less weight for him to carry to-morrow. [_Beginning to cry._] Dear
old Dandy, he never was much to look at. The worst of it is, the fools threw two pails of cold water over him
to put it out. [_THE DEAN goes distractedly into the
Library._] Where is the animal? My man Hatcham is running him up and down the lane here to try to get
him warm again. Where are you going to put the homeless beast up now? [_Starting up._] I do though! Georgiana, pray consider _me!_

GEORGIANA. So I will, when you've had two pails of water thrown over you. [_THE DEAN walks about in despair._

THE DEAN. Mardon, I appeal to _you!_

SIR TRISTRAM. Oh, Dean, Dean, I'm ashamed of you! [_To SIR TRISTRAM._] Are you ready? [_Takes off his coat and throws it over GEORGIANA'S shoulders._]
George, you're a brick! [_Quietly to him._] One partner pulls Dandy out of the
Swan--t'other one leads Dandy into the Deanery. [_They go out together._

THE DEAN. "Sir
Tristram Mardon's Dandy Dick reflected great credit upon the Deanery
Stables!" [_He walks into the Library, where he sinks into a chair, as SALOME,
TARVER, DARBEY and SHEBA come from the window._

TARVER. If I had had my goloshes with me I
should have been here, there, and everywhere. Where there's a crowd of Civilians the Military exercise a wise
discretion in restraining themselves. [_To TARVER and DARBEY._] You had better go now; then we'll get the
house quiet as soon as possible. We will wait with the carriage in the lane. [_Calling._] Papa, Major Tarver and Mr. THE DEAN comes from the Library._

THE DEAN. [_Shaking hands._] Most fascinating evening! [_Shaking hands._] Charming, my dear Dean. _BLORE enters._

SALOME. [_BLORE goes out, followed by SHEBA, SALOME, and TARVER. DARBEY is
going, when he returns to THE DEAN._

DARBEY. By-the-bye, my dear Dean--come over and see me. We ought to know more
of each other. [_Restraining his anger._] I will _not_ say Monday! Oh--and I say--let me know when you preach, and
I'll get some of our fellows to give their patronage! [_He goes out._

THE DEAN. [_Closing the door after him with a bang._] Another moment--another
moment--and I fear I should have been violently rude to him, a guest
under my roof! [_He walks up to the fireplace and stands looking into
the fire, as DARBEY. having forgotten his violin, returns to the
room._] Oh, Blore, now understand me, if that Mr. Darbey ever again
presumes to present himself at the Deanery I will not see him! [_With his violin in his hand, haughtily._] I've come back for my
violin. [_Goes out with dignity._

THE DEAN. [_Horrified._] Oh, Mr. [_He runs out after DARBEY. GEORGIANA and SIR TRISTRAM enter by the
window._

GEORGIANA. Don't be down, Tris, my boy; cheer up, lad, he'll be fit yet, bar a
chill! he knew me, he knew me when I kissed his dear old nose! He'd be a fool of a horse if he hadn't felt deuced flattered at that. He knows he's in the Deanery too. Did you see him cast
up his eyes and lay his ears back when I led him in? Oh, George, George, it's such a pity about his tail! [_Cheerily._] Not it. You watch his head to-morrow--that'll come in
first. [_HATCHAM, a groom, looks in at the window._

HATCHAM. I jest run round to tell you that Dandy is a feedin' as steady as a
baby with a bottle. And I've got hold of the constable 'ere, Mr. Topping--he's going to sit up with me, for company's sake. [_Coming forward mysteriously._] Why, bless you and
the lady, sir--supposin' the fire at the "Swan" warn't no accident! Supposin' it were inciderism--and supposin' our 'orse was the hobject. That's why I ain't goin' to watch single-handed. [_SIR TRISTRAM and GEORGIANA pace up and down excitedly._

HATCHAM. There's only one mortal fear I've got about our Dandy. GEORGIANA _and_ SIR TRISTRAM. He 'asn't found out about 'is tail yet, sir, and when he does it'll
fret him, as sure as my name's Bob Hatcham. Keep the stable pitch dark--he mayn't notice it. Not to-night, sir, but he's a proud 'orse and what'll he think of
'isself on the 'ill to-morrow? You and me and the lady, sir--it 'ud be
different with us, but how's our Dandy to hide his bereavement? [_HATCHAM goes out of the window with SIR TRISTRAM as THE DEAN enters,
followed by BLORE, who carries a lighted lantern._

THE DEAN. [_Looking reproachfully at GEORGIANA._] You have returned, Georgiana? [_With a groan._] Oh! You can sleep to-night with the happy consciousness of having
sheltered the outcast. The poor children, exhausted with the alarm, beg
me to say good-night for them. Yes, sir; but I hear they've just sent into Durnstone hasking for the
Military to watch the ruins in case of another houtbreak. It'll stop
the wicked Ball at the Hathanaeum, it will! [_Drawing the window curtains._

SIR TRISTRAM. [_Having re-entered._] I suppose you want to see the last of me, Jedd. Where shall we stow the dear old chap, Gus, my
boy? Where shall we stow the dear old chap! We don't want to pitch you out of your loft if we can help
it, Gus. No, no--we won't do that. But there's Sheba's little cot still
standing in the old nursery. Just the thing for me--the old nursery. [_Looking round._] Is there anyone else before we lock up? [_BLORE has fastened the window and drawn the curtain._

GEORGIANA. Put Sir Tristram to bed carefully in the nursery, Blore. [_Grasping THE DEAN'S hand._] Good-night, old boy. I'm too done for a
hand of Piquet to-night. [_Slapping him on the back._] I'll teach you during my stay at the
Deanery. [_Helplessly to himself._] Then he's staying with me! Heaven bless the little innocent in his cot. [_SIR TRISTRAM goes out with BLORE._

GEORGIANA. [_Calling after him._] Tris! We
smoke all over the Deanery. [_To himself._] I never smoke! Does _she?_

GEORGIANA. [_Closes the door, humming a tune merrily._] Tra la, tra la! [_She stops, looking at THE DEAN,
who is muttering to himself._] Gus, I don't like your looks, I shall
let the Vet see you in the morning. [_THE DEAN shakes his head mournfully, and sinks on the settee._

GEORGIANA. There _are_ bills, which, at a more convenient time, it will be my
grateful duty to discharge. Stumped--out of coin--run low. Very little would settle the bills--but--but----

GEORGIANA. Why, Gus, you haven't got that thousand. There is a very large number of estimable worthy men who do not
possess a thousand pounds. With that number I have the mournful
pleasure of enrolling myself. Unless the restoration is immediately commenced the spire will
certainly crumble. Then it's a match between you and the spire which parts first. Gus,
will you let your little sister lend you a hand? No, no--not out of my own pocket. [_She takes his arm and
whispers in his ear._] Can you squeeze a pair of ponies? Very well then--clap it on to Dandy Dick! He's a certainty--if those two buckets of water haven't put him off
it! He's a moral--if he doesn't think of his tail coming down the
hill. Keep it dark, Gus--don't
breathe a word to any of your Canons or Archdeacons, or they'll rush
at it and shorten the price for us. Go in, Gus, my boy--take your poor
widowed sister's tip and sleep as peacefully as a blessed baby! [_She presses him warmly to her and kisses him._

THE DEAN. [_Extricating himself._] Oh! In the morning I will endeavor to frame some verbal expression of the
horror with which I regard your proposal. For the present, you are my
parents' child and I trust your bed is well aired. I've done all I can for the Spire. _Bon
soir,_ old boy! If you're wiser in the morning just send Blore on to the course and
he'll put the money on for you. My poor devoted old servant would be lost on a race-course. He was quite at home in Tattersall's Ring when I was at St. I recognized the veteran sportsman the moment I came into the
Deanery. _BLORE enters with his lantern._

GEORGIANA. Investing the savings of your cook and housemaid, of course. You don't
think your servants are as narrow as you are! I beg your pardon, sir, shall I go the rounds, sir? [_THE DEAN gives Blore a fierce look, but BLORE beams sweetly._

GEORGIANA. And pack a hamper with a cold chicken, some
French rolls, and two bottles of Heidsieck--label it "George Tidd,"
and send it on to the Hill. THE DEAN sinks into a chair and clasps his forehead._

BLORE. A dear, 'igh-sperited lady. [_Leaning over THE DEAN._] Aren't you
well, sir? THE DEAN

Lock up; I'll speak to you in the morning. [_BLORE goes into the Library, turns out the lamp there, and
disappears._

What dreadful wave threatens to engulf the Deanery? What has come to
us in a few fatal hours? A horse of sporting tendencies contaminating
my stables, his equally vicious owner nestling in the nursery, and my
own widowed sister, in all probability, smoking a cigarette at her
bedroom window with her feet on the window-ledge! [_Listening._]
What's that? [_He peers through the window curtains._] I thought I
heard footsteps in the garden. I can see nothing--only the old spire
standing out against the threatening sky. [_Leaving the window
shudderingly._] The Spire! My principal
creditor, the most conspicuous object in the city! _BLORE re-enters with his lantern, carrying some bank-notes in his
hand._

BLORE. [_Laying the notes on the table._] I found these, sir, on your
dressing-table--they're bank-notes, sir. [_Taking the notes._] Thank you. I placed them there to be sent to the
Bank to-morrow. [_Counting the notes._] Ten--ten--twenty--five--five,
fifty. The very sum Georgiana urged me to--oh! [_To
BLORE, waving him away._] Leave me--go to bed--go to bed--go to bed! [_BLORE is going._] Blore! What made you tempt me with these at such a moment? The window was hopen, and I feared they might blow
away. [_Catching him by the coat collar._] Man, what were you doing at St. [_With a cry, falling on his knees._] Oh, sir! I knew that
'igh-sperited lady would bring grief and sorrow to the peaceful, 'appy
Deanery! Oh, sir, I _'ave_ done a little on my hown account from time
to time on the 'ill, halso hon commission for the kitchen! Oh, sir, you are a old gentleman--turn a charitable 'art to the Races! It's a wicious institution what spends more ready money in St. Marvells than us good people do in a year. Oh, Edward Blore, Edward Blore, what weak
creatures we are! We are, sir--we are--'specially when we've got a tip, sir. Think of
the temptation of a tip, sir. Bonny Betsy's bound for to win the
'andicap. I know better; she can never get down the hill with those legs of
hers. She can, sir--what's to beat her? The horse in my stable--Dandy Dick! That old bit of ma'ogany, sir. They're layin' ten to one
against him. [_With hysterical eagerness._] Are they? Lord love you, sir--fur how much? [_Impulsively he crams the notes into
BLORE'S hand and then recoils in horror._] Oh! [_Sinks into a chair with a groan._

BLORE. [_In a whisper._] Lor', who'd 'ave thought the Dean was such a ardent
sportsman at 'art? He dursn't give me my notice after this. [_To THE
DEAN._] Of course it's understood, sir, that we keep our little
weaknesses dark. Houtwardly, sir, we remain respectable, and, I 'ope,
respected. [_Putting the notes into his pocket._] I wish you
good-night, sir. THE DEAN makes an effort to
recall him but fails._] And that old man 'as been my pattern and
example for years and years! Oh, Edward Blore, your hidol is
shattered! [_Turning to THE DEAN._] Good-night, sir. May your dreams
be calm and 'appy, and may you have a good run for your money! [_BLORE goes out--THE DEAN gradually recovers his self-possession._

THE DEAN. I--I am upset to-night, Blore. I--I [_looking round._] Blore! If I don't call him back the
Spire may be richer to-morrow by five hundred pounds. [_Snatches a book at haphazard from the
bookshelf. There is the sound of falling rain and distant thunder._]
Rain, thunder. How it assimilates with the tempest of my mind! [_Reading._] "The Horse and its
Ailments, by John Cox, M. R. C. V. It was with the aid of this
volume that I used to doctor my old mare at Oxford. [_Reading._] "Simple remedies for chills--the Bolus." The
helpless beast in my stable is suffering from a chill. If I allow Blore to risk my fifty pounds on Dandy Dick, surely it
would be advisable to administer this Bolus to the poor animal without
delay. [_Referring to the book hastily._] I have these drugs in my
chest. [_Going to the bell and
ringing._] I shall want help. [_He lays the book upon the table and goes into the Library._

_BLORE enters._

BLORE. [_Looking round._] Where is he? The Dean's puzzling me
with his uncommon behavior, that he is. [_THE DEAN comes from the Library, carrying a large medicine chest. On
encountering BLORE he starts and turns away his head, the picture of
guilt._

THE DEAN. Blore, I feel it would be a humane act to administer to the poor
ignorant animal in my stable a simple Bolus as a precaution against
chill. I rely upon your aid and discretion in ministering to any guest
in the Deanery. [_In a whisper._] I see, sir--you ain't going to lose half a chance
for to-morrow, sir--you're a knowin' one, sir, as the sayin' goes! [_Shrinking from BLORE with a groan._] Oh! [_He places the medicine
chest on the table and takes up the book. Handing the book to BLORE
with his finger on a page._] Fetch these humble but necessary articles
from the kitchen--quick. [_BLORE goes out
quickly._] It is exactly seven and twenty years since I last
approached a horse medically. [_He takes off his coat and lays it on a
chair, then rolls his shirt-sleeves up above his elbows and puts on
his glasses._] I trust that this Bolus will not give the animal an
unfair advantage over his competitors. [_BLORE re-enters carrying a tray, on which are a small
flour-barrel and rolling-pin, a white china basin, a carafe of water,
a napkin, and the book. THE DEAN recoils, then guiltily takes the tray
from BLORE and puts it on the table._] Thank you. [_Holding on to the window curtain and watching THE DEAN._] His eyes
is awful; I don't seem to know the 'appy Deanery when I see such
proceedings a'goin' on at the dead of night. [_There is a heavy roll of thunder--THE DEAN mixes a pudding and stirs
it with the rolling-pin._

THE DEAN. The old half-forgotten time returns to me. I am once again a promising
youth at college. [_To himself._] One would think by his looks that he was goin' to
poison his family instead of--Poison! Oh, if hanything serious
'appened to the hanimal in our stable there would be nothing in the
way of Bonny-Betsy, the deservin' 'orse I've trusted with my
'ard-earned savings! I am walking once again in the old streets at Oxford, avoiding the
shops where I owe my youthful bills. [_He pounds away vigorously with the rolling-pin._

BLORE. [_To himself._] Where's the stuff I got a month ago to destroy the
hold black retriever that fell hill? The dog died--the poison's in my pantry--it couldn't have got used for
cooking purposes. I see the broad meadows and the tall Spire of the college--the Spire! Oh, my whole life seems made up of Bills and Spires! [_To himself._] I'll do it! [_Unseen by The Dean he quickly and quietly steals out by the door._

THE DEAN. [_Opening the medicine chest and
bending down over the bottles he pours some drops from a bottle into
the basin._] [_Counting._] Three--four--five--six. [_He replaces the
bottle and takes another._] How fortunate some animals are! [_Counting._] One--two--three, four. [_Taking up the medicine chest he goes with it into the Library._

_As he disappears BLORE re-enters stealthily fingering a small paper
packet._

BLORE. [_In a whisper._] Strychnine! [_There is a heavy roll of
thunder--BLORE darts to the table, empties the contents of the packet
into the basin, and stirs vigorously with the rolling-pin._] I've
cooked Dandy Dick! [_He moves from the table
in horror._] Oh! I'm only a hamatoor sportsman and I can't afford a
uncertainty. [_As THE DEAN returns, BLORE starts up guiltily._] Can I
help you any more, Sir? No, remove these dreadful things, and don't let me see you again
to-night! [_Sits with the basin on his knees, and proceeds to roll the paste._

BLORE. [_Removing the tray._] It's only an 'orse--it's only an 'orse! But
after to-morrow I'll retire from the Turf, if only to reclaim 'im. [_He goes out._

THE DEAN. [_Putting on his coat._] I don't contemplate my humane task with
resignation. The stable is small, and if the animal is restive we
shall be cramped for room. [_The rain is heard._] I shall get a chill
too. [_Seeing SIR TRISTRAM'S coat and cap lying upon the settee._] I
am sure Mardon will lend me this gladly. [_Putting on the coat, which
completely envelops him._] The animal may recognize the garment, and
receive me with kindly feeling. [_Putting on the sealskin cap, which
almost conceals his face._] Ugh! why do I feel this dreadful sinking
at the heart? [_Taking the basin and turning out the lamp._] Oh! if
all followers of the veterinary science are as truly wretched as I am,
what a noble band they must be! [_The thunder rolls as he goes through the window curtains. SIR
TRISTRAM then enters quietly, smoking, and carrying a lighted candle._

SIR TRISTRAM. [_Blowing out the candle._] I shall
doze here till daybreak. I never thought there was so
much thunder in these small country places. [_GEORGIANA, looking pale and agitated, and wearing a dressing-gown,
enters quickly, carrying an umbrella and a lighted candle._

GEORGIANA. I must satisfy myself--I
must--I must! [_Going to the door._]

SIR TRISTRAM. [_Rising suddenly._] Hullo! [_Shrieks with fright._] Ah! [_Holding out her umbrella._] Stand where you are or I'll fire! [_Recognizing SIR TRISTRAM._] Tris! Oh, Tris, I've been dreaming! [_Falling helplessly against Sir
Tristram, who deposits her in a chair._] Oh! I shall be on my legs again in a minute. [_She opens her umbrella and hides herself behind it, sobbing
violently._

SIR TRISTRAM. [_Standing over the umbrella in great concern._] My goodness! Shall I trot you up and down outside? [_Sobbing._] What are you fooling about here for? Why can't
you lie quietly in your cot? The thunder's awful in my room;
when it gets tired it seems to sit down on my particular bit of roof. I did doze once, and then I had a frightful dream. I dreamt that Dandy
had sold himself to a circus, and that they were hooting him because
he had lost his tail. Don't, don't--be a man, George, be a man! [_Shutting her umbrella._] I know I'm dreadfully effeminate. Ah, Tris--don't think me soft, old man. I'm a lonely, unlucky woman,
and the tail end of this horse is all that's left me in the world to
love and to cling to! I'm not such a mean cur as that! Swop halves and take his
head, George, my boy. I'm like a doating mother to my share of Dandy, and it's all
the dearer because it's an invalid. [_Turning towards the window, she following him, he
suddenly stops and looks at her, and seizes her hand._] George, I
never guessed that you were so tender-hearted. And you've robbed me to-night of an old friend--a pal. I mean that I seem to have dropped the acquaintance of George Tidd,
Esquire, forever. I have--but I've got an introduction to his twin-sister, Georgiana! [_Snatching her hand away angrily._] Stay where you are; I'll nurse my
half alone. [_She goes towards the window, then starts back._] Hush! [_Pointing to the window._] There. [_Peeping through the curtains._] You're right. [_SIR TRISTRAM takes the candlestick and they go out leaving the room
in darkness. The curtains at the window are pushed aside, and SALOME
and SHEBA enter; both in their fancy dresses._

SALOME. [_In a rage, lighting the candles on the mantelpiece._] Oh! If we only had a brother to avenge us! I shall try and borrow a brother to-morrow! Cold, wretched, splashed, in debt--for nothing! To think that we've had all the inconvenience of being wicked and
rebellious and have only half done it! It serves us right--we've been trained for clergymen's wives. Gerald Tarver's nose is inclined to pink--may it deepen and deepen
till it frightens cows! [_Voices are heard from the curtained window recess._

DARBEY. [_Outside._] Miss Jedd--Sheba! [_Outside._] Pray hear two wretched men! [_In a whisper._] There they are. You curl your lip better than I--I'll dilate my nostrils. [_SALOME draws aside the curtain. They are
both very badly and shabbily dressed as Cavaliers._

TARVER. [_A most miserable object, carrying a carriage umbrella._] Oh, don't
reproach us, Miss Jedd. It isn't our fault that the Military were
summoned to St. You don't blame officers and gentlemen for responding to the sacred
call of duty? We blame officers for subjecting two motherless girls to the shock of
alighting at the Durnstone Athenaeum to find a notice on the front
door: "Ball knocked on the head--Vivat Regina." We blame gentlemen for inflicting upon us the unspeakable agony of
being jeered at by boys. I took the address of the boy who suggested that we should call again
on the fifth of November. It is on the back of your admission card. We shall both wait on the boy's mother for an
explanation. Oh, smile on us once again, Miss Jedd--a forced, hollow smile, if you
will--only smile. _GEORGIANA enters._

GEORGIANA. [_Weeping._] No, Aunt, no! [_Advancing to TARVER._] How dare you encourage these two simple
children to enjoy themselves! How dare you take them out--without
their Aunt! Do you think _I_ can't keep a thing quiet? [_Shaking TARVER._] I'm speaking to you--Field-Marshal. We shall be happy to receive your representative in the morning. Guarding the ruins of the "Swan" Inn. You mustn't distract our
attention. Guarding the ruins of the "Swan," are you? [_SIR TRISTRAM appears._] Tris, I'm a feeble woman, but I
hope I've a keen sense of right and wrong. Run these outsiders into
the road, and let them guard their own ruins. [_SALOME and SHEBA shriek, and throw themselves at the feet of TARVER
and DARBEY. clinging to their legs._

SALOME. You shall not harm a hair of their heads. [_SIR TRISTRAM twists TARVER'S wig round so that it covers his face. The gate bell is heard ringing violently._

GEORGIANA, SALOME _and_ SHEBA. [_GEORGIANA runs to the door and opens it._

SALOME. [_To TARVER and DARBEY._] Fly! [_TARVER and DARBEY disappear through the curtains at the window._

SHEBA. [_Falling into SALOME'S arms._] We have saved them! Oh, Tris, your man from the stable! [_HATCHAM, carrying the basin with the bolus, runs in
breathlessly--followed by BLORE._

HATCHAM. GEORGIANA _and_ SIR TRISTRAM. The villain that set fire to the "Swan," sir--in the hact of
administering a dose to the 'orse! Topping the constable's collared him, Sir--he's taken him in a cart to
the lock-up! GEORGIANA _and_ SIR TRISTRAM. [_In agony._] They've got the Dean! The first scene is the interior of a country Police Station, a quaint
old room with plaster walls, oaken beams, and a gothic mullioned
window looking on to the street. A massive door, with a small sliding
wicket and an iron grating, opens to a prisoner's cell. The room is
partly furnished as a kitchen, partly as a police station, a copy of
the Police Regulations and other official documents and implements
hanging on the wall. It is the morning after the events of the
previous act. _HANNAH, a buxom, fresh-looking young woman, in a print gown, has been
engaged in cooking while singing gayly._

HANNAH. [_Opening a door and calling with a slight dialect._] Noah darling! [_From another room--in a rough, country voice._] Yaas! You'll have your dinner before you drive your prisoner over to
Durnstone, won't ye, darling? [_Closing the door._] Yaas! Noah's in a nice temper to-day over
summat. Ah well, I suppose all public characters is liable to
irritation. [_There is a knock at the outer door. HANNAH opening it,
sees BLORE with a troubled look on his face._] Well I never! [_Entering and shaking hands mournfully._] How do you do, Mrs. And how is the dear Dean, bless him; the sweetest soul in the world? [_To HANNAH._] I--I 'aven't seen him this morning! Well, this is real kind of you, calling on an old friend, Edward. When
I think that I were cook at the Deanery seven years, and that since I
left you, to get wedded, not a soul of you has been nigh me, it do
seem hard. Well, you see, 'Annah, the kitchen took humbrage at your marryin' a
policeman at Durnstone. Topping's got the appointment of Head Constable at St. Marvells, what's that regarded as? A rise on the scales, 'Annah, a decided rise--but still you've honly
been a week in St. Marvells and you've got to fight your way hup. I think I'm as hup as ever I'm like to be. 'Owever, Jane and Sarah and Willis the stable boy 'ave hunbent so far
as to hask me to leave their cards, knowin' I was a callin'. [_He produces from an old leather pocket-book three very dirty pieces
of paste-board, which he gives to HANNAH._

HANNAH. [_Taking them in her apron with pride._] Thank 'em kindly. We receive on Toosdays, at the side gate. [_Kissing her cheek._

HANNAH. When you was Miss Hevans there wasn't these social barriers,
'Annah! Noah's jealous of the very apron-strings what go round my
waist. I'm not so free and 'andy with my kisses now, I can tell you. Topping isn't indoors
now, surely! [_Nodding her head._] Um--um! Why, he took a man up last night! Why, I thought that when hany harrest was made in St. Marvells, the
prisoner was lodged here honly for the night and that the 'ead
Constable 'ad to drive 'im over to Durnstone Police Station the first
thing in the morning. That's the rule, but Noah's behindhand to-day, and ain't going into
Durnstone till after dinner. And where is the hapartment in question? [_Looking round in horror._] Oh! The "Strong-box" they call it in St. [_Whimpering to himself._] And 'im
accustomed to his shavin' water at h'eight and my kindly hand to
button his gaiters. 'Annah, 'Annah, my dear, it's this very prisoner what I 'ave called on
you respectin'. Oh, then the honor ain't a compliment to me, after all, Mr. I'm killing two birds with one stone, my dear. [_Throwing the cards into BLORE'S hat._] You can take them back to the
Deanery with Mrs. [_Shaking the cards out of his hat and replacing them in his
pocket-book._] I will leave them hon you again to-morrow, 'Annah. But,
'Annah deary, do you know that this hunfortunate man was took in our
stables last night. No, I never ask Noah nothing about Queen's business. He don't want
_two_ women over him! Then you 'aven't seen the miserable culprit? I was in bed hours when Noah brought 'im 'ome. They tell us it's only a wretched poacher or a
petty larcery we'll get in St. My poor Noah ain't never
likely to have the chance of a horrid murder in a place what returns a
Conservative. [_Kneeling to look into the oven._

BLORE. But, 'Annah, suppose this case you've got 'old of now is a case
what'll shake old England to its basis! Suppose it means columns in
the paper with Topping's name a-figurin'! Suppose as family readin',
it 'old its own with divorce cases! You know something about this arrest, you do! I merely wish to encourage
you, 'Annah; to implant an 'ope that crime may brighten your wedded
life. [_Sitting at the table and referring to an official book._] The man
was found trespassing in the Deanery Stables with intent--refuses to
give his name or any account of 'isself. [_To himself._] If I could honly find hout whether Dandy Dick had any
of the medicine it would so guide me at the Races. It
doesn't appear that the 'orse in the stables--took it, does it? [_Looking up sharply._] Took what? You're sure there's no confession of any sort, 'Annah
dear? [_As he is bending over HANNAH, NOAH TOPPING appears. NOAH is a
dense-looking ugly countryman, with red hair, a bristling heard, and a
vindictive leer. He is dressed in ill-fitting clothes, as a rural
Police Constable._

NOAH. [_Fiercely._] 'Annah! [_Starting and replacing the book._] Oh don't! Blore from
the Deanery come to see us--an old friend o' mine! [_BLORE advances to NOAH with a nervous smile, extending his hand._

NOAH. [_Taking BLORE'S hand and holding it firmly._] A friend of hern is a
friend o' mian! She's gettin' me a lot o' nice noo friends this week, since we coom to
St. Of course, dear 'Annah was a lovin' favorite with heverybody. Well then, as her friends be mian, I'm takin' the liberty, one by
one, of gradually droppin' on 'em all. [_Getting his hand away._] Dear me! And if I catch any old fly a buzzin' round my lady I'll venture to
break his 'ead in wi' my staff! [_Preparing to depart._] I--I merely called to know if hanything had
been found hout about the ruffian took in our stables last night! He's the De-an, ain't he? [_Fiercely._] Shut oop, darlin'. Topping's
respects to the Dean, and say I'll run up to the Deanery and see him
after I've took my man over to Durnstone. Thank you--I 'ope the Dean will be at 'ome. [_Offering his hand, into which NOAH significantly places his
truncheon. BLORE goes out quickly._

HANNAH. [_Whimpering._] Oh, Noah, Noah, I don't believe as we shall ever get a
large circle of friends round us! [_Selecting a pair of handcuffs and examining them
critically._] Them'll do. [_Slipping them into his pocket, and turning
upon HANNAH suddenly._] 'Annah! Yes, Noahry----

NOAH. Brighten oop, my darlin', the little time you 'ave me at 'ome with
you. [_She bustles about and begins to lay the cloth._

NOAH. I'm just a' goin' round to the stable to put old Nick in the cart. Oh, dont'ee trust to Nick, Noah dear--he's such a vicious brute. Nick can take me on to the edge o' the hill in half
the time. Ah, what d'ye think I've put off taking my man to Durnstone to now
for? Why, I'm a goin' to get a glimpse of the racin', on my way over. [_Opening the wicket in the cell door and looking in._] There he is! [_To HANNAH._] Hopen the hoven door, 'Annah, and let the smell
of the cookin' get into him. Oh, no, Noah--it's torture! [_She opens the oven door._] Torture! Whenever I get a 'old of a darned obstinate
creature wot won't reveal his hindentity I hopens the hoven door. [_He goes out into the street, and as he departs, the woful face of
THE DEAN appears at the wicket, his head being still enveloped in the
fur cap._

HANNAH. [_Shutting the oven door._] Not me! Torturing prisoners might a' done
for them Middling Ages what Noah's always clattering about, but not
for my time o' life. [_Crossing close to the
wicket, her face almost comes against THE DEAN'S. She gives a cry._]
The Dean! [_He disappears._

HANNAH. [_Tottering to the wicket
and looking in._] Master! It's 'Annah, your poor faithful
servant, 'Annah! [_The face of THE DEAN re-appears._

THE DEAN. [_In a deep sad voice._] Hannah Evans. It's 'Annah Topping, Knee Evans, wife o' the Constable what's goin' to
take you to cruel Durnstone. [_Sinking weeping upon the ground at the
door._] Oh, Mr. Dean, sir, what have you been up to? Woman, I am the victim of a misfortune only partially merited. [_On her knees, clasping her hands._] Tell me what you've done, Master
dear; give it a name, for the love of goodness

THE DEAN. My poor Hannah, I fear I have placed myself in an equivocal position. [_With a shriek of despair._] Ah! Is it a change o' cooking that's brought you to such ways? I cooked
for you for seven 'appy years! you seem to have lost none of your culinary skill. [_With clenched hands and a determined look._] Oh! [_Quickly locking
and bolting the street door._] Noah can't put that brute of a horse to
under ten minutes. The dupplikit key o' the Strong Box! [_Producing a
large key, with which she unlocks the cell door._] Master, you'll give
me your patrol not to cut, won't you? Under any other circumstances, Hannah, I should resent that
insinuation. [_Pulling the door which opens sufficiently to let out THE DEAN._

THE DEAN. [_As he enters the room._] Good day, Hannah; you have bettered
yourself, I hope? [_Hysterically flinging herself upon THE DEAN._] Oh, Master, Master! [_Putting her from him sternly._] Hannah! Oh, I know, I know, but crime levels all, dear sir! You appear to misapprehend the precise degree of criminality which
attaches to me, Mrs. In the eyes of that majestic, but
imperfect instrument, the law, I am an innocent if not an injured man. Stick to it, if you think it's likely to serve
your wicked ends! [_Placing bread with other things on the table._

THE DEAN. My good woman, a single word from me to those at the Deanery, would
instantly restore me to home, family, and accustomed diet. Ah, they all tell that tale what comes here. Why don't you send word,
Dean dear? Because it would involve revelations of my temporary moral aberration! [_Putting her apron to her eyes with a howl._] Owh! Because I should return to the Deanery with my dignity--that priceless
possession of man's middle age!--with my dignity seriously impaired! Oh, don't, sir, don't! How could I face my simple children who have hitherto, not
unreasonably, regarded me as faultless? How could I again walk erect
in the streets of St. Marvells with my name blazoned on the Records of
a Police Station of the very humblest description? [_Sinking into a chair and snatching up a piece of breads which he
begins munching._

HANNAH. [_Wiping her eyes._] Oh, sir, it's a treat to hear you, compared with
the hordinary criminal class. But, master, dear, though my Noah don't
recognize you--through his being a stranger to St. Marvells--how'll
you fare when you get to Durnstone? I have one great buoyant hope--that a word in the ear of the Durnstone
Superintendent will send me forth an unquestioned man. You and he will
be the sole keepers of my precious secret. May its possession be a
lasting comfort to you both. Master, is what you've told me your only chance of getting off
unknown? It is the sole remaining chance of averting a calamity of almost
national importance. Then you're as done as that joint in my oven! The Superintendent at Durnstone--John Ruggles--also the two
Inspectors, Whitaker and Parker----

THE DEAN. Them and their wives and families are chapel folk! [_THE DEAN totters across to a chair, into which he sinks with
his head upon the table._] Master! I was well fed and kept seven years at the
Deanery--I've been wed to Noah Topping eight weeks--that's six years
and ten months' lovin' duty doo to you and yours before I owe nothing
to my darling Noah. Master dear, you shan't be took to Durnstone! Hannah Topping, formerly Evans, it is my duty to inform you
that your reasoning does more credit to your heart than to your head. The Devil's always in a woman's heart because it's
the warmest place to get to! [_Taking a small key from the table
drawer._] Here, take that! [_Pushing the key into the pocket of his
coat._] When you once get free from my darling Noah that key unlocks
your handcuffs! How are you to get free, that's the question now, isn't it? My Noah drives you over to Durnstone with old Nick in the cart. Now Nick was formerly in the Durnstone Fire Brigade,
and when he 'ears the familiar signal of a double whistle you can't
hold him in. [_Putting it into THE DEAN'S
pocket._] Directly you turn into Pear Tree Lane, blow once and you'll
see Noah with his nose in the air, pullin' fit to wrench his 'ands
off. Jump out--roll clear of the wheel--keep cool and 'opeful and blow
again. Before you can get the mud out of your eyes Noah and the horse
and cart will be well into Durnstone, and may Providence restore a
young 'usband safe to his doatin' wife! [_Recoiling horror-stricken._

HANNAH. [_Crying._] Oh--ooh--ooh! Is this the fruit of your seven years' constant cookery at the
Deanery? I wouldn't have done it, only this is your first offence! You're not too old; I want to give you another start in life! Woman, do you think I've no conscience? Do you think I
don't realize the enormity of the--of the difficulties in alighting
from a vehicle in rapid motion? [_Opening the oven and taking out a small joint in a baking tin, which
she places on the table._] It's 'unger what makes you feel
conscientious! [_Waving her away._] I have done with you! With me, sir--but not with the joint! You'll feel wickeder when you've
had a little nourishment. [_He looks hungrily at the dish._] That's
right, Dean, dear--taste my darling Noah's favorite dish. [_Advancing towards the table._] Oh, Hannah Topping--Hannah Topping! [_Clutching the carving-knife despairingly._] I'll have no more women
cooks at the Deanery! [_Sitting and carving with desperation._

HANNAH. You can't blow that whistle on an empty
frame. [_THE DEAN begins to eat._] Don't my cooking carry you back,
sir? Ah, if every mouthful would carry me back one little hour I would
finish this joint! [_NOAH TOPPING, unperceived by HANNAH and THE DEAN, climbs in by the
window, his eyes bolting with rage--he glares round the room, taking
in everything at a glance._

NOAH. [_Under his breath._] My man o' mystery--a waited on by my nooly made
wife--a heating o' my favorite meal. [_Touching HANNAH on the arm, she turns and faces him, speechless with
fright._

THE DEAN. [_Still eating._] If my mind were calmer this would be an
all-sufficient repast. [_HANNAH tries to speak, then clasps her hands
and sinks on her knees to NOAH._] Hannah, a little plain cold water in
a simple tumbler, please. [_Grimly--folding his arms._] 'Annah, hintrodooce me. [_HANNAH gives a
cry and clings to NOAH'S legs._

THE DEAN. [_Calmly to NOAH._] Am I to gather, constable, from your respective
attitudes that you object to these little kindnesses extended to me by
your worthy wife? I'm wishin' to know the name o' my worthy wife's friend. A friend o'
hern is a friend o' mian. She's gettin' me a lot o' nice noo friends since we coom to St. I made this gentleman's acquaintance through the wicket, in a
casual way. Cooks and railins--cooks and railins! I might a guessed my wedded
life 'ud a coom to this. He spoke to me just as a strange gentleman ought to speak to a lady! Didn't you, sir--didn't you? Hannah, do not let us even under these circumstances prevaricate; such
is not quite the case! [_NOAH advances savagely to THE DEAN. There is a knocking at the
door.--NOAH restrains himself and faces THE DEAN._

NOAH. Noa, this is neither the toime nor pla-ace, wi' people at the door and
dinner on t' table, to spill a strange man's blood. I trust that your self-respect as an officer of the law will avert
anything so unseemly. You've touched me on my point o' pride. There ain't
another police-station in all Durnstone conducted more strict and
rigid nor what mian is, and it shall so continue. You and me is a
goin' to set out for Durnstone, and when the charges now standin' agen
you is entered, it's I, Noah Topping, what'll hadd another! [_There is another knock at the door._

HANNAH. The charge of allynating the affections o' my wife, 'Annah! [_Horrified._] No, no! Ay, and worse--the embezzlin' o' my mid-day meal prepared by her
'ands. [_Points into the cell._] Go in; you 'ave five minutes more in
the 'ome you 'ave ruined and laid waste. [_Going to the door and turning to NOAH._] You will at least receive
my earnest assurance that this worthy woman is extremely innocent? [_Points to the joint on the table._] Look theer! [_THE
DEAN, much overcome, disappears through the cell door, which NOAH
closes and locks. To HANNAH,
pointing to the outer door._] Hunlock that door! [_Weeping._] Oh, Noahry, you'll never be popular in St. [_HANNAH unlocks the door, and admits GEORGIANA and SIR TRISTRAM, both
dressed for the race-course._

GEORGIANA. Take a chair, lady, near the fire. [_To SIR TRISTRAM._] Sit
down, sir. This is my first visit to a police-station, my good woman; I hope it
will be the last. Oh, don't say that, ma'am. We're honly hauxilliary 'ere, ma'am--the
Bench sets at Durnstone. I must say you try to make everybody feel at home. [_HANNAH curtseys._

SIR TRISTRAM. [_To HANNAH._] Perhaps this is only a police-station for the young? No, ma'am, we take ladies and gentlemen like yourselves. [_Who has not been noticed, surveying GEORGIANA and SIR TRISTRAM,
gloomily._] 'Annah, hintrodooce me. [_Facing NOAH._] Good gracious! 'Annah's a gettin' me a lot o' nice noo friends this week since we
coom to St. Noah, Noah--the lady and gentlemen is strange. Ay; are you seeing me on business or pleasure? Do you imagine people come here to see you? Noa--they generally coom to see my wife. 'Owever, if it's business
[_pointing to the other side of the room_] that's the hofficial
side--this is domestic. SIR TRISTRAM _and_ GEORGIANA. [_Changing their seats._

SIR TRISTRAM. Tidman is the
sister of Dr. She's profligate--proceedins are pendin'! [_To SIR TRISTRAM._] Strange police station! [_To NOAH._] Well, my good man, to come to the point. My poor friend
and this lady's brother, Dr. Jedd, the Dean, you know--has
mysteriously and unaccountably disappeared. Now, look 'ere--it's no good a gettin' 'asty and irritable with the
law. I'll coom over to yer, officially. [_Putting the baking tin under his arm he crosses over to SIR TRISTRAM
and GEORGIANA._

SIR TRISTRAM. [_Putting his handkerchief to his face._] Don't bring that horrible
odor of cooking over here. It's evidence against my profligate wife. [_SIR TRISTRAM and GEORGIANA exchange looks of impatience._

GEORGIANA. Do you realize that my poor brother the Dean is missing? Touching this missin' De-an. I left him last night to retire to rest. 'As it struck you to look in 'is bed? GEORGIANA _and_ SIR TRISTRAM. It's only confusin'--hall doin' it! [_GEORGIANA puts her handkerchief to her eyes._

SIR TRISTRAM. This is his sister--I am his
friend! GEORGIANA _and_ SIR TRISTRAM. A the'ry that will put you all out o' suspense! GEORGIANA _and_ SIR TRISTRAM. I've been a good bit about, I read a deal, and I'm a shrewd
experienced man. I should say this is nothin' but a hordinary case of
sooicide. [_GEORGIANA sits faintly._

SIR TRISTRAM. [_Savagely to NOAH._] Get out of the way! Oh, Tris, if this were true how could we break it to the girls? I could run oop, durin' the evenin', and break it to the girls. [_Turns upon NOAH._] Look here, all you've got to do is to hold your
tongue and take down my description of the Dean, and report his
disappearance at Durnstone. [_Pushing him into a chair._] Go on! [_Dictating._] "Missing. The Very Reverend Augustin Jedd, Dean of St. [_Softly to GEORGIANA._] Lady, lady. [_NOAH prepares to write, depositing the baking-tin on the table._

GEORGIANA. [_Speaks to GEORGIANA excitedly._

SIR TRISTRAM. [_To NOAH._] Have you got that? [_Writing laboriously with his legs curled round the chair and his
head on the table._] Ay. [_Dictating._] "Description!" I suppose he was jest the hordinary sort o' lookin' man. [_Turning from HANNAH, excitedly._] Description--a little, short, thin
man, with black hair and a squint! [_To GEORGIANA._] No, no, he isn't. I'm Gus's sister--I ought to know what he's like! Good heavens, Georgiana--your mind is not going? [_Clutching SIR TRISTRAM'S arm and whispering in his ear, as she
points to the cell door._] He's in there! Gus is the villain found dosing Dandy Dick last night! [_HANNAH seizes SIR TRISTRAM and talks to him
rapidly._] [_To NOAH._] What have you written? I've written "Hanswers to the name o' Gus!" [_Snatching the paper from him._] It's not wanted. I'm too busy to bother about him this week. Look here--you're the constable who took the man in the Deanery
Stables last night? [_Looking out of the window._] There's my cart outside ready to
take the scoundrel over to Durnstone. [_He tucks the baking-tin under his arm and goes up to the cell door._

GEORGIANA. [_To herself._] Oh, Gus, Gus! [_Unlocking the door._] I warn yer. [_NOAH goes into the cell, closing the door after him._

Tris! What was my brother's motive in bolusing Dandy last night? The first thing to do is to get him out of this hole. But we can't trust to Gus rolling out of a flying dogcart! Why, it's
as much as I could do! Oh, yes, lady, he'll do it. There's another--a awfuller charge hangin' over his
reverend 'ead. To think my own stock should run vicious like this. [_NOAH comes out of the cell with THE DEAN, who is in handcuffs._

GEORGIANA _and_ SIR TRISTRAM. [_Raising his eyes, sees SIR TRISTRAM and GEORGIANA, and recoils with
a groan, sinking on to a chair._] Oh! I am the owner of the horse stabled at the Deanery. I
make no charge against this wretched person. [_To THE DEAN._] Oh man,
man! I was discovered administering to a suffering beast a simple remedy
for chills. The analysis hasn't come home from the chemist's yet. [_To NOAH._] Release this man. He was found trespassin' in the stables of the la-ate
De-an, who has committed sooicide. I----

SIR TRISTRAM, GEORGIANA _and_ HANNAH. The Diseased De-an is the honly man wot can withdraw one charge----

THE DEAN. SIR TRISTRAM, GEORGIANA _and_ HANNAH. And I'm the honly man wot can withdraw the other. I charge this person unknown with allynating the affections o' my wife
while I was puttin' my 'orse to. And I'm goin' to drive him over to
Durnstone with the hevidence. Oh lady, lady, it's appearances what is against us. [_Through the opening of the door._] Woa! [_Whispering to THE DEAN._] I am disappointed in you, Angustin. Have
you got this wretched woman's whistle? [_Softly to THE DEAN._] Oh Jedd, Jedd--and these are what you call
Principles! [_Appearing in the doorway._] Time's oop. May I say a few parting words in the home I have apparently wrecked? In setting out upon a journey, the termination of which is
problematical, I desire to attest that this erring constable is the
husband of a wife from whom it is impossible to withhold respect, if
not admiration. As for my wretched self, the confession of my weaknesses must be
reserved for another time--another place. [_To GEORGIANA._] To you,
whose privilege it is to shelter in the sanctity of the Deanery, I
give this earnest admonition. Within an hour from this terrible
moment, let the fire be lighted in the drawing-room--let the missing
man's warm bath be waiting for its master--a change of linen prepared. [_NOAH takes him by the arm and leads him out._

GEORGIANA. Oh, what am I to think of my brother? [_Kneeling at GEORGIANA'S feet._] Think! That he's the beautifullest,
sweetest man in all Durnshire! It's I and my whistle and Nick the fire-brigade horse what'll bring
him back to the Deanery safe and unharmed. Not a soul but we three'll
ever know of his misfortune. [_Outside._] Get up, now! [_Rushing to the door and looking out._] He's done
for! GEORGIANA _and_ SIR TRISTRAM. Noah's put Kitty in the cart, and
left Old Nick at home! _The second scene is the Morning Room at the Deanery again._

_SALOME and SHEBA are sitting there gloomily._

SALOME. In the meantime it is such a comfort to feel that we have no
cause for self-reproach. [_Clinging to SALOME._] If I should pine and ultimately die of this
suspense I want you to have my workbox. [_Shaking her head and sadly turning away._] Thank you, dear, but if
Papa is not home for afternoon tea you will outlive me. [_Turning towards the window as MAJOR TARVER and MR. DARBEY appear
outside._

DARBEY. [_SALOME unfastens the window._

DARBEY. Don't be shocked when you see Tarver. _TARVER and DARBEY enter, dressed for the Races, but DARBEY is
supporting TARVER, who looks extremely weakly._

TARVER. You do well, gentlemen, to intrude upon two feeble women at a moment
of sorrow. One step further, and I shall ask Major Tarver, who is nearest the
bell, to ring for help. [_TARVER sinks into a chair._

DARBEY. [_Standing by the side of TARVER._] There now. Miss Jedd,
that Tarver is in an exceedingly critical condition. Feeling that he
has incurred your displeasure he has failed even in the struggle to
gain the race-course. Middleton and I
explained that Major Tarver loved with a passion [_looking at SHEBA_]
second only to my own. [_Sitting comfortably on the settee._] Oh, we cannot listen to you,
Mr. [_The two girls exchange looks._

DARBEY. The Doctor made a searching examination of the Major's tongue and
diagnosed that, unless the Major at once proposed to the lady in
question and was accepted, three weeks or a month at the seaside would
be absolutely imperative. We are curious to see to what lengths you will go. The pitiable condition of my poor friend speaks for itself. I beg your pardon--it does nothing of the kind. [_Rising with difficulty and approaching SALOME._] Salome--I have
loved you distractedly for upwards of eight weeks. [_Going to him._] Oh, Major Tarver, let me pass; [_holding his coat
firmly_] let me pass, I say. [_DARBEY follows SHEBA across the room._

TARVER. To a man in my condition love is either a rapid and fatal malady, or
it is an admirable digestive. Accept me, and my merry laugh once more
rings through the Mess Room. Reject me, and my collection of vocal
music, loose and in volumes, will be brought to the hammer, and the
bird, as it were, will trill no more. And is it really I who would hush the little throaty songster? [_Taking a sheet of paper from his pocket._] I have the
Doctor's certificate to that effect. [_Both reading the certificate they walk into Library._

SHEBA. Darbey, I have never thought of marriage seriously. People never do till they _are_ married. Pardon me, Sheba--but what is your age? Oh, it is so very little--it is not worth mentioning. Well, of course--if you insist----

SHEBA. No, no, I see that is impracticable. All I ask
is time--time to ponder over such a question, time to know myself
better. [_They separate as TARVER and SALOME re-enter the room. TARVER is
glaring excitedly and biting his nails._

TARVER. I never thought I should live to be accepted by anyone. DARBEY _and_ TARVER. Oh, what do you think of it, Mr. Shocking, but we oughtn't to condemn him unheard. [_At the window._] Here's Aunt Georgiana! [_Going out quickly._

SALOME. [_Pulling TARVER after her._] Come this way and let us take cuttings
in the conservatory. [_They go out._

SHEBA. Darbey, wait for me--I have decided. _Yes._

[_She goes out by the door as GEORGIANA enters excitedly at the
window._

GEORGIANA. [_Waving her handkerchief._] Come on, Tris! _SIR TRISTRAM and HATCHAM enter by the window carrying THE DEAN. They
all look as though they have been recently engaged in a prolonged
struggle._

SIR TRISTRAM. That I will, ma'am, and gladly. [_They deposit THE DEAN in a chair and GEORGIANA and SIR TRISTRAM each
seize a hand, feeling THE DEAN'S pulse, while HATCHAM puts his hand on
THE DEAN'S heart._

THE DEAN. [_Opening his eyes._] Where am I now? SIR TRISTRAM _and_ HATCHAM

[_Quietly._] Hurrah! [_To HATCHAM._] We can't shout here; go and cheer
as loudly as you can in the roadway by yourself. [_HATCHAM runs out at the window._

THE DEAN. [_Gradually recovering._] Georgiana--Mardon. How are you, Jedd, old boy? I feel as if I had been walked over carefully by a large concourse of
the lower orders! [_HATCHAM'S voice is heard in the distance cheering. They all listen._

SIR TRISTRAM. That's Hatcham; I'll raise his wages. Do I understand that I have been forcibly and illegally rescued? A woman who would have been a heroine in any age--Georgiana! Georgiana, I am bound to overlook it, in a relative, but never let
this occur again. You found out that that other woman's plan went lame, didn't you? I discovered its inefficacy, after a prolonged period of ineffectual
whistling. But we ascertained the road the genial constable was going to follow. He was bound for the edge of the hill, up Pear Tree Lane, to watch the
Races. Directly we knew this, Tris and I made for the Hill. Bless your
soul, there were hundreds of my old friends there--welshers,
pick-pockets, card-sharpers, all the lowest race-course cads in the
kingdom. In a minute I was in the middle of 'em, as much at home as a
Duchess in a Drawing-room. Instantly
there was a cry of "Blessed if it ain't George Tidd!" Tears of real
joy sprang to my eyes--while I was wiping them away Tris had his
pockets emptied and I lost my watch. Ah, Jedd, it was a glorious moment! Tris made a back, and I stood on it, supported by a correct-card
merchant on either side. "Dear friends," I said; "Brothers! You should have heard the shouts of honest welcome. Before I could obtain silence my field glasses had gone on their long
journey. "A very dear relative of mine has
been collared for playing the three-card trick on his way down from
town." "He'll be on the brow of the
Hill with a bobby in half-an-hour," said I, "who's for the rescue?" A
dead deep silence followed, broken only by the sweet voice of a young
child, saying, "What'll we get for it?" "A pound a-piece," said I.
There was a roar of assent, and my concluding words, "and possibly six
months," were never heard. At that moment Tris' back could stand it no
longer, and we came heavily to the ground together. [_Seizing THE DEAN
by the hand and dragging him up._] Now you know whose hands have led
you back to your own manger. [_Embracing him._] And oh, brother,
confess--isn't there something good and noble in true English sport
after all? But whence
is the money to come to reward these dreadful persons? I cannot
reasonably ask my girls to organize a bazaar or concert. Well, I've cleared fifteen hundred over the Handicap. Then the horse who enjoyed the shelter of the
Deanery last night----

SIR TRISTRAM. All the rest nowhere, and Bonny Betsy walked in
with the policeman. [_To himself._] Five hundred pounds towards the Spire! Oh, where is Blore with the good news! Sir Tristram, I am under the impression that your horse swallowed
reluctantly a small portion of that bolus last night before I was
surprised and removed. By the bye, I am expecting the analysis of that concoction every
minute. Spare yourself the trouble--the secret is with me. I seek no
acknowledgment from either of you, but in your moment of deplorable
triumph remember with gratitude the little volume of "The Horse and
its Ailments" and the prosaic name of its humane author--John Cox. [_He goes out through the Library._

GEORGIANA. But oh, Tris Mardon, what can I ever say to you? Why, you were the man who hauled Augustin out of the
cart by his legs! And when his cap fell off, it was you--brave
fellow that you are--who pulled the horse's nose-bag over my brother's
head so that he shouldn't be recognized. My dear Georgiana, these are the common courtesies of every-day life. They are acts which any true woman would esteem. Gus won't readily
forget the critical moment when all the cut chaff ran down the back of
his neck--nor shall I.

SIR TRISTRAM. Nor shall I forget the way in which you gave Dandy his whisky out of a
soda water bottle just before the race. That's nothing--any lady would do the same. You looked like the Florence Nightingale of the paddock! Oh,
Georgiana, why, why, why won't you marry me? Because you've only just asked me, Tris! [_Goes to him cordially._

SIR TRISTRAM. But when I touched your hand last night, you reared! Yes, Tris, old man, but love is founded on mutual esteem; last night
you hadn't put my brother's head in that nose-bag. [_They go together to the fireplace, he with his arm round her waist._

SHEBA. [_Looking in at the door._] How annoying! There's Aunt and Sir
Tristram in this room--Salome and Major Tarver are sitting on the hot
pipes in the conservatory--where am I and Mr. [_She withdraws quickly as THE DEAN enters through the Library
carrying a paper in his hand; he has now resumed his normal
appearance._

THE DEAN. Home, with the secret of my
sad misfortune buried in the bosoms of a faithful few. Home, with the sceptre of my dignity still
tight in my grasp! What is this I have picked up on the stairs? [_Reads with a horrified look, as HATCHAM enters at the window._

HATCHAM. The chemist has just brought the annal_i_sis. [_SIR TRISTRAM and GEORGIANA go out at the window, following HATCHAM._

THE DEAN. [_Reading._] "Debtor to Lewis Isaacs, Costumier to
the Queen, Bow Street--Total, Forty pounds, nineteen!" There was a
fancy masked ball at Durnstone last night! Salome--Sheba--no, no! [_Bounding in and rushing at THE DEAN._] Papa, Papa! [_SALOME seizes his hands, SHEBA his coat-tails, and turn him round
violently._

SALOME. Papa, why have you tortured us with anxiety? Before I answer a question, which, from a child to its parent,
partakes of the unpardonable vice of curiosity, I demand an
explanation of this disreputable document. [_Reading._] "Debtor to
Lewis Isaacs, Costumier to the Queen." [_SHEBA sits aghast on the table--SALOME distractedly falls on the
floor._

THE DEAN. I will not follow this legend in all its revolting intricacies. Suffice it, its moral is inculcated by the mournful total. [_Looking from one to the other._]
There was a ball at Durnstone last night. I trust I was better--that is, otherwise employed. [_Referring
to the bill._] Which of my hitherto trusted daughters was a lady--no,
I will say a person--of the period of the French Revolution? [_SHEBA points to SALOME._

THE DEAN. And a flower-girl of an unknown epoch. [_SALOME points to SHEBA._] To
your respective rooms! [_The girls cling together._] Let your blinds
be drawn. At seven porridge will be brought to you. Papa, we, poor girls as we are, can pay the bill. Through the kindness of our Aunt----

SALOME. [_Recoiling._] You too! Is there no
conscience that is clear--is there no guilessness left in this house,
with the possible exception of my own! [_Sobbing._] We always knew a little more than you gave us credit for,
Papa. [_Handing SHEBA the bill._] Take this horrid thing--never let it meet
my eyes again. As for the scandalous costumes, they shall be raffled
for in aid of local charities. Confidence, that precious pearl in the
snug shell of domesticity, is at an end between us. I chastise you
both by permanently withholding from you the reason of my absence from
home last night. [_The girls totter out as SIR TRISTRAM enters quickly at the window,
followed by GEORGIANA, carrying the basin containing the bolus. SIR
TRISTRAM has an opened letter in his hand._

SIR TRISTRAM. GEORGIANA _and_ SIR TRISTRAM. [_To GEORGIANA._] How dare you confront me without even the semblance
of a blush--you who have enabled my innocent babies, for the first
time in their lives, to discharge one of their own accounts. There isn't a blush in our family--if there were, you'd want it. [_SHEBA and SALOME appear outside the window, looking in._

SIR TRISTRAM. Jedd, you were once my friend, and you are to be my relative. [_Looking at GEORGIANA._] My sister! [_To SIR TRISTRAM._] I offer no
opposition. But not even our approaching family tie prevents my designating you as
one of the most atrocious conspirators known in the history of the
Turf. As the owner of one-half of Dandy Dick, I denounce you! As the owner of the other half, _I_ denounce you! _SHEBA and SALOME enter, and remain standing in the recess,
listening._

SIR TRISTRAM. The chief ingredient of your infernal preparation is known. It contains nothing that I would not cheerfully administer to my own
children. [_Pointing to the paper._] Strychnine! [_Clinging to each other terrified._] Oh! Summon my devoted servant Blore, in whose presence the
innocuous mixture was compounded. [_GEORGIANA rings the bell. The
girls hide behind the window curtains._] This analysis is simply the
pardonable result of over-enthusiasm on the part of our local chemist. You're a disgrace to the pretty little police station where you slept
last night! [_BLORE enters and stands unnoticed._

THE DEAN. I will prove that in the Deanery Stables the common laws of
hospitality have never been transgressed. [_GEORGIANA hands THE DEAN the basin from the table._] A simple remedy
for a chill. GEORGIANA _and_ SIR TRISTRAM. I, myself, am suffering from the exposure of last night. [_Taking the
remaining bolus and opening his mouth._] Observe me! [_Rushing forward, snatching the basin from THE DEAN and sinking on to
his knees._] No, no! You wouldn't 'ang the holdest
servant in the Deanery. I 'ad a honest fancy for Bonny Betsy, and I wanted this
gentleman's 'orse out of the way. And while you was mixing the dose
with the best ecclesiastical intentions, I hintroduced a foreign
element. [_Pulling BLORE up by his coat collar._] Viper! Oh sir, it was hall for the sake of the Dean. The dear Dean had only Fifty Pounds to spare for sporting purposes,
and I thought a gentleman of 'is 'igh standing ought to have a
certainty. I can conceal it no longer--I--I instructed this unworthy creature to
back Dandy Dick on behalf of the Restoration Fund. [_Shaking BLORE._] And didn't you do it? In the name of that tottering Spire, why not? Oh, sir, thinking as you'd given some of the mixture to Dandy I put
your cheerful little offering on to Bonny Betsy. [_SALOME and SHEBA disappear._

THE DEAN. [_To BLORE._] I could have pardoned everything but this last act
of disobedience. If I leave the Deanery, I shall give my reasons, and then what'll
folks think of you and me in our old age? Not if sober, sir--but suppose grief drove me to my cups? I must save you from intemperance at any cost. Remain in my service--a
sad, sober and, above all, a silent man! [_SALOME and SHEBA appear as BLORE goes out through the window._

SALOME. Darbey!----

THE DEAN. If you have sufficiently merged all sense of moral rectitude as to
declare that I am not at home, do so. Papa; we have accidentally discovered that you, our parent,
have stooped to deception, if not to crime. [_Staggering back._] Oh! We are still young--the sooner, therefore, we are removed from any
unfortunate influence the better. We have an opportunity of beginning life afresh. These two gallant gentlemen have proposed for us. [_He goes out rapidly, followed by SALOME and SHEBA. Directly they
have disappeared, NOAH TOPPING, looking dishevelled, rushes in at the
window, with HANNAH clinging to him._

NOAH. [_Glaring round the room._] Is this 'ere the Deanery? [_GEORGIANA and SIR TRISTRAM come to him._

HANNAH. Theer's been a man rescued from my lawful custody while my face was
unofficially held downwards in the mud. The villain has been traced
back to the Deanery. The man was a unknown lover of my nooly made wife! You mustn't bring your domestic affairs here; this is a subject for
your own fireside of an evening. [_THE DEAN appears outside the window with SALOME, SHEBA, TARVER and
DARBEY._

THE DEAN. [_Outside._] Come in, Major Tarver--come in, Mr. _THE DEAN enters, followed by SALOME, TARVER, SHEBA and DARBEY._

NOAH. [_Confronting THE DEAN._] My man. I'm speaking to the man I took last night--the culprit as 'as
allynated the affections of my wife. [_Going out at the window._

[_SALOME and TARVER go into the Library and sit at the writing-table. DARBEY sits in an arm-chair with SHEBA on the arm._

THE DEAN. [_Mildly._] Do not let us chide a man who is conscientious even in
error. [_Looking at HANNAH._] I think I see Hannah Evans, once an
excellent cook under this very roof. Topping now, sir--bride o' the constable. And oh, do forgive
him--he's a mass o' ignorance. [_HANNAH returns to NOAH. as SIR TRISTRAM re-enters with HATCHAM._

SIR TRISTRAM. [_To HATCHAM._] Hatcham--[_pointing to THE DEAN_]--Is that the man you
and the Constable secured in the stable last night? Bless your 'art, sir, that's the Dean 'imself. [_To NOAH._] Why, our man was a short, thin individual! [_HATCHAM goes out at the window._

THE DEAN. [_To NOAH._] I trust you are perfectly satisfied. [_Wiping his brow and looking puzzled._] I'm doon. I withdraw unreservedly any charge against this
unknown person found on my premises last night. I attribute to him the
most innocent intentions. Hannah, you and your worthy husband will
stay and dine in my kitchen. [_Turning angrily to HANNAH._] Now then, you don't know a real
gentleman when you see one. Why don't 'ee thank the Dean warmly? [_Kissing THE DEAN'S hands with a curtsey._] Thank you, sir. [_Benignly._] Go--go. [_They back out, bowing and curtseying._

GEORGIANA. Well, Gus, you're out of all your troubles. My family influence gone forever--my dignity crushed out of all
recognition--the genial summer of the Deanery frosted by the winter of
Deceit. Ah, Gus, when once you lay the whip about the withers of the horse
called Deception he takes the bit between his teeth, and only the
devil can stop him--and he'd rather not. Shall I tell you who has been
riding the horse hardest? [_SHEBA sits at the piano and plays a bright air softly--DARBEY
standing behind her--SALOME and TARVER stand in the archway._

GEORGIANA. [_Slapping THE DEAN on the back._] Look here, Augustin, George Tidd
will lend you that thousand for the poor, innocent old Spire. [_Taking her hand._] Oh, Georgiana! On one condition--that you'll admit there's no harm in our laughing at
a Sporting Dean. My brother Gus doesn't want us to be merry at his expense. [_They both laugh._

THE DEAN. [_Trying to silence them._] No, no! Why, Jedd, there's no harm in laughter, for those who laugh or those
who are laughed at. Provided always--firstly, that it is Folly that is laughed at and not
Virtue; secondly, that it is our friends who laugh at us, [_to the
audience_] as we hope they all will, for our pains. THE END



_Transcriber's Note_

This transcription is based on the scan images posted by The Internet
Archive at:

http://archive.org/details/dandydickplayint00pinerich

In addition, when there was a question about the printed text, another
edition posted by The Internet Archive was consulted:

http://archive.org/details/dandydickplayint00pineiala

The following changes were made to the text:

-  Throughout the text, dashes at the end of lines have been
normalized. -  Throughout the text, "and" in the character titles preceding
dialogue has been italicized consistently and names in stage
directions have been consistently either capitalized (in the text
version) or set in small caps (in the html version). -  In the Introductory Note, "St. Marvells" has an apostrophe, whereas
in the text of the play it almost always does not. The inconsistency
has been allowed to stand in the Introductory Note, but the apostrophe
has been removed in the few instances in the text. 25: "_THE DEAN gives DARBEY a severe look..._"--A bracket has
been added to the beginning of this line. --The second "No" has been changed to lower
case. 139: "Oh, what do you think of it. --The period
after "it" has been changed to a comma. 141: "We can't shout here, go and cheer..."--The comma has been
changed to a semicolon. 142: "That's Hatcham, I'll raise his wages." --The comma has
been changed to a semicolon. 143: "'aint" has been changed to "ain't". 147: "...mutual esteem, last night..."--The comma has been
changed to a semicolon. The html version of this etext attempts to reproduce the layout of the
printed text. However, some concessions have been made, particularly
in the handling of stage directions enclosed by brackets on at least
one side. In general, the
stage directions were typeset in the printed text as follows:

-  Before and within dialogue. -  Flush right, on the same line as the end of dialogue if there was
enough space; on the next line, if there was not. -  If the stage directions were two lines, they were indented from the
left margin as hanging paragraphs. How much the stage directions were
indented varied. In the etext, all stage directions not before or within dialogue are
placed on the next line, indented the same amount from the left
margin, and coded as hanging paragraphs. They
had done their part--would the thieves do theirs? Adhering strictly to the instructions, Croyden and Macloud left
Annapolis on the next car, caught the boat at Baltimore, and arrived in
Hampton in the evening, in time for dinner. They stopped a few minutes
at Ashburton, to acquaint Captain Carrington with their return, and
then went on to Clarendon. Neither wanted the other to know and each
endeavored to appear at ease. He threw his cigarette into his coffee cup, and
pushed his chair back from the table. "You're trying to appear nonchalant,
and you're doing it very well, too, but you can't control your fingers
and your eyes--and neither can I, I fancy, though I've tried hard
enough, God knows! These four days of strain and
uncertainty have taken it all out of us. If I had any doubt as to my
affection for Elaine, it's vanished, now.----I don't say I'm fool
enough to propose to her, yet I'm scarcely responsible, at present. If
I were to see her this minute, I'd likely do something rash." "You're coming around to it, gradually," said Macloud. I don't know about the 'gradually.' I want to pull
myself together--to get a rein on myself--to--what are you smiling at;
am I funny?" "I never saw a man fight so hard against his
personal inclinations, and a rich wife. You don't deserve her!--if I
were Elaine, I'd turn you down hard, hard." "And hence, with a woman's unreasonableness and trust in the one she
loves, she will likely accept you." Macloud blew a couple of smoke rings and watched them sail upward. "I suppose you're equally discerning as to Miss Carrington, and her
love for you," Croyden commented. "I regret to say, I'm not," said Macloud, seriously. "That is what
troubles me, indeed. Unlike my friend, Geoffrey Croyden, I'm perfectly
sure of my own mind, but I'm not sure of the lady's." "Then, why don't you find out?" "Exactly what I shall do, when she returns." We each seem to be able to answer the other's uncertainty," he
remarked, calmly. "I'm going over to Ashburton, and talk with the Captain a little--sort
of cheer him up. "It's a very good occupation for you, sitting up to
the old gent. I'll give you a chance by staying away, to-night. Make a
hit with grandpa, Colin, make a hit with grandpa!" "And you make a hit with yourself--get rid of your foolish theory, and
come down to simple facts," Macloud retorted, and he went out. "Get rid of your foolish theory," Croyden soliloquized. "Well,
maybe--but _is_ it foolish, that's the question? I'm poor, once
more--I've not enough even for Elaine Cavendish's husband--there's the
rub! she won't be Geoffrey Croyden's wife, it's I who will be Elaine
Cavendish's husband. 'Elaine Cavendish _and her husband_ dine with us
to-night!' --'Elaine Cavendish _and her husband_ were at the horse
show!' 'Elaine Cavendish _and her husband_ were here!--or there!--or
thus and so!'" It would be too belittling, too disparaging of
self-respect.--Elaine Cavendish's husband!--Elaine Cavendish's
husband! Might he out-grow it--be known for himself? He glanced up at
the portrait of the gallant soldier of a lost cause, with the high-bred
face and noble bearing. "You were a brave man, Colonel Duval!" He took out a cigar, lit it very deliberately, and fell to thinking....
Presently, worn out by fatigue and anxiety, he dozed....

                  *       *       *       *       *

And as he dozed, the street door opened softly, a light step crossed
the hall, and Elaine Cavendish stood in the doorway. She was clad in black velvet, trimmed in sable. A
blue cloak was thrown, with careless grace, about her gleaming
shoulders. One slender hand lifted the gown from before her feet. She
saw the sleeping man and paused, and a smile of infinite tenderness
passed across her face. A moment she hesitated, and at the thought, a faint blush suffused her
face. Then she glided softly over, bent and kissed him on the lips. She was there, before him,
the blush still on cheek and brow. And, straightway took her, unresisting,
in his arms....

"Tell me all about yourself," he said, at last, drawing her down into
the chair and seating himself on the arm. "Where is Miss
Carrington--safe?" "Colin's with her--I reckon she's safe!" "It won't be
his fault if she isn't, I'm sure.--I left them at Ashburton, and came
over here to--you." "I'll go back at once----"

He laughed, joyously. "My hair,
dear,--do be careful!" "I'll be good--if you will kiss me again!" "But you're not asleep," she objected. "And you will promise--not to kiss me again?" She looked up at him tantalizingly, her red lips parted, her bosom
fluttering below. "If it's worth coming half way for, sweetheart--you may," she said....

"Now, if you're done with foolishness--for a little while," she said,
gayly, "I'll tell you how we managed to get free." "Oh, yes!--the Parmenter jewels. Davila told me the story, and how you
didn't find them, though our abductors think you did, and won't believe
otherwise." "None--we were most courteously treated; and they released us, as
quickly as the check was paid." "I mean, that I gave them my check for the ransom money--you hadn't the
jewels, you couldn't comply with the demand. I knew you couldn't pay it, so I did. Don't let us think of
it, dear!--It's over, and we have each other, now. Then suddenly she, woman-like, went straight back to
it. "How did you think we managed to get free--escaped?" "Yes--I never thought of your paying the money." she said, "you are deceiving me!--you are--_you_ paid the money,
also!" Macloud and I _did_ pay the ransom to-day--but of what consequence is
it; whether you bought your freedom, or we bought it, or both bought
it? You and Davila are here, again--that's the only thing that
matters!" came Macloud's voice from the
hallway, and Davila and he walked into the room. Elaine, with a little shriek, sprang up. "Davila and I were occupying similar
positions at Ashburton, a short time ago. as
he made a motion to put his arm around her. Davila eluded him--though the traitor red confirmed his words--and
sought Elaine's side for safety. "It's a pleasure only deferred, my dear!" "By the way,
Elaine, how did Croyden happen to give in? He was shying off at your
wealth--said it would be giving hostages to fortune, and all that
rot." "I'm going to try to make
good." "Geoffrey," said Elaine, "won't you show us the old pirate's
letter--we're all interested in it, now." "I'll show you the letter, and where I
found it, and anything else you want to see. Croyden opened the secret drawer, and
took out the letter. he said, solemnly, and handed it to Elaine. She carried it to the table, spread it out under the lamp, and Davila
and she studied it, carefully, even as Croyden and Macloud had
done--reading the Duval endorsements over and over again. "It seems to me there is something queer about these postscripts," she
said, at last; "something is needed to make them clear. Is this the
entire letter?--didn't you find anything else?" "It's a bit dark in this hole. She struck it, and peered back into the recess. "Here is something!--only a corner visible." "It has slipped down, back of the false partition. She drew out a tiny sheet of paper, and handed it to Croyden. Croyden glanced at it; then gave a cry of amazed surprise. The rest crowded around him while he read:

                                         "Hampton, Maryland. "Memorandum to accompany the letter of Robert Parmenter, dated 10
  May 1738. "Whereas, it is stipulated by the said Parmenter that the Jewels
  shall be used only in the Extremity of Need; and hence, as I have
  an abundance of this world's Goods, that Need will, likely, not
  come to me. And judging that Greenberry Point will change, in
  time--so that my son or his Descendants, if occasion arise, may
  be unable to locate the Treasure--I have lifted the Iron box,
  from the place where Parmenter buried it, and have reinterred it
  in the cellar of my House in Hampton, renewing the Injunction
  which Parmenter put upon it, that it shall be used only in the
  Extremity of Need. When this Need arise, it will be found in the
  south-east corner of the front cellar. At the depth of two feet,
  between two large stones, is the Iron box. It contains the
  jewels, the most marvelous I have ever seen. For a moment, they stood staring at one another too astonished to
speak. "To think that it was here, all
the time!" They trooped down to the cellar, Croyden leading the way. Moses was off
for the evening, they had the house to themselves. As they passed the
foot of the stairs, Macloud picked up a mattock. "Which is the south-east corner,
Davila?" "The ground is not especially hard," observed Macloud, with the first
stroke. "I reckon a yard square is sufficient.--At a depth of two feet
the memorandum says, doesn't it?" Fascinated, they were watching the fall of the pick. With every blow, they were listening for it to strike the stones. "Better get a shovel, Croyden, we'll need it," said Macloud, pausing
long enough, to throw off his coat.... "Oh! I forgot to say, I wired
the Pinkerton man to recover the package you buried this morning." Croyden only nodded--stood the lamp on a box, and returned with the
coal scoop. "This will answer, I reckon," he said, and fell to work. "To have hunted
the treasure, for weeks, all over Greenberry Point, and then to find it
in the cellar, like a can of lard or a bushel of potatoes." "You haven't found it, yet," Croyden cautioned. "And we've gone the
depth mentioned." we haven't found it, yet!--but we're going to find it!" Macloud
answered, sinking the pick, viciously, in the ground, with the last
word. Macloud cried, sinking the pick in at another
place. The fifth stroke laid the stone
bare--the sixth and seventh loosened it, still more--the eighth and
ninth completed the task. When the earth was away and the stone exposed, he stooped and, putting
his fingers under the edges, heaved it out. "The rest is for you, Croyden!" For a moment, Croyden looked at it, rather dazedly. Could it be the
jewels were _there_!--within his reach!--under that lid! Suddenly, he
laughed!--gladly, gleefully, as a boy--and sprang down into the hole. The box clung to its resting place for a second, as though it was
reluctant to be disturbed--then it yielded, and Croyden swung it onto
the bank. "We'll take it to the library," he said, scraping it clean of the
adhering earth. And carrying it before them, like the Ark of the Covenant, they went
joyously up to the floor above. He placed it on the table under the chandelier, where all could see. It
was of iron, rusty with age; in dimension, about a foot square; and
fastened by a hasp, with the bar of the lock thrust through but not
secured. "Light the gas, Colin!--every burner," he said. "We'll have the full
effulgence, if you please."... The scintillations which leaped out to meet them, were like the rays
from myriads of gleaming, glistening, varicolored lights, of dazzling
brightness and infinite depth. A wonderful cavern of coruscating
splendor--rubies and diamonds, emeralds and sapphires, pearls and opals
glowing with all the fire of self, and the resentment of long neglect. "You may touch them--they will not
fade." They put them out on the table--in little heaps of color. The women
exclaiming whene'er they touched them, cooingly as a woman does when
handling jewels--fondling them, caressing them, loving them. They stood back and gazed--fascinated by it
all:--the color--the glowing reds and whites, and greens and blues. "It is wonderful--and it's true!" Two necklaces lay among the rubies, alike as lapidary's art could make
them. Croyden handed one to Macloud, the other he took. "In remembrance of your release, and of Parmenter's treasure!" he said,
and clasped it around Elaine's fair neck. Macloud clasped his around Davila's. "Who cares, now, for the time spent on Greenberry Point or the double
reward!" *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's note:

Minor changes have been made to correct typesetters' errors;
otherwise, every effort has been made to remain true to the
author's words and intent. Hence the word figuratively means, as in the present instance,
'sort,' or 'quality.' Our word 'brand' has a similar meaning. The finer
kinds of wine were drawn off from the 'dolia,' or large vessels, in
which they were kept into the 'amphor,' which were made of earthenware
or glass, and the mouth of the vessel was stopped tight by a plug of
wood or cork, which was made impervious to the atmosphere by being
rubbed over with pitch, clay, or a composition of gypsum. On the
outside, the title of the wine was painted, the date of the vintage
being denoted by the names of the Consuls then in office: and when the
vessels were of glass, small tickets, called 'pittacia,' were suspended
from them, stating to a similar effect. For a full account of
the ancient wines, see Dr. Smith's Dictionary of Greek and Roman
Antiquities.] [Footnote 353: The imitative bird.--Ver. Statius, in his Second
Book, calls the parrot 'Human sollers imitator lingu,' 'the clever
imitator of the human voice.'] [Footnote 354: The long trumpet.--Ver. We learn from Aulus Gellius,
that the trumpeters at funerals were called'siticines.' They headed
the funeral procession, playing mournful strains on the long trumpet,
'tuba,' here mentioned. These were probably in addition to the
'tibicines,' or 'pipers,' whose number was limited to ten by Appius
Claudius, the Censor. See the Sixth Book of the Fasti, 1. [Footnote 360: Affectionate turtle-dove.--Ver. This turtle-dove and
the parrot had been brought up in the same cage together. He probably
refers to these birds in the thirty-eighth line of the Epistle of Sappho
to Phaon where he mentions the turtle-dove as being black. This Elegy is
remarkable for its simplicity and pathetic beauty, and can hardly fail
to remind the reader of Cowper's Elegies, on the death of the bullfinch,
and that of his pet hare.] [Footnote 361: The Phocian youth.--Ver. He alludes to the
friendship of Orestes and Pylades the Phocian, the son of Strophius.] [Footnote 362: So prettily.--Ver. 'Bene' means here, 'prettily,' or
'cleverly,' rather than 'distinctly,' which would be inconsistent with
the signification of blsus.] [Footnote 363: All their battles --Ver. Aristotle, in the Eighth
Chapter of the Ninth Book of his History of Animals, describes quails
or ortolans, and partridges, as being of quarrelsome habits, and much at
war among themselves.] [Footnote 364: The foreboder.--Ver. Festus Avienus, in his
Prognostics, mentions the jackdaw as foreboding rain by its chattering.] See the story of the Nymph
Coronis, in the Second Book of the Metamorphoses.] [Footnote 367: After nine ages.--Ver. Pliny makes the life of the
crow to last for a period of three hundred years.] [Footnote 368: Destined numbers.--Ver. 'Numeri' means here, the
similar. parts of one whole: 'the allotted portions of human life.'] [Footnote 369: Seventh day was come.--Ver. Hippocrates, in his
Aphorisms, mentions the seventh, fourteenth, and twentieth, as the
critical days in a malady. Ovid may here possibly allude to the seventh
day of fasting, which was supposed to terminate the existence of the
person so doing.] [Footnote 370: Corinna, farewell.--Ver. It may have said 'Corinna;'
but Ovid must excuse us if we decline to believe that it said 'vale,'
'farewell,' also; unless, indeed, it had been in the habit of saying so
before; this, perhaps, may have been the case, as it had probably often
heard the Poet say 'vale' to his mistress.] [Footnote 371: The Elysian hill.--Ver. He kindly imagines a place
for the souls of the birds that are blessed.] [Footnote 372: By his words.--Ver. His calling around him, in
human accents, the other birds in the Elysian fields, is ingeniously and
beautifully imagined.] [Footnote 377: This very tomb.--Ver. This and the following line
are considered by Heinsius to be spurious, and, indeed, the next line
hardly looks like the composition of Ovid.] [Footnote 378: Am I then.--Ver. 'Am
I always then to be made the subject of fresh charges?'] [Footnote 379: Long-eared ass.--Ver. Perhaps the only holiday that
the patient ass got throughout the year, was in the month of June,
when the festival of Vesta was celebrated, and to which Goddess he had
rendered an important service. See the Sixth Book of the Fasti, 1. [Footnote 380: Skilled at tiring.--Ver. She was the 'ornatrix,'
or 'tiring woman' of Corinna. As slaves very often received their names
from articles of dress, Cypassis was probably so called from the
garment called 'cypassis,' which was worn by women and men of effeminate
character, and extended downwards to the ancles.] [Footnote 387: With the whip.--Ver. From this we see that the whip
was applied to the female slaves, as well as the males.] [Footnote 388: Carpathian ocean..--Ver. See the Metamorphoses, Book
xi.] [Footnote 389: Swarthy Cypassis.--Ver. From this expression, she
was probably a native of Egypt or Syria.] [Footnote 390: With his spear.--Ver. He alludes to the cure of
Telephus by the aid of the spear of Achilles, which had previously
wounded him.] [Footnote 391: Cottages of thatch.--Ver. In the First Book of the
Fasti, 1.199, he speaks of the time when 'a little cottage received
Quiriuus, the begotten of Mars, and the sedge of the stream afforded him
a scanty couch.' The straw-thatched cottage of Romulus was preserved at
Rome for many centuries. 184, and the Note
to the passage.] [Footnote 392: Off to the fields.--Ver. The 'emeriti,' or veterans
of the Roman legions, who had served their full time, received a regular
discharge, which was called'missio,' together with a bounty, either in
money, or an allotment of land. Virgil was deprived of his property near
Mantua, by the officers of Augustus; and in his first Eclogue, under
the name of Tityrus, he relates how he obtained restitution of it on
applying to the Emperor.] [Footnote 393: Free from the race.--Ver. [Footnote 394: Wand of repose--Ver. For an account of the 'rudis,'
and the privilege it conferred, see the Tristia, Book, iv, El. [Footnote 395: Grcinus.--Ver. He addresses three of his Pontic
Epistles, namely, the Sixth of the First Book, the Sixth of the Second
Book, and the Ninth of the Fourth Book, to his friend Grcinus. In the
latter Epistle, he congratulates him upon his being Consul elect.] [Footnote 396: Without my arms.--Ver. 'Inermis,' may be rendered,
'off my guard.'] [Footnote 397: Like the skiff.--Ver. 'Pliaselos' is perhaps here
used as a general name for a boat or skiff; but the vessel which was
particularly so called, was long and narrow, and probably received its
name from its resemblance to a kidney-bean, which was called 'ptaselus.' The 'phaseli' were chiefly used by the Egyptians, and were of various
sizes, from that of a mere boat to a vessel suited for a long voyage. Appian mentions them as being a medium between ships of war and merchant
vessels. Being built for speed, they were more noted for their swiftness
than for their strength. 127, speaks of them as
being made of clay; but, of course, that can only refer to 'pha-seli' of
the smallest kind.] [Footnote 401: That are thin.--Ver 23. [Footnote 402: Arm his breast --Ver. He alludes to the 'lorica,' or
cuirass, which was worn by the soldiers.] [Footnote 403: Of his battles.--Ver. He probably was thinking at
this moment of the deaths of Cornelius Gallus, and T. Haterius, of the
Equcstriai order, whose singular end is mentioned by Valerius Maximus,
11. ix c. 8, and by Pliny the Elder, B. [Footnote 404: The meeting rocks.--Ver 3. See the 121st line of the
Epistle of Medea to Jason, and the Note to the passage.] [Footnote 405: Tinted pebbles.--Ver. The 'picti lapilli' are
probably camelians, which are found on the sea shore, and are of various
tints.] 'Mora,' 'delay,' is put here
for that which causes the delay. 'That is a pleasure which belongs to
the shore.'] [Footnote 407: In what Malea.--Ver. Propertius and Virgil also
couple Malea, the dangerous promontory on the South of Laconia, with the
Syrtes or quicksands of the Libyan coast.] [Footnote 409: Stars of the fruitful Leda.--Ver. Commentators are
divided upon the exact meaning of this line. Some think that it refers
to the Constellations of Castor and Pollux, which were considered to be
favourable to mariners; and which Horace mentions in the first line
of his Third Ode, B. i., 'Sic fratres Helenae, lucida sidera,' 'The
brothers of Helen, those brilliant stars.' Others think that it refers
to the luminous appearances which were seen to settle on the masts
of ships, and were called by the name of Castor and Pollux; they were
thought to be of good omen when both appeared, but unlucky when seen
singly.] [Footnote 410: In the couch.--Ver. 'Torus' most probably means, in
this place a sofa, on which the ladies would recline while reading.] [Footnote 411: Amusing books.--Ver. By using the diminutive
'libellus' here, he probably means some light work, such as a bit of
court scandal, of a love poem.] [Footnote 412: My Divinities.--Ver. 126,
and the Note to the passage.] [Footnote 413: As a table.--Ver. This denotes his impatience to
entertain her once again, and to hear the narrative of her adventures.] [Footnote 414: Though they be fictions.--Ver. He gives a sly hit
here at the tales of travellers.] [Footnote 415: Twice five years.--Ver. Or the 'lustrum' of the
Romans, see the Fasti, Book iii. 166, and the Tristia, Book iv. [Footnote 416: And the cause.--Ver. This passage is evidently
misunderstood in Nisard's translation, 'Je ne serai pas non plus la caus
d'une nouvelle guerre,' 'I will never more be the cause of a new war.'] [Footnote 417: A female again.--Ver. He alludes to the war in
Latium, between neas and Turnus, for the hand of Lavinia, the daughter
of Latinus and Amata. See the narrative in the Fourteenth book of the
Metamorphoses.] [Footnote 421: 'Twas the females--Ver. The rape of the Sabines, by
the contrivance of Romulus, is here alluded to. The narrative will
be found in the Third Book of the Fasti, 1. It has been
suggested, but apparently without any good grounds, that Tarpeia is here
alluded to.] [Footnote 422: Thou who dost.--Ver. Io was said to be worshipped
under the name of Isis.] [Footnote 423: Partonium.--Ver. This city was situate at the
Canopic mouth of the Nile, at the Western extremity of Egypt, adjoining
to Libya. According to Strabo, its former name was Ammonia. It
still preserves its ancient name in a great degree, as it is called
al-Baretoun.] [Footnote 424: Fields of Canopus.--Ver. Canopus was a city at one
of the mouths of the Nile, now called Aboukir. The epithet
'genialis,' seems to have been well deserved, as it was famous for its
voluptuousness. Strabo tells us that there was a temple there dedicated
to Serapis, to which multitudes resorted by the canal from Alexandria. He says that the canal was filled, night and day, with men and women
dancing and playing music on board the vessels, with the greatest
licentiousness. The place was situate on an island of the Nile, and
was about fifteen miles distant from Alexandria. Ovid gives a similar
description of Alexandria, in the Tristia, Book i. El. Memphis was a city situate on the
North of Egypt, on the banks of the Nile. It was said to have been built
by Osirit.] See the Metamorphoses, Book ix. [Footnote 428: By thy sistra. For an account of the mystic
'sistra' of Isis, see the Pontic Epistles, Book i. El. For an account of Anuhis, the Deity
with the dog's head, see the Metamorphoses, Book ix. See the Metamorphoses, Book ix. 692, and the Note to the passage.] [Footnote 431: The sluggish serpent.--Ver. Macrobius tells us, that
the Egyptians accompanied the statue of Serapis with that of an animal
with three heads, the middle one that of a lion, the one to the right,
of a dog, and that to the left, of a ravenous wolf; and that a serpent
was represented encircling it in its folds, with its head below the
right hand of the statue of the Deity. To this the Poet possibly
alludes, or else to the asp, which was common in the North of Egypt, and
perhaps, was looked upon as sacred. If so, it is probable that the word
'pigra,''sluggish,' refers to the drowsy effect produced by the sting
of the asp, which was generally mortal. This, indeed, seems the more
likely, from the fact of the asp being clearly referred to, in company
with these Deities, in the Ninth Book of the Metamorphoses, 1. 93; which
see, with the Note to the passage.] [Footnote 432: The horned Apis.--Ver. See the Ninth Book of the
Metamorphoses, 1. 691, and the Note to the passage.] Isis is here addressed, as
being supposed to be the same Deity as Diana Lucina, who was invoked by
pregnant and parturient women. Thus Isis appears to Telethusa, a Cretan
woman, in her pregnancy, in the Ninth Book of the Metamorphoses, 1. [Footnote 434: Thy appointed days.--Ver. Votaries who were
worshipping in the temples of the Deities sat there for a considerable
time, especially when they attended for the purpose of sacrifice. In
the First Book of the Pontic Epistles, Ep. 50, Ovid says, 'I have
beheld one who confessed that he had offended the Divinity of Isis,
clothed in linen, sitting before he altars of Isis.'] 'Queis' seems a preferable reading
to 'qua.'] [Footnote 436: The Galli.--Ver. Some suppose that Isis and Cybele
were the same Divinity, and that the Galli, or priests of Cybele,
attended the rites of their Goddess under the name of Isis. It seems
clear, from the present passage, that the priests of Cybele, who were
called Galli, did perform the rites of Isis, but there is abundant proof
that these were considered as distinct Deities. In imitation of the
Corybantes, the original priests of Cybele, they performed her rites
to the sound of pipes and tambourines, and ran to and fro in a frenzied
manner.] [Footnote 437: With thy laurels.--Ver. See the Note to the 692nd
line of the Ninth Book of the Metamorphoses. While celebrating the
search for the limbs of Osiris, the priests uttered lamentations,
accompanied with the sound of the'sistra'; but when they had found the
body, they wore wreaths of laurel, and uttered cries, signifying their
joy.] [Footnote 438: Ilithyia.--Ver. As to the Goddess Ilithyia, see the
Ninth Book of the Metamorphoses, 1. [Footnote 439: With their bucklers.--Ver. Armed with 'pelt,' or
bucklers, like the Amazons.] [Footnote 440: The sand must.--Ver. This figure is derived from the
gladiatorial fights of the amphitheatre, where the spot on which they
fought was strewed with sand, both for the purpose of giving a firm
footing to the gladiators, and of soaking up the blood that was shed.] [Footnote 441: Again throw stones.--Ver. He alludes to Deucalion
and Pyr-rha. See the First Book of the Metamorphoses.] [Footnote 442: Ilia had destroyed.--Ver. See
her story, related at the beginning of the Third Book of the Fasti.] [Footnote 443: Why pierce.--Ver. He alludes to the sharp
instruments which she had used for the purpose of procuring abortion:
a practice which Canace tells Macareus that her nurse had resorted to. See the Metamorphoses, Book
viii. [Footnote 445: Many a time.--Ver. He seems here to speak of this
practice as being frequently resorted to.] [Footnote 446: She deserved it.--Ver. From this, it would seem that
the practice was considered censurable; but, perhaps it was one of those
cases whose heinousness is never fully discovered till it has brought
about its own punishment.] [Footnote 447: O ring.--Ver. On the rings in use among the ancients,
see the note to the First Book of the Aruores, El. See also
the subject of the seventh Elegy of the First Book of the Tristia.] [Footnote 448: Carpathian old man.--Ver. For some account of
Proteus, who is here referred to, see the First Book of the Fasti, 1. [Footnote 449: Be able to seal--Ver. From this, it appears to have
been a signet ring.] [Footnote 450: Touch the lips.--Ver. See the Tristia, Book v., El. 1 5, and the Note to the passage.] [Footnote 459: In her desk.--Ver. 'Loculi' used in the plural,
as in the present instance, signified a receptacle with compartments,
similar, perhaps, to our writing desks; a small box, coffer, casket, or
cabinet of wood or ivory, for keeping money or jewels.] See the Note to the first line of the
First Elegy of this Book.] [Footnote 461: Pelignian land.--Ver. From Pliny the Elder, we learn
that the Peligni were divided into three tribes, the Corfinienses, the
Superequani, and the Sulmonenses.] [Footnote 462: Constellation.--Ver. He alludes to the heat attending
the Dog star, see the Fasti, Book iv., 1. 939, and the Note to the
passage.] [Footnote 463: The thin soil.--Ver. 'Rarus ager' means, a 'thin' or
'loose' soil, which was well suited for the cultivation of the grape.] [Footnote 464: That bears its berries.--Ver. In Nisard's
translation, the words 'bacciferam Pallada,' which mean the olive, are
rendered 'L'amande Caere Pallas,' 'the almond dear to Pallas.'] [Footnote 465: Lengthened tracks.--Ver. To the Delphin Editor this
seems a silly expression.] [Footnote 466: The stormy Alps.--Ver. See the Metamorphoses, Book
ii. [Footnote 467: The obedient stream.--Ver. This was a method of
irrigation in agriculture, much resorted to by the ancients.] [Footnote 468: Fierce Cilicians --Ver. The people of the interior
of Cilicia, in Asia Minor, were of rude and savage manners while those
on the coast had been engaged in piracy, until it had been effectually
suppressed by Pompey.] [Footnote 469: Britons painted green.--Ver. The Britons may be
called 'virides,' from their island being surrounded by the sea; or,
more probably, from the colour with which they were in the habit of
staining their bodies. Csar says, in the Fifth Book of the Gallic war,
'The Britons stain themselves with woad, 'vitrum,' or 'glastum,'
which produces a blue colour: and thus they become of a more dreadful
appearance in battle.' The conquest of Britain, by Csar, is alluded to
in the Fifteenth Book of the Metamorphoses, 1. [Footnote 471: Loves the vine.--Ver. The custom of training vines
by the side of the elm, has been alluded to in a previous Note. See also
the Metamorphoses, Book xiv. 663, and the Note to the passage.] [Footnote 472: As the nags.--Ver. The'manni' were used by the
Romans for much the same purpose as our coach-horses; and were probably
more noted for their fleetness than their strength; They were a small
breed, originally imported from Gaul, and the possession of them was
supposed to indicate the possession of considerable wealth. As the
'esseda' was a small vehicle, and probably of light structure, we must
not be surprised at Corinna being in the habit of driving for herself. The distance from Rome to Sulmo was about ninety miles: and the journey,
from his expressions in the fifty-first and fifty-second lines, must
have been over hill and dale.] [Footnote 473: Your little chaise.--Ver. For an account of the
'essedum,' or 'esseda,' see the Pontic Epistles, Book ii. 34,
and the Note to the passage.] [Footnote 474: King of Pkthia.--Ver. He alludes to the marriage of
Thetis, the sea Goddess, to Peleus, the king of Phthia, in Thessaly.] [Footnote 475: His anvil.--Ver. It is a somewhat curious fact,
that the anvils of the ancients exactly resembled in form and every
particular those used at the present day.] [Footnote 476: Becomingly united.--Ver. He says, that in the
Elegiac measure the Pentameter, or line of five feet, is not unhappily
matched with the Hexameter, or heroic line of six feet.] [Footnote 477: Disavowed by you.--Ver. 'Voids' seems more agreable
to the sense of the passage, than 'nobis.' 'to be denied by us;' as,
from the context, there was no fear of his declining her affection.] [Footnote 478: That she is Corinna.--Ver. This clearly proves that
Corinna was not a real name; it probably was not given by the Poet to
any one of his female acquaintances in particular.] [Footnote 479: Thy poem onwards.--Ver. Macer translated the Iliad of
Homer into Latin verse, and composed an additional poem, commencing
at the beginning of the Trojan war, and coming down to the wrath of
Achilles, with which Homer begins.] [Footnote 480: I, Macer.--Ver. milius Macer is often mentioned
by Ovid in his works. 10,1.41, he says,
'Macer, when stricken in years, many a time repeated to me his poem on
birds, and each serpent that is deadly, each herb that is curative.' The
Tenth Epistle of the Second Book of Pontic Epistles is also addressed to
him, in which Ovid alludes to his work on the Trojan war, and the time
when they visited Asia Minor and Sicily together. He speaks of him in
the Sixteenth Epistle of the Fourth Book, as being then dead. Macer was
a native of Verona, and was the intimate friend of Virgil, Ovid, and
Tibullus. Some suppose that the poet who wrote on natural history, was
not the same with him who wrote on the Trojan war; and, indeed, it does
not seem likely, that he who was an old man in the youth of Ovid, should
be the same person to whom he writes from Pontus, when about fifty-six
years of age. The bard of Ilium died in Asia.] [Footnote 481: Tragedy grew apace.--Ver. He alludes to his tragedy
of Medea, which no longer exists. Quintilian thus speaks of it: 'The
Medea of Ovid seems to me to prove how much he was capable of, if he had
only preferred to curb his genius, rather than indulge it.'] [Footnote 482: Sabinus return.--Ver. He represents his friend,
Sabinus, here in the character of a 'tabellarius,' or 'letter carrier,'
going with extreme speed (celer) to the various parts of the earth, and
bringing back the answers of Ulysses to Penelope, Hippolytus to Phaedra,
neas to Dido, Demophon to Phyllis, Jason to Hypsipyle, and Phaon to
Sappho. All these works of Sabinus have perished, except the Epistle of
Ulysses to Penelope, and Demophon to Phyllis. His Epistle from Paris
to Oenonc, is not here mentioned. See the Pontic Epistles, Book iv. [Footnote 483: Bring back letters.--Ver. As the ancients had
no establishment corresponding to our posts, they employed special
messengers called 'tabellarii,' for the conveyance of their letters.] [Footnote 484: Vowed to Phobus.--Ver. Sappho says in her Epistle,
that if Phaon should refuse to return, she will dedicate her lyre to
Phobus, and throw herself from the Leucadian rock. This, he tells her,
she may now-do, as by his answer Phaon declines to return.] [Footnote 485: Pain in her head.--Ver. She pretended a head-ache,
when nothing wras the matter with her; in order that too much
familiarity, in the end, might not breed contempt.] [Footnote 486: A surfeit of love.--Ver. 'l'inguis amor' seems here
to mear a satisfied 'ora 'pampered passion;' one that meets with no
repulse.] [Footnote 487: Enclosed Dana.--Ver. See the Metamorphoses, Book
iv., 1.] [Footnote 488: The dogs bark.--Ver. The women of loose character,
among the Romans, were much in the habit of keeping dogs, for the
protection of their houses.] FOOTNOTES BOOK THREE:

[Footnote 501: Than the other.--Ver. 'He alludes to the unequal
lines of the Elegiac measure, which consists of Hexameters and
Pentameters. In personifying Elegy, he might have omitted this remark,
as it does not add to the attractions of a lady, to have one foot longer
than the other; he says, however, that it added to her gracefulness.] [Footnote 502: The Lydian buskin.--Ver. As Lydia was said to
have sent colonists to Etruria, some Commentators think that the word
'Lydius' here means 'Etrurian and that the first actors at Rome were
Etrurians. But, as the Romans derived their notions of tragedy from the
Greeks, we may conclude that Lydia in Asia Minor is here referred
to; for we learn from Herodotus and other historians, that the Greeks
borrowed largely from the Lydians.] [Footnote 503: Drunken revels.--Ver. He probably alludes to the
Fourth Elegy of the First, and the Fifth Elegy of the Second Book of the
'Amores.'] The 'thyrsus' was said to
have been first used by the troops of Bacchus, in his Indian expedition,
when, to deceive the Indians, they concealed the points of their spears
amid leaves of the vine and ivy. Similar weapons were used by his
devotees when worshipping him, which they brandished to and fro. To be
touched with the thyrsus of Bacchus, meant 'to be inspired with poetic
frenzy.' See the Notes to the Metamorphoses, Book iii. [Footnote 506: In unequal numbers.--Ver. Some have supposed, that
allusion is made to the Tragedy of Medea, which Ovid had composed, and
that it had been written in Elegiac measure. This, however, does not
seem to be the meaning of the passage. Elegy justly asks Tragedy, why,
if she has such a dislike to Elegiac verses, she has been talking in
them? which she has done, from the 15th line to the 30th.] [Footnote 507: Myself the patroness.--Ver. She certainly does
not give herself a very high character in giving herself the title of
'lena.'] [Footnote 508: The fastened door.--Ver. He alludes, probably, to
one of the Elegies which he rejected, when he cut down the five books to
three.] [Footnote 509: In a hose tunic.--Ver. He may possibly allude to the
Fifth Elegy of the First Book, as the words 'tunic velata recinct,' as
applied to Corinna, are there found. But there he mentions midday as the
time when Corinna came to him, whereas he seems here to allude to the
middle of the night.] [Footnote 510: Cut in the wood.--Ver. He alludes to the custom of
lovers carving inscriptions on the doors of their obdurate mistresses:
this we learn from Plautus to have been done in Elegiac strains, and
sometimes with charcoal. 'Implentur me fores clegiarum carbonibus.' 'My
doors are filled with the coal-black marks of elegies.'] [Footnote 511: On her birthday.--Ver. She is telling Ovid what she
has put up with for his sake; and she reminds him how, when he sent to
his mistress some complimentary lines on her birthday, she tore them
up and threw them in the water. Horace mentions 'the flames, or the
Adriatic sea,' as the end of verses that displeased. 5, relates a somewhat similai story. Diphilus the poet was in
the habit of sending his verses to his mistress Gnathna. One day she
was mixing him a cup of wine and snow-water, on which he observed, how
cold her well must be; to which she answered, yes, for it was there that
she used to throw his compositions.] [Footnote 514: From behind.--Ver. It is not known, for certain, to
what he refers in this line. Some think that he refers to the succeeding
Elegies in this Book, which are, in general, longer than the former
ones, while others suppose that he refers to his Metamorphoses, which he
then contemplated writing. Burmann, however, is not satisfied with this
explanation, and thinks that, in his more mature years, he contemplated
the composition of Tragedy, after having devoted his youth to lighter
snbjects; and that he did not compose, or even contemplate the
composition of his Metamorphoses, until many years afterwards.] [Footnote 515: I am not sitting here.--Ver. He is here alluding to
the Circen-sian games, which were celebrating in the Circus Maximus, or
greatest Circus, at Rome, at different times in the year. Some account
is given of the Circus Maximus in the Note to 1. 392. of the Second Book
of the Fasti. The 'Magni,' or Great Circensian games, took place on the
Fourth of the Ides of April. The buildings of the Circus were burnt in
the conflagration of Rome, in Nero's reign; and it was not restored
till the days of Trajan, who rebuilt it with more than its former
magnificence, and made it capable, according to some authors, of
accommodating 385,000 persons. The Poet says, that he takes no
particular interest himself in the race, but hopes that the horse may
win which is her favourite.] [Footnote 516: The spirited steeds.--Ver. The usual number of
chariots in each race was four. The charioteers were divided into four
companies, or 'fac-tiones,' each distinguished by a colour, representing
the season of the year. These colours were green for the spring, red for
the summer, azure for the autumn, and white for the winter. Originally,
but two chariots started in each race; but Domitian increased the number
to six, appointing two new companies of charioteers, the golden and the
purple; however the number was still, more usually, restricted to four. The greatest interest was shewn by all classes, and by both sexes, in
the race. Lists of the horses were circulated, with their names and
colours; the names also of the charioteers were given, and bets were
extensively made, (see the Art of Love, Book i. 167, 168,) and
sometimes disputes and violent contests arose.] [Footnote 517: To be seated by you.--Ver. The men and women sat
together when viewing the contests of the Circus, and not in separate
parts of the building, as at the theatres.] [Footnote 518: Happy the driver.--Ver. [Footnote 519: The sacred barrier.--Ver. For an account of the
'career,' or'starting-place,' see the Notes to the Tristia, Book v. El. It is called'sacer,' because the whole of the Circus Maximus
was sacred to Consus, who is supposed by some to have been the same
Deity as Neptune. The games commenced with sacrifices to the Deities.] [Footnote 520: I would give rein.--Ver. The charioteer was wont
to stand within the reins, having them thrown round his back. Leaning
backwards, he thereby threw his full weight against the horses, when
he wished to check them at full speed. This practice, however, was
dangerous, and by it the death of Hippolytus was caused. In the
Fifteenth Book of the Metamorphoses,1. 524, he says, 'I struggled,
with unavailing hand, to guide the bridle covered with white foam, and
throwing myself "backwards, I pulled back the loosened reins.' To avoid
the danger of this practice, the charioteer carried a hooked knife at
his waist, for the purpose of cutting the reins on an emergency.] [Footnote 521: The turning-place.--Ver.'see the Tristia, Book iv. Of course, thpse who
kept as close to the'meta' as possible, would lose the least distance
in turning round it.] [Footnote 522: How nearly was Pelops.--Ver. In his race with
Onomas, king of Pisa, in Arcadia, for the hand of his daughter,
Hippodamia, when Pelops conquered his adversary by bribing his
charioteer, Myrtilus.] [Footnote 523: Of his mistress.--Ver. He here seems to imply that
it was Hippodamia who bribed Myrtilus.] [Footnote 524: Shrink away in vain.--Ver. She shrinks from him, and
seems to think that he is sitting too close, but he tells her that the
'linea' forces them to squeeze. This 'linea' is supposed to have been
either cord, or a groove, drawn across the seats at regular intervals,
so as to mark out room for a certain number of spectators between each
two 'line.'] [Footnote 525: Has this advantage.--Ver. He congratulates himsdf on
the construction of the place, so aptly giving him an excuse for sitting
close to his mistress.] [Footnote 526: But do you --Ver. He is pretending to be very
anxious for her comfort, and is begging the person on the other side not
to squeeze so close against his mistress.] [Footnote 527: And you as well.--Ver. As in the theatres, the
seats, which were called 'gradas,''sedilia,' or'subsellia,' were
arranged round the course of the Circus, in ascending tiers; the lowest
being, very probably, almost flush with the ground. There were, perhaps,
no backs to the seats, or, at the best, only a slight railing of wood. The knees consequently of those in the back row would be level, and in
juxta-position with the backs of those in front. He is here telling the
person who is sitting behind, to be good enough to keep his knees to
himself, and not to hurt the lady's back by pressing against her.] [Footnote 528: I am taking it up.--Ver. He is here showing off his
politeness, and will not give her the trouble of gathering up her dress. Even in those days, the ladies seem to have had no objection to their
dresses doing the work of the scavenger's broom.] [Footnote 529: The fleet Atalanta.--Ver. Some suppose that the
Arcadian Atalanta, the daughter of Iasius, was beloved by a youth of the
name of Milanion. According to Apollodorus, who evidently confounds
the Arcadian with the Boeotian Atalanta, Milanion was another name of
Hippo-menes, who conquered the latter in the foot race, as mentioned
in the Tenth Book of the Metamorphoses. See the Translation of the
Metamorphoses, p. From this and another passage of Ovid, we have
reason to suppose that Atalanta was, by tradition, famous for the beauty
of her ancles.] [Footnote 530: The fan may cause.--Ver. Instead of the word
'tabella,' 'flabella' has been suggested here; but as the first syllable
is long, such a reading would occasion a violation of the laws of metre,
and 'tabella' is probably correct. It has, however, the same meaning
here as 'flabella it signifying what we should call 'a fan;' in fact,
the 'flabellum' was a 'tabella,' or thin board, edged with peacocks'
feathers, or those of other birds, and sometimes with variegated pieces
of cloth. These were generally waved by female slaves, who were called
'flabellifer'; or else by eunuchs or young boys. They were used to cool
the atmosphere, to drive away gnats and flies, and to promote sleep. We here see a gentleman offering to fan a lady, as a compliment; and it
must have been especially grateful amid the dust and heat of the Roman
Circus. That which was especially intended for the purpose of driving
away flies, was called'muscarium.' The use of fans was not confined
to females; as we learn from Suetonius, that the Emperor Augustus had
a slave to fan him during his sleep. The fan was also sometimes made of
linen, extended upon a light frame, and sometimes of the two wings of a
bird, joined back to back, and attached to a handle.] [Footnote 531: Now the procession.--Ver. 34 All this time they have
been waiting for the ceremony to commence. The 'Pompa,' or procession,
now opens the performance. In this all those who were about to exhibit
in the race took a part. The statues of the Gods were borne on wooden
platforms on the shoulders of men, or on wheels, according as they
were light or heavy. The procession moved from the Capitol, through the
Forum, to the Circus Maximus, and was also attended by the officers of
state. Musicians and dancers preceded the statues of the Gods. 391, and the Note to the passage.] [Footnote 532: Victory borne.--Ver. On the wooden platform, which
was called 'ferculum,' or 'thensa,' according as it was small or large.] [Footnote 533: With expanded wings.--Ver. Victory was always
represented with expanded wings, on account of her inconstancy and
volatility.] [Footnote 534: Salute Neptune.--Ver. 'Plaudite Neptuno' is
equivalent, in our common parlance, to 'Give a cheer for Neptune.' He
is addressing the sailors who may be present: but he declines to have
anything to do with the sea himself.] [Footnote 535: Arms I detest.--Ver. Like his contemporary, Horace,
Ovid was no lover of war.] [Footnote 536: Of the artisan.--Ver. We learn from the Fasti, Book
iii. 1.815, that Minerva was especially venerated as the patroness of
handicrafts.] [Footnote 537: Let the boxers.--Ver. Boxing was one of the earliest
athletic games practised by the Greeks. Apollo and Hercules, as well as
Pollux, are celebrated by the poets for excelling in this exercise. It formed a portion of the Olympic contests; while boys fought in the
Nemean and Isthmian games. Concerning the 'cstus' used by pugilists,
see the Fasti, Book ii. The method
in fighting most practised was to remain on the defensive, and thus to
wear out the opponent by continual efforts. To inflict blows, without
receiving any in return on the body, was the great point of merit. The
right arm was chiefly used for attack, while the office of the left was
to protect the body. Teeth were often knocked out, and the ears were
much disfigured. The boxers, by the rules of the game, were not allowed
to take hold of each other, nor to trip up their antagonist. In Italy
boxing seems to have been practised from early times by the people of
Etruria. It continued to be one of the popular games during the period
of the Republic as well as of the Empire.] [Footnote 538: In the lattice work.--Ver. The 'cancelli' were
lattice work, which probably fkirted the outer edge of each wide
'prcinctio,' or passage,that ran along in front of the seats, at
certain intervals. As the knees would not there be so cramped, these
seats would be considered the most desirable. It is clear that Ovid and
the lady have had the good fortune to secure front seats, with the feet
resting either on the lowest 'prcinctio', or the 'prcinctio' of a set
of seats higher up. Stools, of course, could not be used, as they would
be in the way of passers-by. He perceives, as the seat is high, that she
has some difficulty in touching the ground with her feet, and naturally
concludes that her legs must ache; on which he tells her, if it will
give her ease, to rest the tips of her feet on the lattice work railing
which was opposite, and which, if they were on an upper 'prcinctio,'
ran along the edge of it: or if they were on the very lowest tier,
skirted the edge of the 'podium' which formed the basis of that tier. This she might do, if the 'prcinctio' was not more than a yard wide,
and if the 'cancelli' were as much as a foot in height.] [Footnote 539: Now the Prcetor.--Ver. The course is now clear
of the procession, and the Prtor gives the signal for the start, the
'carceres' being first opened. This was sometimes given by sound of
trumpet, or more frequently by letting fall a napkin; at least, after
the time of Nero, who is said, on one occasion, while taking a meal, to
have heard the shouts of the people who were impatient for the race to
begin, on which he threw down his napkin as the signal.] [Footnote 540: The even harriers.--Ver. From this description we
should be apt to think that the start was effected at the instant when
the 'carceres' were opened. This was not the case: for after coming out
of the-carceres,' the chariots were ranged abreast before a white line,
which was held by men whose office it was to do, and who were called
'moratores.' When all were ready, and the signal had been given, the
white line was thrown down, and the race commenced, which was seven
times round the course. The 'career' is called 'quum,' because they
were in a straight line, and each chariot was ranged in front of the
door of its 'career.'] [Footnote 541: Circuit far too wide.--Ver. The charioteer, whom the
lady favours, is going too wide of the'meta,' or turning-place, and so
loses ground, while the next overtakes him.] [Footnote 542: To the left.--Ver. He tells him to guide the horses
to the left, so as to keep closer to the'meta,' and not to lose so much
ground by going wide of it.] [Footnote 543: Call him back again.--Ver. He, by accident, lets
drop the observation, that they have been interesting themselves for
a blockhead. But he immediately checks himself, and, anxious that the
favourite may yet distinguish himself, trusts that the spectators
will call him back. Crispinus, the Delphin Editor, thinks, that by the
calling back, it is meant that it was a false start, and that the race
was to be run over again. Bur-mann, however, is not of that opinion;
but supposes, that if any chariot did not go well, or the horses seemed
jaded, it was the custom to call the driver back from the present race,
that with new horses he might join in the next race. This, from the
sequel, seems the most rational mode of explanation here.] [Footnote 544: Waving the garments.--Ver. The signal for stopping
was given by the men rising and shaking and waving their outer garments,
or 'togae,' and probably calling the charioteer by name.] [Footnote 545: Disarrange your hair.--Ver. He is afraid lest her
neighbours, in their vehemence should discommode her hair, and tells
her, in joke, that she may creep into the bosom of his own 'toga.'] [Footnote 546: And now the barrier.--Ver. The first race we are to
suppose finished, and the second begins similarly to the first. There
were generally twenty-five of these'missus,' or races in a day.] [Footnote 547: The variegated throng.--Ver. [Footnote 548: At all events.--Ver. He addresses the favourite, who
has again started in this race.] [Footnote 549: Bears away the palm.--Ver. The favourite charioteer
is now victorious, and the Poet hopes that he himself may gain the palm
in like manner. The victor descended from his car at the end of the
race, and ascended the'spina,' where he received his reward, which was
generally a considerable sum of money. For an account of the'spina,'
see the Metamorphoses, Book x. l. [Footnote 550: Her beauty remains.--Ver. She has not been punished
with ugliness, as a judgment for her treachery.] [Footnote 551: Proved false to me.--Ver. Tibullus has a similar
passage, 'Et si perque suos fallax juravit ocellos 'and if with her eyes
the deceitful damsel is forsworn.'] [Footnote 552: Its divine sway.--Ver. 'Numen' here means a power
equal to that of the Divinities, and which puts it on a level with
them.] [Footnote 553: Mine felt pain.--Ver. When the damsel swore by them,
his eyes smarted, as though conscious of her perjury.] [Footnote 554: Forsooth to you.--Ver. He says that surely it was
enough for the Gods to punish Andromeda, the daughter of Cepheus, for
the sins of her mother, without making him to suffer misery for the
perjury of his mistress. Cassiope, the mother of Andromeda, having dared
to compare her own beauty with that of the Nereids, her daughter was, by
the command of Jupiter, exposed to a sea-monster, which was afterwards
slain by Perseus. [Footnote 555: Hurls at the groves.--Ver. A place which had been
struck by lightning was called 'bidental,' and was held sacred ever
afterwards. The same veneration was also paid to a place where any
person who had been killed by lightning was buried. Priests collected
the earth that had been torn up by lightning, and everything that had
been scorched, and buried it in the ground with lamentations. The spot
was then consecrated by sacrificing a two-year-old sheep, which being
called 'bidens,' gave its name to the place. An altar was also erected
there, and it was not allowable thenceforth to tread on the spot, or
to touch it, or even look at it. When the altar had fallen to decay, it
might be renovated, but to remove its boundaries was deemed sacrilege. Madness was supposed to ensue on committing such an offence; and Seneca
mentions a belief, that wine which had been struck by lightning, would
produce death or madness in those who drank it.] [Footnote 556: Unfortunate Semele.--Ver. See the fate of Semele,
related in the Third Book of the Metamorphoses.] [Footnote 557: Have some regard.--Ver. 'Don't
sweat any more by my eyes.'] [Footnote 558: Because she cannot, stilt sews.--Ver. It is not a
little singular that a heathen poet should enunciate the moral doctrine
of the New Testament, that it is the thought, and not the action, that
of necessity constitutes the sin.] [Footnote 559: A hundred in his neck.--Ver. In the First Book of
the Metamorphoses, he assigns to Argus only one hundred eyes; here,
however, he uses a poet's license, prohably for the sake of filling up
the line.] [Footnote 560: Its stone and its iron.--Ver. From Pausanias and
Lucian we learn that the chamber of Dana was under ground, and was
lined with copper and iron.] [Footnote 561: Nor yet is it legal.--Ver. He tells him that he
ought not to inflict loss of liberty on a free-born woman, a punishment
that was only suited to a slave.] [Footnote 562: Those two qualities.--Ver. He says, the wish being
probably the father to the thought, that beauty and chastity cannot
possibly exist together.] [Footnote 563: Many a thing at home.--Ver. He tells him that he
will grow quite rich with the presents which his wife will then receive
from her admirers.] [Footnote 564: Its bubbling foam..--Ver. He alludes to the noise
which the milk makes at the moment when it touches that in the pail.] [Footnote 565: Ewe when milked.--Ver. Probably the milk of ewes was
used for making cheese, as is sometimes the case in this country.] [Footnote 566: Hag of a procuress.--Ver. We have been already
introduced to one amiable specimen of this class in the Eighth Elegy of
the First Book.] [Footnote 567: River that hast.--Ver. Ciofanus has this interesting
Note:--'This river is that which flows near the walls of Sulmo, and,
which, at the present day we call 'Vella.' In the early spring, when the
snows melt, and sometimes, at the beginning of autumn, it swells to a
wonderful degree with the rains, so that it becomes quite impassable. Ovid lived not far from the Fountain of Love, at the foot of the
Moronian hill, and had a house there, of which considerable vestiges
still remain, and are called 'la botteghe d'Ovidio.' Wishing to go
thence to the town of Sulmo, where his mistress was living, this river
was an obstruction to his passage.'] [Footnote 568: A hollow boat.--Ver. 'Cymba' was a name given to
small boats used on rivers or lakes. He here alludes to a ferry-boat,
which was not rowed over; but a chain or rope extending from one side of
the stream to the other, the boatman passed across by running his hands
along the rope.] [Footnote 569: The opposite mountain.--Ver. The mountain of Soracte
was near the Flaminian way, in the territory of the Falisci, and may
possibly be the one here alluded to. Ciofanus says that its name is now
'Majella,-and that it is equal in height to the loftiest mountains of
Italy, and capped with eternal snow. He means to say that he has risen early in the morning for the purpose
of proceeding on his journey.] [Footnote 570: The son of Dana.--Ver. Mercury was said to have
lent to Perseus his winged shoes, 'talaria,' when he slew Medusa with
her viperous locks.] [Footnote 571: Wish for the chariot.--Ver. Ceres was said to have
sent Trip-tolemus in her chariot, drawn by winged dragons, to introduce
agriculture among mankind. See the Fourth Book of the Fasti, 1. [Footnote 572: Inachus.--Ver. Inachus was a river of Argolis, in
Peloponnesus.] [Footnote 573: Love for Melie.--Ver. Melie was a Nymph beloved by
Neptune, to whom she bore Amycus, king of Bebrycia, or Bithynia, in Asia
Minor, whence her present appellation.] [Footnote 574: Alpheus.--Ver 29. See the story of Alpheus and Arethusa,
in the Fifth Book of the Metamorphoses, 1. [Footnote 575: Cresa.--Ver. Cresa was a Naad, the mother of
Hypseas, king of the Lapithae, by Peneus, a river of Thessaly. Xanthus
was a rivulet near Troy. Of Cresa being promised to Xanthus nothing
whatever is known.] [Footnote 576: The be beloved by Mars.--Ver. Pindar, in his Sixth
Olympic Ode, says that Metope, the daughter of Ladon, was the mother of
live daughters, by Asopus, a river of Boeotia. Their names were Corcyra,
gina, Salamis, Thebe, and Harpinna. Ovid, in calling her Thebe,
probably follows some other writer. She is called 'Martia,' because she
was beloved by Mars, to whom she bore Evadne.] [Footnote 577: Hand of Hercules.--Ver. For the contest of Hercules
and Achelous for the hand of Deianira, see the beginning of the Ninth
Book of the Metamorphoses.] [Footnote 578: Calydon.--Ver. Aeneus, the father of Meleager and
Dei'anira, reigned over tolia, of which Calydon was the chief city.] [Footnote 579: The native spot.--Ver. 40; He alludes to the fact of the
source or native country of the Nile being then, as it probably still
is, quite unknown.] [Footnote 580: Daughter of Asopus.--Ver. Evadne is called
'Asopide,' from her mother being the wife of Asopus. [Footnote 581: Enipeus dried up.--Ver. Probably the true reading
here is 'fictus,' 'the false Enipeus.' Tyro was the daughter of
Salmoneus, king of Pisa, in Elis. She being much enamoured of the river
Enipeus, Neptune is said to have assumed his form, and to have been, by
her, the father of Pelias and Neleus.'] [Footnote 582: Argive Tibur,--Ver. Tibur was a town beautifully
situate in the neighbourhood of Home; it was said to have been founded
by three Argive brothers, Tyburtus, Catillus, and Coras.] [Footnote 583: Whom Ilia.--Ver. Ilia was said to have been buried
alive, by the orders of Amulius, on the banks of the river Tiber; or,
according to some, to have been thrown into that river, on which she is
said to have become the wife of the river, and was deified. Acron, an
ancient historian, wrote to the effect that her ashes were interred on
the banks of the Anio; and that river overflowing, carried them to
the bed of the Tiber, whence arose the story of her nuptials with the
latter. According to one account, she was not put to death, but was
imprisoned, having been spared by Amulius at the entreaty of his
daughter, who was of the same age as herself, and at length regained her
liberty.] [Footnote 584: Descendant of Laomedon.--Ver. She was supposed to
be descended from Laomedon, through Ascanius, the son of Cresa, the
granddaughter of Laomedon.] [Footnote 585: No white fillet.--Ver. The fillet with which the
Vestals bound their hair.] [Footnote 586: Am I courted.--Ver. The Vestais were released from
their duties, and were allowed to marry if they chose, after they had
served for thirty years. The first ten years were passed in learning
their duties, the next ten in performing them, and the last ten in
instructing the novices.] [Footnote 587: Did she throw herself.--Ver. The Poet follows the
account which represented her as drowning herself.] [Footnote 588: To some fixed rule.--Ver. 'Legitimum' means
'according to fixed laws so that it might be depended upon, 'in a steady
manner.'] [Footnote 589: Injurious to the flocks.--Ver. It would be
'damnosus' in many ways, especially from its sweeping away the cattle
and the produce of the land. Its waters, too, being turbid, would be
unpalatable to the thirsty traveller, and unwholesome from the melted
snow, which would be likely to produce goitre, or swellings in the
throat.] [Footnote 590: Could I speak of the rivers.--Ver. He apologizes to
the Achelos, Inachus, and Nile, for presuming to mention their names,
in addressing such a turbid, contemptible stream.] [Footnote 591: After my poems.--Ver. He refers to his lighter works;
such, perhaps, as the previous books of his Amores. This explains
the nature of the 'libelli,' which he refers to in his address to his
mistress, in the Second Book of the Amores, El. [Footnote 592: His wealth acquired.--Ver. For the
explanation of this word, see the Fasti, B. i. 217, and the Note to
the passage.] [Footnote 593: Through his wounds.--Ver. In battle, either by giving
wounds, or receiving them.] [Footnote 594: Which thus late.--Ver. By 4 serum,'he means that
his position, as a man of respectable station, has only been recently
acquired, and has not descended to him through a long line of
ancestors.] [Footnote 595: Was it acquired.--Ver. This was really much to
the merit of his rival; but most of the higher classes of the Romans
affected to despise anything like gain by means of bodily exertion; and
the Poet has extended this feeling even to the rewards of merit as a
soldier.] [Footnote 596: Hold sway over.--Ver. He here plays upon the two
meanings of the word 'deducere.' 'Deducere carmen' is 'to compose
poetry'; 'deducere primum pilum' means 'to form' or 'command the first
troop of the Triarii.' These were the veteran soldiers of the Roman
army, and the 'Primipilus' (which office is here alluded to) being the
first Centurion of the first maniple of them, was the chief Centurion of
the legion, holding an office somewhat similar to our senior captains. See the Note to the
49th line of the Seventh Epistle, in the-Fourth Book of the Pontic
Epistles.] [Footnote 597: The ravished damsel.--Ver. [Footnote 598: Resorted to presents.--Ver. He seems to allude to
the real meaning of the story of Dana, which, no doubt, had reference
to the corrupting influence of money.] [Footnote 599: With no boundaries.--Ver. The 'limes' was a line
or boundary, between pieces of land belonging to different persons, and
consisted of a path, or ditch, or a row of stones. The 'ager limitatus'
was the public land marked out by 'limites,' for the purposes of
allotment to the citizens. On apportioning the land, a line, which was
called 'limes,' was drawn through a given point from East to West, which
was called 'decumanus,' and another line was drawn from North to South. The distance at which the 'limites' were to be drawn depended on the
magnitude of the squares or 'centuri,' as they were called, into which
it was purposed to divide the tract.] [Footnote 601: Then was the shore.--Ver. Because they had not as
yet learnt the art of navigation.] [Footnote 602: Turreted fortifications.--Ver. Among the ancients
the fortifications of cities were strengthened by towers, which were
placed at intervals on the walls; they were also generally used at the
gates of towns.] [Footnote 603: Why not seek the heavens.--Ver. With what indignation
would he not have spoken of a balloon, as being nothing less than a
downright attempt to scale the 'tertia rgna!'] [Footnote 604: Ciesar but recently.--Ver. See the end of the
Fifteenth Book of the Metamorphoses, and the Fasti, Book iii. [Footnote 605: The Senate-house.--Ver. 'Curia'was the name of the
place where the Senate held its meetings, such as the 'curia Hostilia,'
* Julia,' Marcelli,' and others. Hence arose the custom of calling the
Senate itself, in the various Roman towns, by the name of 'curia,' but
not the Senate of Rome. He here means to say, that poverty excluded a
man from the Senate-house, and that wealth alone was the qualification
for the honours of the state.] [Footnote 606: Wealth alone confers honours --Ver. The same
expression occurs in the Fasti, Book i. '217, where a similar
complaint is made on the worldly-mindedness of the age.] [Footnote 607: The Field of Mars.--Ver. The 'comitia,' or meetings
for the elections of the magistrates, were held on the 'Campus Martius'
or field of Mars. See the Notes to the Fasti, Book i. The 'Fora' were of two kinds
at Rome; some being market-places, where all kinds of goods were exposed
for sale, while others were solely courts of justice. Among the latter
is the one here mentioned, which was simply called 'Forum,' so long as
it was the only one of its kind existing at Rome, and, indeed, after
that period, as in the present instance. At a later period of the
Republic, and under the Empire, when other 'fora,' for judicial
purposes, were erected, this Forum' was distinguished by the epithets
'vetus,' 'old,' or'magnum, 'great.' It was situate between the
Capitoline and Palatine hills, and was originally a swamp or marsh,
which was filled up hy Romulus or Tatius. It was chiefly used for
judicial proceedings, and is supposed to have been surrounded with
the hankers' shops or offices, 'argentaria.' Gladiatorial games were
occasionally held there, and sometimes prisoners of war, and faithless
legionary soldiers, were there put to death. A second 'Forum,' for
judicial purposes, was erected hy Julius Caesar, and was called hy his
name. It was adorned with a splendid temple of Venus Genitrix. A third
was built hy Augustus, and was called 'Forum Augusts' It was adorned
with a temple of Mars, and the statues of the most distinguished men
of the republic. Having suffered severely from fire, this Forum was
restored by the Emperor Hadrian. John travelled to the hallway. It is mentioned in the Fourth Book of
the Pontic Epistles, Ep. [Footnote 609: With regard to me.--Ver. He says that because he is
poor she makes excuses, and pretends that she is afraid of her husband
and those whom he has set to watch her.] [Footnote 610: Of thy own inspiration.--Ver. Burmann remarks, that
the word 'opus' is especially applied to the sacred rites of the Gods;
literally 'the priest of thy rites.'] [Footnote 611: The erected pile--Ver. Among the Romans the corpse
was burnt on a pile of wood, which was called 'pyra,' or 'rogus.' According to Servius, it was called by the former name before, and hy
the latter after, it was lighted, but this distinction is not observed
by the Latin writers.] It was in the form of an altar with four equal sides, but it varied in
height and the mode of decoration, according to the circumstances of the
deceased. On the pile the body was placed with the couch on which it had
been carried; and frankincense, ointments, locks of hair, and garlands,
were thrown upon it. Even ornaments, clothes, and dishes of food were
sometimes used for the same purpose. This was done not only by the
family of the deceased, but by such persons as joined the funeral
procession.] [Footnote 612: The cruel boar.--Ver. He alludes to the death of
Adonis, by the tusk of a boar, which pierced his thigh. See the Tenth
Book of the Metamorphoses, l. [Footnote 613: We possess inspiration.--Ver. In the Sixth Book of
the Fasti, 1. 'There is a Deity within us (Poets): under
his guidance we glow with inspiration; this poetic fervour contains the
impregnating. [Footnote 614: She lays her.--Ver. It must be remembered that,
whereas we personify Death as of the masculine gender; the Romans
represented the grim tyrant as being a female. It is a curious fact
that we find Death very rarely represented as a skeleton on the Roman
monuments. The skeleton of a child has, in one instance, been found
represented on one of the tombs of Pompeii. The head of a horse was
one of the most common modes of representing death, as it signified
departure.] [Footnote 615: Ismarian Orpheus.--Ver. Apollo and the Muse Calliope
were the parents of Orpheus, who met with a cruel death. See the
beginning of the Eleventh Book of the Metamorphoses.] 'linon' was said to have been
the exclamation of Apollo, on the death of his son, the poet Linus. The
word is derived from the Greek, 'di Aiv,' 'Alas! A certain
poetic measure was called by this name; but we learn from Athenaeus,
that it was not always confined to pathetic subjects. There appear to
have been two persons of the name of Linus. One was a Theban, the son of
Apollo, and the instructor of Orpheus and Hercules, while the other was
the son of an Argive princess, by Apollo, who, according to Statius, was
torn to pieces in his infancy by dogs.] [Footnote 617: The son of Mon. See the Note to the ninth
line of the Fifteenth Elegy of the First Book of the Amores.] [Footnote 618: Slow web woven.--Ver. [Footnote 619: Nemesis, so Delia.--Ver. Nemesis and Delia were the
names of damsels whose charms were celebrated by Tibullus.] [Footnote 620: Sacrifice avail thee.--Ver. He alludes to two lines
in the]

First Elegy of Tibullus.] 'Quid tua nunc Isis mihi Delia? quid mihi prosunt]

Ilia tu toties sera repuisa manu.'] What have I now to do, Delia, with your Isis? what avail me those sistra
so often shaken by your hand?'] [Footnote 621: What lying apart.--Ver. During the festival of Isis,
all intercourse with men was forbidden to the female devotees.] [Footnote 622: The yawning tomb.--Ver. The place where a person was
burnt was called 'bustum,' if he was afterwards buried on the same spot,
and 'ustrina,' or 'ustrinum,' if he was buried at a different place. See
the Notes to the Fasti, B. ii. [Footnote 623: The towers of Eryx--Ver. He alludes to Venus, who
had a splendid temple on Mount Eryx, in Sicily.] [Footnote 624: The Phacian land.--Ver. The Phacians were the
ancient people of Corcyra, now the isle of Corfu. Tibullus had attended
Messala thither, and falling ill, was unable to accompany his patron on
his return to Rome, on which he addressed to him the First Elegy of his
Third Book, in which he expressed a hope that he might not die among
the Phacians. Tibullus afterwards
recovered, and died at Rome. When he penned this line, Ovid little
thought that his own bones would one day rest in a much more ignoble
spot than Corcyra, and one much more repulsive to the habits of
civilization.] 1 Hie'here seems to be the preferable
reading; alluding to Rome, in contradistinction to Corcyra.] [Footnote 626: His tearful eyes.--Ver. He alludes to the custom of
the nearest relative closing the eyes of the dying person.] [Footnote 627: The last gifts.--Ver. The perfumes and other
offerings which were thrown on the burning pile, are here alluded to. Tibullus says, in the same Elegy--]

'Non soror Assyrios cineri qu dedat odores,]

Et Heat effusis ante sepulchra comis']

'No sister have I here to present to my ashes the Assyrian perfumes,
and to weep before my tomb with dishevelled locks.' To this passage Ovid
makes reference in the next two lines.] [Footnote 628: Thy first love.--Ver. 'Prior;' his former love was
Delia, who was forsaken by him for Nemesis. They are both represented
here as attending his obsequies. Tibullus says, in the First Elegy of
the First Book, addressing Delia:--]

1 Te spectem, suprema mihi cum venerit hora,]

Te teneam moriens, dficiente manu.] Flebis et arsuro positum me, Delia, lecto,]

Tristibus et lacrymis oscula mista dabis.'] May I look upon you when my last hour comes, when dying, may I hold you
with my failing hand. Delia, you will lament me, too, when placed on my
bier, doomed to the pile, and will give me kisses mingled with the tears
of grief.' It would appear
from the present passage, that it was the custom to give the last kiss
when the body was laid on the funeral pile.] [Footnote 629: With his failing hand.--Ver. Nemesis here alludes
to the above line, and tells Delia, that she, herself, alone engaged his
affection, as it was she alone who held his hand when he died.] [Footnote 630: Learned Catullus.--Ver. Catullus was a Roman poet, a
native of Verona. Calvus was also a Roman poet of great merit. The poems
of Catullus and Calvus were set to music by Hermogenes, Tigellius, and
Demetrius, who were famous composers. lines
427 and 431, and the Notes to the passages.] [Footnote 631: Prodigal of thy blood.--Ver. He alludes to the fact
of Gallus having killed himself, and to his having been suspected
of treason against Augustus, from whom he had received many marks of
kindness Ovid seems to hint, in the Tristia, Book ii. 446, that the
fault of Gallus was his having divulged the secrets of Augustus, when
he was in a state o* inebriety. Some writers say, that when Governor of
Egypt, he caused his name and exploits to be inscribed on the Pyramids,
and that this constituted his crime. Others again, suppose that he was
guilty of extortion in Egypt, and that he especially harassed the people
of Thebea with his exactions. Some of the Commentators think that under
the name 'amicus,' Augustus is not here referred to, inasmuch as it
woulc seem to bespeak a familiar acquaintanceship, which is not known
to have existed. Scaliger thinks that it must refer to some
misunderstanding which had taken place between Gallus and Tibullus, in
which the former was accused of having deceived his friend.] [Footnote 632: The rites of Ceres--Ver. This festival of Ceres
occurred on the Fifth of the Ides of April, being the 12th day of that
month. White garments, were worn at this
festival, and woollen robes of dark colour were prohibited. The worship
was conducted solely by females, and all intercourse with men was
forbidden, who were not allowed to approach the altars of the Goddess.] [Footnote 633: The oaks, the early oracles.--Ver. On the oaks, the
oracles of Dodona, see the Translation of the Metamorphoses, pages 253
and 467.] [Footnote 634: Having nurtured Jove.--Ver. See an account of the
education of Jupiter, by the Curetes, in Crete, in the Fourth Book of
the Fasti, L 499, et seq.] [Footnote 635: Beheld Jasius.--Ver. Iasius, or Iasion, was,
according to most accounts, the son of Jupiter and Electra, and enjoyed
the favour of Ceres, by whom he was the father of Plutus. According
to the Scholiast on Theocritus, he was the son of Minos, and the Nymph
Phronia. According to Apollodorus, he was struck dead by the bolts of
Jupiter, for offering violence to Ceres. He was also said by some to
be the husband of Cybele. He is supposed to have been a successful
husbandman when agriculture was but little known; which circumstance is
thought to have given rise to the story of his familiarity with Ceres. Ovid repeats this charge against the chastity of Ceres, in the Tristia,
Book ii. Mary journeyed to the bathroom. [Footnote 636: Proportion of their wheat.--Ver. With less corn than
had been originally sown.] [Footnote 637: The law-giving Mims.--Ver. Minos is said to have
been the first who gave laws to the Cretans.] [Footnote 638: Late have the horns.--Ver. This figure is derived
from the horns, the weapons of the bull. 'At length I have assumed the
weapons of defence.' It is rendered in a singular manner in Nisard's
Translation, 'Trop tard, helas 1 J'ai connu l'outrage fait a mon front.' I have known the outrage done to my forehead.'!!!] [Footnote 639: Have patience and endure.--Ver. He addresses himself,
recommending fortitude as his only cure.] [Footnote 640: The hard ground.--Ver. At the door of his mistress;
a practice which seems to have been very prevalent with the Roman
lovers.] [Footnote 641: I was beheld by him.--Ver. As, of courser, his rival
would only laugh at him for his folly, and very deservedly.] [Footnote 642: As you walked.--Ver. By the use of the word
'spatiantis,' he alludes to her walks under the Porticos of Rome, which
were much frequented as places for exercise, sheltered from the heat.] [Footnote 643: The Gods forsworn.--Ver. This forms the subject of
the Third Elegy of the present Book.] [Footnote 644: Young mem at banquets.--Ver. See the Fifth Elegy of
the Second Book of the Amores.] [Footnote 645: She was not ill.--Ver. When he arrived, he found his
rival in her company.] [Footnote 646: I will hate.--Ver. This and the next line are
considered by Heinsius and other Commentators to be spurious.] [Footnote 647: She who but lately.--Ver. Commentators are at a
loss to know whether he is here referring to Corinna, or to his other
mistress, to whom he alludes in the Tenth Elegy of the Second Book,
when he confesses that he is in love with two mistresses. If Corinna was
anything more than an ideal personage, it is probable that she is not
meant here, as he made it a point not to discover to the world who was
meant under that name; whereas, the mistress here mentioned has been
recommended to the notice of the Roman youths by his poems.] [Footnote 648: Made proclamation.--Ver. He says that, unconsciously,
he has been doing the duties of the 'prco' or 'crier,' in recommending
his mistress to the public. The 'prco,' among the Romans, was employed
in sales by auction, to advertise the time, place, and conditions of
sale, and very probably to recommend and praise the property offered
for sale. These officers also did the duty of the auctioneer, so far
as calling out the biddings, but the property was knocked down by the
'magister auctionum.' The 'prcones' were also employed to keep silence
in the public assemblies, to pronounce the votes of the centuries, to
summon the plaintiff and defendant upon trials, to proclaim the victors
in the public games, to invite the people to attend public funerals,
to recite the laws that were enacted, and, when goods were lost, to cry
them and search for them. The office of a 'prco' was, in the time of
Cicero, looked upon as rather disreputable.] [Footnote 649: Thebes.--Ver. He speaks of the Theban war, the
Trojan war, and the exploits of Caesar, as being good subjects for Epic
poetry; but he says that he had neglected them, and had wasted his time
in singing in praise of Corinna. This, however, may be said in reproof
of his general habits of indolence, and not as necessarily implying that
Corinna is the cause of his present complaint. The Roman poet Statius
afterwards chose the Theban war as his subject.] [Footnote 650: Poets as witnesses.--Ver. That is, 'to rely
implicitly on the testimony of poets.' The word 'poetas' requires a
semicolon after it, and not a comma.] [Footnote 651: The raging dogs.--Ver. He here falls into his usual
mistake of confounding Scylla, the daughter of Nisus, with Scylla, the
Nymph, the rival of Circe, in the affections of Glaucus. 33 of the First Epistle of Sabinus, and the Eighth and Fourteenth
Books of the Metamorphoses.] [Footnote 652: Descendant of Abas.--Ver. In the Fourth Book of the
Metamorphoses he relates the rescue of Andromeda from the sea monster,
by Perseus, the descendant of Abas, and clearly implies that he used
the services of the winged horse Pegasus on that occasion. It has been
suggested by some Commentators, that he here refers to Bellerophon; but
that hero was not a descendant of Abas, and, singularly enough, he is
not on any occasion mentioned or referred to by Ovid.] [Footnote 653: Extended Tityus.--Ver. Tityus was a giant, the son
of Jupiter and Elara. Offering violence to Latona, he was pierced by the
darts of Apollo and hurled to the Infernal Regions, where his liver was
doomed to feed a vulture, without being consumed.] [Footnote 654: Enceladus.--Ver. He was the son of Titan and Terra,
and joining in the war against the Gods, he was struck by lightning,
and thrown beneath Mount tna. See the Pontic Epistles, Book ii. [Footnote 655: The-two-shaped damsels.--Ver. He evidently alludes
to the Sirens, with their two shapes, and not to Circe, as some have
imagined.] [Footnote 656: The Ithacan bags.--Ver. olus gave Ulysses
favourable wind* sewn up in a leather bag, to aid him in his return to
Ithaca. See tha Metamorphoses, Book xiv. 223]

[Footnote 657: The Cecropian bird.--Ver. He calls Philomela the
daughter of Pandion, king of Athens, 'Cecropis ales Cc crops having been
the first king of Athens. Her story is told in the Sixth Book of the
Metamorphoses.] [Footnote 658: A bird, or into gold.--Ver. He alludes to the
transformation of Jupiter into a swan, a shower of gold, and a bull; in
the cases of Leda, Dana, and Europa.] [Footnote 659: The Theban seed.--Ver. He alludes to the dragon's
teeth sown by Cadmus. See the Third Book of the Metamorphoses.] [Footnote 660: Distil amber tears.--Ver. Reference is made to the
transformation of the sisters of Phaeton into poplars that distilled
amber. See the Second Book of the Metamorphoses, 1. [Footnote 661: Who once were ships.--Ver. He alludes to the ships
of neas, which, when set on fire by Turnus, were changed into sea
Nymphs.] [Footnote 662: The hellish banquet.--Ver. Reference is made to the
revenge of Atreus, who killed the children of Thyestes, and set them
on table before their father, on which occasion the Sun is said to have
hidden his face.] [Footnote 663: Stonesfollowed the lyre.--Ver. Amphion is said to
have raised the walls of Thebes by the sound of his lyre.] [Footnote 664: Camillus, by thee.--Ver. Marcus Furius Camillus, the
Roman general, took the city of Falisci.] [Footnote 665: The covered paths.--Ver. The pipers, or flute
players, led the procession, while the ground was covered with carpets
or tapestry.] [Footnote 666: Snow-white heifers.--Ver. Pliny the Elder, in his
Second Book, says, 'The river Clitumnus, in the state of Falisci, makes
those cattle white that drink of its waters.'] [Footnote 667: In the lofty woods.--Ver. It is not known to what
occasion this refers. Juno is stated to have concealed herself on two
occasions; once before her marriage, when she fled from the pursuit of
Jupiter, who assumed the form of a cuckoo, that he might deceive her;
and again, when, through fear of the giants, the Gods took refuge in
Egypt and Libya. [Footnote 668: As a mark.--Ver. This is similar to the alleged
origin of the custom of throwing sticks at cocks on Shrove Tuesday. The
Saxons being about to rise in rebellion against their Norman oppressors,
the conspiracy is said to have been discovered through the inopportune
crowing of a cock, in revenge for which the whole race of chanticleers
were for centuries submitted to this cruel punishment.] [Footnote 669: With garments.--Ver. As'vestis' was a general name
for a covering of any kind, it may refer to the carpets which appear to
be mentioned in the twelfth line, or it may mean, that the youths and
damsels threw their own garments in the path of the procession.] [Footnote 670: After the Grecian manner.--Ver. Falisci was said to
have been a Grecian colony.] [Footnote 671: Hold religious silence.--Ver. 'Favere linguis' seems
here to mean, 'to keep religious silence as to the general meaning of
the term, see the Fasti, Book i. [Footnote 672: Halesus.--Ver. Halesus is said to have been the son
of Agamemnon, by a concubine. Alarmed at the tragic death of his father,
and of the murderers, gisthus and Clytemnestra, he fled to Italy, where
he founded the city of Phalesus, which title, with the addition of
one letter, was given to it after his name. Phalesus afterwards became
corrupted, to 'Faliscus,' or 'Falisci.'] [Footnote 673: One side and the other.--Ver. For the 'torus
exterior' and 'interior,' and the construction of the beds of the
ancients, see the Note to the Eighth Book of the Metamorphoses, 1. This passage seems to be hopelessly
corrupt.] [Footnote 674: Turning-place is grazed.--Ver. On rounding the'meta'
in the chariot race, from which the present figure is derived, see the
Note to the 69th line of the Second Elegy of this Book.] [Footnote 675: Heir to my rank.--Ver. 112, where he enlarges upon the rank and circumstances of his family.] [Footnote 676: To glorious arms.--Ver. He alludes to the Social
war which was commenced in the year of the City 659, by the Marsi, the
Peligni, and the Picentes, for the purpose of obtaining equal rights
and privileges with the Roman citizens. He calls them 'arma honesta,'
because wielded in defence of their liberties.] [Footnote 677: Rome dreaded.--Ver. The Romans were so alarmed, that
they vowed to celebrate games in honour of Jupiter, if their arms should
prove successful.] [Footnote 678: Amathusian parent.--Ver. Venus was worshipped
especially at Amathus, a city of Cyprus; it is mentioned by Ovid as
abounding in metals. [Footnote 679: The homed.--Ver. In addition to the reasons already
mentioned for Bacchus being represented as horned, it is said, by some,
that it arose from the fact, of wine being drunk from horns in the
early ages. It has been suggested, that it had a figurative meaning, and
implied the violence of those who are overtaken with wine.] [Footnote 680: Lyus.--Ver. For the meaning of the word Lyus, see
the Metamorphoses, Book iv. [Footnote 681: My sportive.--Ver. Genialis; the Genii were the
Deities of pure, unadorned nature. 58, and
the Note to the passage. 'Genialis,' consequently, 'voluptuous,' or
'pleasing to the impulses of nature.'] Schermerhorn's advice, the party
took possession of two empty Fifth avenue stages which happened to be
waiting at the Fulton ferry, and rode slowly up Broadway to Chambers
street, where Peter and his father bid them good-by, and went off to the
depot. As Peter had declined changing his clothes before he left, they
had to travel all the way to Buffalo with our young friend in this
unusual guise; but, as people had become used to seeing soldiers
parading about in uniform, they didn't seem particularly surprised,
whereat Master Peter was rather disappointed. To go back to the Zouaves, however. When the stages turned into Fifth
avenue, they decided to get out; and after forming their ranks in fine
style, they marched up the avenue, on the sidewalk this time, stopping
at the various houses or street corners where they must bid adieu to one
and another of their number, promising to see each other again as soon
as possible. At last only Tom and Freddy were left to go home by themselves. As they
marched along, keeping faultless step, Freddy exclaimed, "I tell you
what, Tom! I mean to ask my father, the minute he comes home, to let me
go to West Point as soon as I leave school! I must be a soldier--I
can't think of anything else!" "That's just what I mean to do!" cried Tom, with sparkling eyes; "and,
Fred, if you get promoted before me, promise you will have me in your
regiment, won't you?" answered Freddy; "but you're the oldest, Tom,
and, you know, the oldest gets promoted first; so mind you don't forget
me when you come to your command!" As he spoke, they reached his own home; and our hero, glad after all to
come back to father, mother, and sister, bounded up the steps, and rang
the bell good and _hard_, just to let Joseph know that a personage of
eminence had arrived. As the door opened, he turned gayly round, cap in
hand, saying, "Good-by, Maryland; you've left the regiment, but you'll
never leave the Union!" and the last words he heard Tom say were, "No,
by George, _never_!" *       *       *       *       *

And now, dear little readers, my boy friends in particular, the history
of Freddy Jourdain must close. He still lives in New York, and attends
Dr. Larned's school, where he is at the head of all his classes. The Dashahed Zouaves have met very often since the encampment, and had
many a good drill in their room--the large attic floor which Mr. Jourdain allowed them for their special accommodation, and where the
beautiful regimental colors are carefully kept, to be proudly displayed
in every parade of the Zouaves. When he is sixteen, the boy Colonel is to enter West Point Academy, and
learn to be a real soldier; while Tom--poor Tom, who went down to
Baltimore that pleasant July month, promising so faithfully to join
Freddy in the cadet corps, may never see the North again. And in conclusion let me say, that should our country again be in danger
in after years, which God forbid, we may be sure that first in the
field, and foremost in the van of the grand army, will be our gallant
young friend,

                                 COLONEL FREDDY. IT took a great many Saturday afternoons to finish the story of "Colonel
Freddy," and the children returned to it at each reading with renewed
and breathless interest. George and Helen couldn't help jumping up off
their seats once or twice and clapping their hands with delight when
anything specially exciting took place in the pages of the wonderful
story that was seen "before it was printed," and a great many "oh's" and
"ah's" testified to their appreciation of the gallant "Dashahed
Zouaves." They laughed over the captive Tom, and cried over the true
story of the old sergeant; and when at length the very last word had
been read, and their mother had laid down the manuscript, George sprang
up once more, exclaiming; "Oh, I wish I could be a boy soldier! Mamma,
mayn't I recruit a regiment and camp out too?" cried his sister; "I wish I had been Jessie; what a
pity it wasn't all true!" "And what if I should tell you," said their mother, laughing, "that a
little bird has whispered in my ear that 'Colonel Freddy' was
wonderfully like your little Long Island friend Hilton R----?" "Oh, something funny I heard about him last summer; never mind what!" The children wisely concluded that it was no use to ask any more
questions; at the same moment solemnly resolving that the very next time
they paid a visit to their aunt, who lived at Astoria, they would beg
her to let them drive over to Mr. R----'s place, and find out all about
it. After this, there were no more readings for several Saturdays; but at
last one morning when the children had almost given up all hopes of more
stories, George opened his eyes on the sock hanging against the door,
which looked more bulgy than ever. he shouted; "Aunt Fanny's
daughter hasn't forgotten us, after all!" and dressing himself in a
double quick, helter-skelter fashion, George dashed out into the entry,
forgot his good resolution, and slid down the banisters like a streak of
lightning and began pummelling on his sister's door with both fists;
shouting, "Come, get up! here's another Sock story for
us!" This delightful announcement was quite sufficient to make Helen's
stockings, which she was just drawing on in a lazy fashion, fly up to
their places in a hurry; then she popped her button-over boots on the
wrong feet, and had to take them off and try again; and, in short, the
whole of her dressing was an excellent illustration of that time-honored
maxim, "The more _haste_, the worse _speed_;" George, meanwhile,
performing a distracted Indian war dance in the entry outside, until his
father opened his door and wanted to know what the racket was all about. At this moment Helen came out, and the two children scampered down
stairs, and sitting down side by side on the sofa, they proceeded to
examine this second instalment of the Sock stories. They found it was
again a whole book; and the title, on a little page by itself, read
"GERMAN SOCKS." "These must be more stories like that
dear 'Little White Angel.'" And so they proved to be; for, on their mother's commencing to read the
first story, it was found to be called, "God's Pensioners;" and
commenced, "It was a cold--" but stop! This book was to be devoted
to "Colonel Freddy;" but if you will only go to Mr. Leavitt's, the
publishers, you will there discover what was the rest of the second Sock
Stories. *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired. Page 41, "dilemna" changed to "dilemma" (horns of this dilemma)

Page 81, "arttisically" changed to "artistically" (his fork
artistically)





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Red, White, Blue Socks. It was the sprite now transformed into a giant--a terrible-looking
fellow, though to Jimmieboy he was not terrible because the boy knew
that the dreadful creature was only his little friend in disguise. came a bellowing voice from above the trees. I'm sure you'll do, and I am ready,"
said Jimmieboy, with a laugh. But there came no answer, and Jimmieboy, looking about him to see why
the major made no reply, was just in time to see that worthy soldier's
coat-tails disappearing down the road. The major was running away as fast as he could go. "You've frightened him pretty well, Spritey," said Jimmieboy, with a
laugh, as the major passed out of sight. "But you don't seem a bit afraid." "I'm not--though I think I should be if I didn't know who you are,"
returned Jimmieboy. "Well, I need to be if I am to get the best of Fortyforefoot, but, I
say, you mustn't call me Spritey now that I am a giant. It won't do to
call me by any name that would show Fortyforefoot who I really am," said
the sprite, with a warning shake of his head. "Bludgeonhead is my name now," replied the sprite. "Benjamin B.
Bludgeonhead is my full name, but you know me well enough to call me
plain Bludgeonhead." "All right, plain Bludgeonhead," said Jimmieboy, "I'll do as you
say--and now don't you think we'd better be starting along?" "Yes," said Bludgeonhead, reaching down and grabbing hold of Jimmieboy
with his huge hand. "We'll start right away, and until we come in sight
of Fortyforefoot's house I think perhaps you'll be more comfortable if
you ride on my shoulder instead of in my coat-pocket." "Thank you very much," said Jimmieboy, as Bludgeonhead lifted him up
from the ground and set him lightly as a feather on his shoulder. "I think I'd like to be
as tall as this all the time, Bludgeonhead. What a great thing it would
be on parade days to be as tall as this. Why I can see miles and miles
of country from here." "Yes, it's pretty fine--but I don't think I'd care to be so tall
always," returned Bludgeonhead, as he stepped over a great broad river
that lay in his path. "It makes one very uppish to be as high in the air
as this; and you'd be all the time looking down on your friends, too,
which would be so unpleasant for your friends that they wouldn't have
anything to do with you after a while. I'm going to
jump over this mountain in front of us." Here Bludgeonhead drew back a little and then took a short run, after
which he leaped high in the air, and he and Jimmieboy sailed easily over
the great hills before them, and then alighted safe and sound on the
other side. cried Jimmieboy, clapping his hands with glee. "I hope there are lots more hills like that to be jumped over." "No, there aren't," said Bludgeonhead, "but if you like it so much I'll
go back and do it again." Bludgeonhead turned back and jumped over the mountain half a dozen times
until Jimmieboy was satisfied and then he resumed his journey. "This," he said, after trudging along in silence for some time, "this is
Fortyforefoot Valley, and in a short time we shall come to the giant's
castle; but meanwhile I want you to see what a wonderful place this is. The valley itself will give you a better idea of Fortyforefoot's great
power as a magician than anything else that I know of. Do you know what
this place was before he came here?" "It was a great big hole in the ground," returned Bludgeonhead. Fortyforefoot liked the situation because it was
surrounded by mountains and nobody ever wanted to come here because sand
pits aren't worth visiting. There wasn't a tree or a speck of a green
thing anywhere in sight--nothing but yellow sand glaring in the sun all
day and sulking in the moon all night." It's all covered with beautiful trees and
gardens and brooks now," said Jimmieboy, which was quite true, for the
Fortyforefoot Valley was a perfect paradise to look at, filled with
everything that was beautiful in the way of birds and trees and flowers
and water courses. "How could he make the trees and flowers grow in dry
hot sand like that?" "By his magic power, of course," answered Bludgeonhead. "He filled up a
good part of the sand pit with stones that he found about here, and then
he changed one part of the desert into a pond so that he could get all
the water he wanted. Then he took a square mile of sand and changed
every grain of it into blades of grass. Other portions he transformed
into forests until finally simply by the wonderful power he has to
change one thing into another he got the place into its present shape." "But the birds, how did he make them?" "He didn't," said Bludgeonhead. They saw
what a beautiful place this was and they simply moved in." Bludgeonhead paused a moment in his walk and set Jimmieboy down on the
ground again. "I think I'll take a rest here before going on. We are very near to
Fortyforefoot's castle now," he said. "I'll sit down here for a few
moments and sharpen my sword and get in good shape for a fight if one
becomes necessary. This place is full of
traps for just such fellows as you who come in here. That's the way
Fortyforefoot catches them for dinner." So Jimmieboy staid close by Bludgeonhead's side and was very much
entertained by all that went on around him. He saw the most wonderful
birds imaginable, and great bumble-bees buzzed about in the flowers
gathering honey by the quart. Once a great jack-rabbit, three times as
large as he was, came rushing out of the woods toward him, and Jimmieboy
on stooping to pick up a stone to throw at Mr. Bunny to frighten him
away, found that all the stones in that enchanted valley were precious. He couldn't help laughing outright when he discovered that the stone he
had thrown at the rabbit was a huge diamond as big as his fist, and that
even had he stopped to choose a less expensive missile he would have had
to confine his choice to pearls, rubies, emeralds, and other gems of the
rarest sort. And then he noticed that what he thought was a rock upon
which he and Bludgeonhead were sitting was a massive nugget of pure
yellow gold. This lead him on to inspect the trees about him and then he
discovered a most absurd thing. Fortyforefoot's extravagance had
prompted him to make all his pine trees of the most beautifully polished
and richly inlaid mahogany; every one of the weeping willows was made of
solid oak, ornamented and carved until the eye wearied of its beauty,
and as for the birds in the trees, their nests were made not of stray
wisps of straw and hay stolen from the barns and fields, but of the
softest silk, rich in color and lined throughout with eiderdown, the
mere sight of which could hardly help being restful to a tired bird--or
boy either, for that matter, Jimmieboy thought. "Did he make all this out of sand? All these jewels and magnificent
carvings?" "Simply took up a handful of sand and tossed
it up in the air and whatever he commanded it to be it became. But the
most wonderful thing in this place is his spring. He made what you might
call a 'Wish Dipper' out of an old tin cup. Then he dug a hole and
filled it with sand which he commanded to become liquid, and, when the
sand heard him say that, it turned to liquid, but the singular thing
about it is that as Fortyforefoot didn't say what kind of liquid it
should be, it became any kind. So now if any one is thirsty and wants a
glass of cider all he has to do is to dip the wish dipper into the
spring and up comes cider. If he wants lemonade up comes lemonade. If he
wants milk up comes milk. As Bludgeonhead spoke these words Jimmieboy was startled to hear
something very much like an approaching footstep far down the road. he asked, seizing Bludgeonhead by the hand. "Yes, I did," replied Bludgeonhead, in a whisper. "It sounded to me like
Fortyforefoot's step, too." "I'd better hide, hadn't I?" Climb inside
my coat and snuggle down out of sight in my pocket. We musn't let him
see you yet awhile." Jimmieboy did as he was commanded, and found the pocket a very
comfortable place, only it was a little stuffy. "It's pretty hot in here," he whispered. "Well, look up on the left hand corner of the outer side of the pocket
and you'll find two flaps that are buttoned up," replied Bludgeonhead,
softly. One will let in all the air you want, and the
other will enable you to peep out and see Fortyforefoot without his
seeing you." In a minute the buttons were found and the flaps opened. Everything
happened as Bludgeonhead said it would, and in a minute Jimmieboy,
peering out through the hole in the cloak, saw Fortyforefoot
approaching. The owner of the beautiful valley seemed very angry when he caught sight
of Bludgeonhead sitting on his property, and hastening up to him, he
cried:

"What business have you here in the Valley of Fortyforefoot?" Jimmieboy shrank back into one corner of the pocket, a little overcome
with fear. Fortyforefoot was larger and more terrible than he thought. "I am not good at riddles," said Bludgeonhead, calmly. "That is at
riddles of that sort. If you had asked me the difference between a duck
and a garden rake I should have told you that a duck has no teeth and
can eat, while a rake has plenty of teeth and can't eat. But when you
ask me what business I have here I am forced to say that I can't say." "You are a very bright sort of a giant," sneered Fortyforefoot. "The fact is I can't help being bright. My
mother polishes me every morning with a damp chamois." "Do you know to whom you are speaking?" "No; not having been introduced to you, I can't say I know you,"
returned Bludgeonhead. You are Anklehigh, the
Dwarf." At this Fortyforefoot turned purple with rage. "I'll right quickly teach thee a
lesson thou rash fellow." Fortyforefoot strode up close to Bludgeonhead, whose size he could not
have guessed because Bludgeonhead had been sitting down all this time
and was pretty well covered over by his cloak. [Illustration: BLUDGEONHEAD SHOWS JIMMIEBOY TO FORTYFOREFOOT. [Blank Page]

"I'll take thee by thine ear and toss thee to the moon," he cried,
reaching out his hand to make good his word. "Nonsense, Anklehigh," returned Bludgeonhead, calmly. No dwarf can fight with a giant of my size." "But I am not the dwarf Anklehigh," shrieked Fortyforefoot. "And I am Bludgeonhead," returned the other, rising and towering way
above the owner of the valley. cried Fortyforefoot, falling on his knees in abject
terror. Pardon, O, Bludgeonhead. I did not know
you when I was so hasty as to offer to throw you to the moon. I thought
you were--er--that you were--er----"

"More easily thrown," suggested Bludgeonhead. "Yes--yes--that was it," stammered Fortyforefoot. "And now, to show that
you have forgiven me, I want you to come to my castle and have dinner
with me." "I'll be very glad to," replied Bludgeonhead. "What are you going to
have for dinner?" "Anything you wish," said Fortyforefoot. "I was going to have a very
plain dinner to-night because for to-morrow's dinner I have invited my
brother Fortythreefoot and his wife Fortytwoinch to have a little
special dish I have been so fortunate as to secure." "Oh, only a sniveling creature I caught in one of my traps this
afternoon. He was a soldier, and he wasn't very brave about being
caught, but I judge from looking at him that he will make good eating,"
said Fortyforefoot. "I couldn't gather from him who he was. He had on a
military uniform, but he behaved less like a warrior than ever I
supposed a man could. It seems from his story that he was engaged upon
some secret mission, and on his way back to his army, he stumbled over
and into one of my game traps where I found him. He begged me to let him
go, but that was out of the question. I haven't had a soldier to eat for
four years, so I took him to the castle, had him locked up in the
ice-box, and to-morrow we shall eat him." He told me so many names that I didn't
believe he really owned any of them," said Fortyforefoot. "All I could
really learn about him was that he was as brave as a lion, and that if I
would spare him he would write me a poem a mile long every day of my
life." "Very attractive offer, that," said Bludgeonhead, with a smile. "Yes; but I couldn't do it. I wouldn't miss eating him for anything,"
replied Fortyforefoot, smacking his lips, hungrily. "I'd give anything
anybody'd ask, too, if I could find another as good." "Well, now, I thought you
would, and that is really what I have come here for. I have in my pocket
here a real live general that I have captured. Now between you and me, I
don't eat generals. I don't care for them--they fight so. I prefer
preserved cherries and pickled peaches and--er--strawberry jam and
powdered sugar and almonds, and other things like that, you know, and it
occurred to me that if I let you have the general you would supply me
with what I needed of the others." "You have come to the right place, Bludgeonhead," said Fortyforefoot,
eagerly. "I'll give you a million cans of jam, all the pickled peaches
and other things you can carry if this general you speak about is a fine
specimen." "Well, here he is," said Bludgeonhead, hauling Jimmieboy out of his
pocket--whispering to Jimmieboy at the same time not to be afraid
because he wouldn't let anything happen to him, and so of course
Jimmieboy felt perfectly safe, though a little excited. "No," answered Bludgeonhead, putting Jimmieboy back into his pocket
again. "If I ever do find another, though, you shall have him." This of course put Fortyforefoot in a tremendously good humor, and
before an hour had passed he had not only transformed pebbles and twigs
and leaves of trees and other small things into the provisions that the
tin soldiers needed, but he had also furnished horses and wagons enough
to carry them back to headquarters, and then Fortyforefoot accompanied
by Bludgeonhead entered the castle, where the proprietor demanded that
Jimmieboy should be given up to him. Bludgeonhead handed him over at once, and ten minutes later Jimmieboy
found himself locked up in the pantry. Hardly had he time to think over the strange events of the afternoon
when he heard a noise in the ice-box over in one corner of the pantry,
and on going there to see what was the cause of it he heard a familiar
voice repeating over and over again these mournful lines:

    "From Giant number one I ran--
       But O the sequel dire! I truly left a frying-pan
       And jumped into a fire." "Hullo in there," whispered Jimmieboy. "The bravest man of my time," replied the voice in the ice-box. "Major
Mortimer Carraway Blueface of the 'Jimmieboy Guards.'" "Oh, I am so glad to find you again," cried Jimmieboy, throwing open the
ice-box door. "I thought it was you the minute I heard your poetry." "You recognized the beauty of
the poem?" "But you said you were in the fire when I
knew you were in the ice-box, and so of course----"

"Of course," said the major, with a frown. "You remembered that when I
say one thing I mean another. Well, I'm glad to see you again, but why
did you desert me so cruelly?" For a moment Jimmieboy could say nothing, so surprised was he at the
major's question. Then he simply repeated it, his amazement very evident
in the tone of his voice. "Why did we desert you so cruelly?" When two of my companions
in arms leave me, the way you and old Spriteyboy did, I think you ought
to make some explanation. "But we didn't desert you," said Jimmieboy. "No such idea ever entered
our minds. The minute Spritey turned into
Bludgeonhead you ran away just about as fast as your tin legs could
carry you--frightened to death evidently." "Jimmieboy," said the major, his voice husky with emotion, "any other
person than yourself would have had to fight a duel with me for casting
such a doubt as you have just cast upon my courage. The idea of me, of
I, of myself, Major Mortimer Carraway Blueface, the hero of a hundred
and eighty-seven real sham fights, the most poetic as well as the
handsomest man in the 'Jimmieboy Guards' being accused of running away! "I've been accused of dreadful things,
     Of wearing copper finger-rings,
     Of eating green peas with a spoon,
     Of wishing that I owned the moon,
     Of telling things that weren't the truth,
     Of having cut no wisdom tooth,
     In times of war of stealing buns,
     And fainting at the sound of guns,
     Yet never dreamed I'd see the day
     When it was thought I'd run away. Alack--O--well-a-day--alas! Alas--O--well-a-day--alack! Alas--alack--O--well-a-day! Aday--alas--O--lack-a-well--"

"Are you going to keep that up forever?" "If you are
I'm going to get out. I've heard stupid poetry in this campaign, but
that's the worst yet." "I only wanted to show you what I could do in the way of a lamentation,"
said the major. "If you've had enough I'll stop of course; but tell me,"
he added, sitting down upon a cake of ice, and crossing his legs, "how
on earth did you ever get hold of the ridiculous notion that I ran away
frightened?" The minute
the sprite was changed into Bludgeonhead I turned to speak to you, and
all I could see of you was your coat-tails disappearing around the
corner way down the road." "And just because my coat-tails behaved like that you put me down as a
coward?" I hurried
off; but not because I was afraid. I was simply going down the road to
see if I couldn't find a looking-glass so that Spriteyboy could see how
he looked as a giant." "That's a magnificent excuse," he said. "I thought you'd think it was," said the major, with a pleased smile. "And when I finally found that there weren't any mirrors to be had
along the road I went back, and you two had gone and left me." It's a great thing, sleep is, and I wrote the
lines off in two tenths of a fifth of a second. As I remember it, this
is the way they went:

    "SLEEP. Deserted by my friends I sit,
       And silently I weep,
     Until I'm wearied so by it,
     I lose my little store of wit;
       I nod and fall asleep. Then in my dreams my friends I spy--
       Once more are they my own. I cease to murmur and to cry,
     For then 'tis sure to be that I
       Forget I am alone. 'Tis hence I think that sleep's the best
       Of friends that man has got--
      Not only does it bring him rest
     But makes him feel that he is blest
       With blessings he has not." "Why didn't you go to sleep if you felt that way?" "I wanted to find you and I hadn't time. There was only time for me to
scratch that poem off on my mind and start to find you and Bludgeyboy,"
replied the major. "His name isn't Bludgeyboy," said Jimmieboy, with a smile. "Oh, yes, I forgot," said the major. "It's a good name, too,
Bludgeonpate is." "How did you come to be captured by Fortyforefoot?" asked Jimmieboy,
after he had decided not to try to correct the major any more as to
Bludgeonhead's name. "The idea of a miserable
ogre like Fortyforefoot capturing me, the most sagacitacious soldier of
modern times. I suppose you think I fell into one of his game traps?" "That's what he said," said Jimmieboy. "He said you acted in a very
curious way, too--promised him all sorts of things if he'd let you go." "That's just like those big, bragging giants," said the major. I came here of my own free will
and accord." Down here into this pantry and into the ice-chest? You can't fool me," said Jimmieboy. "To meet you, of course," retorted the major. I knew it
was part of your scheme to come here. You and I were to be put into the
pantry and then old Bludgeyhat was to come and rescue us. I was the one
to make the scheme, wasn't I?" It was Bludgeonhead," said Jimmieboy, who didn't know whether to
believe the major or not. "That's just the way," said the major, indignantly, "he gets all the
credit just because he's big and I don't get any, and yet if you knew of
all the wild animals I've killed to get here to you, how I met
Fortyforefoot and bound him hand and foot and refused to let him go
unless he would permit me to spend a week in his ice-chest, for the sole
and only purpose that I wished to meet you again, you'd change your mind
mighty quick about me." "Did you ever see me in a real sham battle?" "No, I never did," said Jimmieboy. "Well, you'd better never," returned the major, "unless you want to be
frightened out of your wits. I have been called the living telescope,
sir, because when I begin to fight, in the fiercest manner possible, I
sort of lengthen out and sprout up into the air until I am taller than
any foe within my reach." queried Jimmieboy, with a puzzled air about him. "Well, I should like to see it once," said Jimmieboy. "Then you will never believe it," returned the major, "because you will
never see it. I never fight in the presence of others, sir." As the major spoke these words a heavy footstep was heard on the stairs. cried the major, springing to his feet. "I do not ask you for your gold,
       Nor for an old straw hat--
     I simply ask that I be told
       Oh what, oh what is that?" "It is a footstep on the stairs," said Jimmieboy. moaned the major "If it is Fortyforefoot all is
over for us. "I was afraid he could not wait,
       The miserable sinner,
     To serve me up in proper state
       At his to-morrow's dinner. Alas, he comes I greatly fear
       In search of Major Me, sir,
     And that he'll wash me down with beer
       This very night at tea, sir." "Oh, why did I come here--why----"

"I shall!" roared a voice out in the passage-way. "You shall not," roared another voice, which Jimmieboy was delighted to
recognize as Bludgeonhead's. "I am hungry," said the first voice, "and what is mine is my own to do
with as I please. "I will toss you into the air, my dear Fortyforefoot," returned
Bludgeonhead's voice, "if you advance another step; and with such force,
sir, that you will never come down again." Stand aside," roared the voice of
Fortyforefoot. The two prisoners in the pantry heard a tremendous scuffling, a crash,
and a loud laugh. Then Bludgeonhead's voice was heard again. "Good-by, Fortyforefoot," it cried. "I hope he is not going to leave us," whispered Jimmieboy, but the major
was too frightened to speak, and he trembled so that half a dozen times
he fell off the ice-cake that he had been sitting on. "Give my love to the moon when you pass her, and when you get up into
the milky way turn half a million of the stars there into baked apples
and throw 'em down to me," called Bludgeonhead's voice. "If you'll only lasso me and pull me back I'll do anything you want me
to," came the voice of Fortyforefoot from some tremendous height, it
seemed to Jimmieboy. "Not if I know it," replied Bludgeonhead, with a laugh. "I think I'd
like to settle down here myself as the owner of Fortyforefoot Valley. Whatever answer was made to this it was too indistinct for Jimmieboy to
hear, and in a minute the key of the pantry door was turned, the door
thrown open, and Bludgeonhead stood before them. "You are free," he said, grasping Jimmieboy's hand and squeezing it
affectionately. "But I had to get rid of him. It was the only way to do
it. "And did you really throw him off into the air?" asked Jimmieboy, as he
walked out into the hall. ejaculated Jimmieboy, as he glanced upward and saw a huge rent in
the ceiling, through which, gradually rising and getting smaller and
smaller the further he rose, was to be seen the unfortunate
Fortyforefoot. "I simply picked him up and tossed him over
my head. I shall turn myself into Fortyforefoot
and settle down here forever, only instead of being a bad giant I shall
be a good one--but hallo! The major had crawled out of the ice-chest and was now trying to appear
calm, although his terrible fright still left him trembling so that he
could hardly speak. "It is Major Blueface," said Jimmieboy, with a smile. "He was Fortyforefoot's other prisoner." "N--nun--not at--t--at--at all," stammered the major. "I
def--fuf--feated him in sus--single combat." "But what are you trembling so for now?" "I--I am--m not tut--trembling," retorted the major. "I--I am o--only
sh--shivering with--th--the--c--c--c--cold. I--I--I've bub--been in
th--that i--i--i--ice bu--box sus--so long." Jimmieboy and Bludgeonhead roared with laughter at this. Then giving the
major a warm coat to put on they sent him up stairs to lie down and
recover his nerves. After the major had been attended to, Bludgeonhead changed himself back
into the sprite again, and he and Jimmieboy sauntered in and out among
the gardens for an hour or more and were about returning to the castle
for supper when they heard sounds of music. There was evidently a brass
band coming up the road. In an instant they hid themselves behind a
tree, from which place of concealment they were delighted two or three
minutes later to perceive that the band was none other than that of the
"Jimmieboy Guards," and that behind it, in splendid military form,
appeared Colonel Zinc followed by the tin soldiers themselves. cried Jimmieboy, throwing his cap into the air. shrieked the colonel, waving his sword with delight, and
commanding his regiment to halt, as he caught sight of Jimmieboy. [Illustration: BLUDGEONHEAD COMES TO THE RESCUE. [Blank Page]

"Us likewise!" cheered the soldiers: following which came a trembling
voice from one of the castle windows which said:

    "I also wish to add my cheer
       Upon this happy day;
     And if you'll kindly come up here
       You'll hear me cry 'Hooray.'" "No," said the sprite, motioning to Jimmieboy not to betray the major. "Only a little worn-out by the fight we have had with Fortyforefoot." "Yes," said the sprite, modestly. "We three have got rid of him at
last." "Do you know who
Fortyforefoot really was?" "The Parallelopipedon himself," said the colonel. "We found that out
last night, and fearing that he might have captured our general and our
major we came here to besiege him in his castle and rescue our
officers." "But I don't see how Fortyforefoot could have been the
Parallelopipedon," said Jimmieboy. "What would he want to be him for,
when, all he had to do to get anything he wanted was to take sand and
turn it into it?" "Ah, but don't you see," explained the colonel, "there was one thing he
never could do as Fortyforefoot. The law prevented him from leaving this
valley here in any other form than that of the Parallelopipedon. He
didn't mind his confinement to the valley very much at first, but after
a while he began to feel cooped up here, and then he took an old packing
box and made it look as much like a living Parallelopipedon as he could. Then he got into it whenever he wanted to roam about the world. Probably
if you will search the castle you will find the cast-off shell he used
to wear, and if you do I hope you will destroy it, because it is said to
be a most horrible spectacle--frightening animals to death and causing
every flower within a mile to wither and shrink up at the mere sight of
it." "It's all true, Jimmieboy," said the sprite. Why,
he only gave us those cherries and peaches there in exchange for
yourself because he expected to get them all back again, you know." "It was a glorious victory," said the colonel. "I will now announce it
to the soldiers." This he did and the soldiers were wild with joy when they heard the
news, and the band played a hymn of victory in which the soldiers
joined, singing so vigorously that they nearly cracked their voices. When they had quite finished the colonel said he guessed it was time to
return to the barracks in the nursery. "Not before the feast," said the sprite. "We have here all the
provisions the general set out to get, and before you return home,
colonel, you and your men should divide them among you." So the table was spread and all went happily. In the midst of the feast
the major appeared, determination written upon every line of his face. The soldiers cheered him loudly as he walked down the length of the
table, which he acknowledged as gracefully as he could with a stiff bow,
and then he spoke:

"Gentlemen," he said, "I have always been a good deal of a favorite with
you, and I know that what I am about to do will fill you with deep
grief. I am going to stop being a man of war. The tremendous victory we
have won to-day is the result entirely of the efforts of myself, General
Jimmieboy and Major Sprite--for to the latter I now give the title I
have borne so honorably for so many years. Our present victory is one of
such brilliantly brilliant brilliance that I feel that I may now retire
with lustre enough attached to my name to last for millions and millions
of years. I need rest, and here I shall take it, in this beautiful
valley, which by virtue of our victory belongs wholly and in equal parts
to General Jimmieboy, Major Sprite and myself. Hereafter I shall be
known only as Mortimer Carraway Blueface, Poet Laureate of Fortyforefoot
Hall, Fortyforefoot Valley, Pictureland. As Governor-General of the
country we have decided to appoint our illustrious friend, Major
Benjamin Bludgeonhead Sprite. General Jimmieboy will remain commander of
the forces, and the rest of you may divide amongst yourselves, as a
reward for your gallant services, all the provisions that may now be
left upon this table. That
is that you do not take the table. It is of solid mahogany and must be
worth a very considerable sum. Now let the saddest word be said,
    Now bend in sorrow deep the head. Let tears flow forth and drench the dell:
    Farewell, brave soldier boys, farewell." Here the major wiped his eyes sadly and sat down by the sprite who shook
his hand kindly and thanked him for giving him his title of major. "We'll have fine times living here together," said the sprite. "I'm going to see if I can't have
myself made over again, too, Spritey. I'll be pleasanter for you to look
at. What's the use of being a tin soldier in a place where even the
cobblestones are of gold and silver." "You can be plated any how," said Jimmieboy. "Yes, and maybe I can have a platinum sword put in, and a real solid
gold head--but just at present that isn't what I want," said the major. "What I am after now is a piece of birthday cake with real fruit raisins
in it and strips of citron two inches long, the whole concealed beneath
a one inch frosting. "I don't think we have any here," said Jimmieboy, who was much pleased
to see the sprite and the major, both of whom he dearly loved, on such
good terms. "But I'll run home and see if I can get some." "Well, we'll all go with you," said the colonel, starting up and
ordering the trumpeters to sound the call to arms. "All except Blueface and myself," said the sprite. "We will stay here
and put everything in readiness for your return." "That is a good idea," said Jimmieboy. "And you'll have to hurry for we
shall be back very soon." This, as it turned out, was a very rash promise for Jimmieboy to make,
for after he and the tin soldiers had got the birthday cake and were
ready to enter Pictureland once more, they found that not one of them
could do it, the frame was so high up and the picture itself so hard
and impenetrable. Jimmieboy felt so badly to be unable to return to his
friends, that, following the major's hint about sleep bringing
forgetfulness of trouble, he threw himself down on the nursery couch,
and closing his brimming eyes dozed off into a dreamless sleep. It was quite dark when he opened them again and found himself still on
the couch with a piece of his papa's birthday cake in his hand, his
sorrows all gone and contentment in their place. His papa was sitting at
his side, and his mamma was standing over by the window smiling. "You've had a good long nap, Jimmieboy," said she, "and I rather think,
from several things I've heard you say in your sleep, you've been
dreaming about your tin soldiers." "I don't believe it was a dream, mamma," he said, "it was all too real." And then he told his papa all that had happened. "Well, it is very singular," said his papa, when Jimmieboy had finished,
"and if you want to believe it all happened you may; but you say all the
soldiers came back with you except Major Blueface?" "Yes, every one," said Jimmieboy. "Then we can tell whether it was true or not by looking in the tin
soldier's box. If the major isn't there he may be up in Fortyforefoot
castle as you say." Jimmieboy climbed eagerly down from the couch and rushing to the toy
closet got out the box of soldiers and searched it from top to bottom. The major was not to be seen anywhere, nor to this day has Jimmieboy
ever again set eyes upon him. Transcriber's Note:

The use of capitalisation for major and general has been retained as
appears in the original publication. Changes have been made as follows:

    Page 60
    ejaculated the Paralleopipedon _changed to_
    ejaculated the Parallelopipedon? MADELINE LESLIE,
  AUTHOR OF "THE LESLIE STORIES," "TIM, THE SCISSORS-GRINDER,"
                              ETC. BOSTON:
                        LEE AND SHEPARD,
              SUCCESSORS TO PHILLIPS, SAMPSON & CO. MINNIE'S PET PARROT. BY

                      MRS. MADELINE LESLIE,
  AUTHOR OF "THE LESLIE STORIES," "TIM, THE SCISSORS-GRINDER,"
                              ETC. BOSTON:
                        LEE AND SHEPARD,
              SUCCESSORS TO PHILLIPS, SAMPSON & CO. BY

                      MRS. MADELINE LESLIE,
  AUTHOR OF "THE LESLIE STORIES," "TIM, THE SCISSORS-GRINDER,"
                              ETC. BOSTON:
                        LEE AND SHEPARD,
              SUCCESSORS TO PHILLIPS, SAMPSON & CO. MINNIE'S PET LAMB. BY

                      MRS. MADELINE LESLIE,
  AUTHOR OF "THE LESLIE STORIES," "TIM, THE SCISSORS-GRINDER,"
                              ETC. BOSTON:
                        LEE AND SHEPARD,
              SUCCESSORS TO PHILLIPS, SAMPSON & CO. BY

                      MRS. MADELINE LESLIE,
  AUTHOR OF "THE LESLIE STORIES," "TIM, THE SCISSORS-GRINDER,"
                              ETC. BOSTON:
                        LEE AND SHEPARD,
              SUCCESSORS TO PHILLIPS, SAMPSON & CO. Transcriber's Note

The following typographical errors were corrected:

Page  Error
73    "good morning," changed to 'good morning,'
112   pet monkey." This watering-pot
with a fine rose will enable you to sprinkle them slowly, and the soil
can absorb the moisture naturally and equally. Most plants need water
much as we take our food, regularly, often, and not too much at a time. Let this surface soil in the pots be your guide. It should never be
perfectly dry, and still less should it be sodden with moisture; nor
should moisture ever stand in the saucers under the pots, unless the
plants are semi-aquatic, like this calla-lily. You will gradually learn
to treat each plant or family of plants according to its nature. The
amount of water which that calla requires would kill this heath, and the
quantity needed by the heath would be the death of that cactus over
there." cried Amy, "if I were left alone in the care of your
flower-room, I should out-Herod Herod in the slaughter of the innocents." "You will not be left alone, and you will be surprised to find how
quickly the pretty mystery of life and growth will begin to reveal itself
to you." *       *       *       *       *

As the days passed, Amy became more and more absorbed in the genial family
life of the Cliffords. She especially attached herself to the old people,
and Mr. Clifford were fast learning that their kindness to the
orphan was destined to receive an exceeding rich reward. Her young eyes
supplemented theirs, which were fast growing dim; and even platitudes read
in her sweet girlish voice seemed to acquire point and interest. She soon
learned to glean from the papers and periodicals that which each cared for,
and to skip the rest. She discovered in the library a well-written book on
travel in the tropics, and soon had them absorbed in its pages, the
descriptions being much enhanced in interest by contrast with the winter
landscape outside. Clifford had several volumes on the culture of
flowers, and under her guidance and that of Webb she began to prepare for
the practical out-door work of spring with great zest. In the meantime she
was assiduous in the care of the house plants, and read all she could find
in regard to the species and varieties represented in the little
flower-room. It became a source of genuine amusement to start with a
familiar house plant and trace out all its botanical relatives, with their
exceedingly varied character and yet essential consanguinity; and she drew
others, even Alf and little Johnnie, into this unhackneyed pursuit of
knowledge. "These plant families," she said one day, "are as curiously diverse as
human families. Group them together and you can see plainly that they
belong to one another, and yet they differ so widely." "As widely as Webb and I," put in Burt. "Burt is what you would call a rampant grower, running more to wood and
foliage than anything else," Leonard remarked. "I didn't say that," said Amy. "Moreover, I learned from my reading that
many of the strong-growing plants become in maturity the most productive
of flowers or fruit." It's a fault that will mend every day," she
replied, with a smile that was so arch and genial that he mentally
assured himself that he never would be disheartened in his growing
purpose to make Amy more than a sister. CHAPTER XII

A MOUNTAINEER'S HOVEL


One winter noon Leonard returned from his superintendence of the
wood-cutting in the mountains. At the dinner-table be remarked: "I have
heard to-day that the Lumley family are in great destitution, as usual. It is useless to help them, and yet one cannot sit down to a dinner like
this in comfort while even the Lumleys are hungry." "Hunger is their one good trait," said Webb. "Under its incentive they
contribute the smallest amount possible to the world's work." "I shouldn't mind," resumed Leonard, "if Lumley and his wife were pinched
sharply. Indeed, it would give me solid satisfaction had I the power to
make those people work steadily for a year, although they would regard it
as the worst species of cruelty. They have a child, however, I am told,
and for its sake I must go and see after them. Come with me, Amy, and I
promise that you will be quite contented when you return home." It was rather late in the afternoon when the busy Leonard appeared at the
door in his strong one-horse sleigh with its movable seat, and Amy found
that he had provided an ample store of vegetables, flour, etc. She
started upon the expedition with genuine zest, to which every mile of
progress added. The clouded sky permitted only a cold gray light, in which everything
stood out with wonderful distinctness. Even the dried weeds with their
shrivelled seed-vessels were sharply defined against the snow. The beech
leaves which still clung to the trees were bleached and white, but the
foliage on the lower branches of the oaks was almost black against the
hillside. At times Leonard would stop
his horse, and when the jingle of the sleigh-bells ceased the silence was
profound. Every vestige of life had disappeared in the still woods, or
was hidden by the snow. "How lonely and dreary it all looks!" "That is why I like to look at a scene like this," Leonard replied. "When I get home I see it all again--all its cold desolation--and it
makes Maggie's room, with her and the children around me, seem like
heaven." But oh, the contrast to Maggie's room that Amy looked upon after a ride
over a wood-road so rough that even the deep snow could not relieve its
rugged inequalities! A dim glow of firelight shone through the frosted
window-panes of a miserable dwelling, as they emerged in the twilight
from the narrow track in the growing timber. In response to a rap on the
door, a gruff, thick voice said, "Come in." Leonard, with a heavy basket on his arm, entered, followed closely by
Amy, who, in her surprise, looked with undisguised wonder at the scene
before her. Indeed, it seemed
like profanation of the word to call the bare, uncleanly room by that
sweetest of English words. Her eyes
were not resting on decent poverty, but upon uncouth, repulsive want; and
this awful impoverishment was not seen in the few articles of cheap,
dilapidated furniture so clearly as in the dull, sodden faces of the man
and woman who kennelled there. No trace of manhood or womanhood was
visible--and no animal is so repulsive as a man or woman imbruted. The man rose unsteadily to his feet and said: "Evenin', Mr. The woman had not the grace or the power to acknowledge their presence,
but after staring stolidly for a moment or two at her visitors through
her dishevelled hair, turned and cowered over the hearth again, her
elfish locks falling forward and hiding her face. The wretched smoky fire they maintained was the final triumph and
revelation of their utter shiftlessness. With square miles of woodland
all about them, they had prepared no billets of suitable size. The man
had merely cut down two small trees, lopped off their branches, and
dragged them into the room. Their butt-ends were placed together on the
hearth, whence the logs stretched like the legs of a compass to the two
further corners of the room. Amy, in the uncertain light, had nearly
stumbled over one of them. As the logs burned away they were shoved
together on the hearth from time to time, the woman mechanically throwing
on dry sticks from a pile near her when the greed wood ceased to blaze. Both man and woman were partially intoxicated, and the latter was so
stupefied as to be indifferent to the presence of strangers. While
Leonard was seeking to obtain from the man some intelligible account of
their condition, and bringing in his gifts, Amy gazed around, with her
fair young face full of horror and disgust. Then her attention was
arrested by a feeble cry from a cradle in a dusky corner beyond the
woman, and to the girl's heart it was indeed a cry of distress, all the
more pathetic because of the child's helplessness, and unconsciousness of
the wretched life to which it seemed inevitably destined. She stepped to the cradle's side, and saw a pallid little creature, puny
and feeble from neglect. Its mother paid no attention to its wailing, and
when Amy asked if she might take it up, the woman's mumbled reply was
unintelligible. After hesitating a moment Amy lifted the child, and found it scarcely
more than a little skeleton. Sitting down on the only chair in the room,
which the man had vacated--the woman crouched on an inverted box--Amy
said, "Leonard, please bring me the milk we brought." After it had been warmed a little the child drank it with avidity. Leonard stood in the background and sadly shook his head as he watched
the scene, the fire-light flickering on Amy's pure profile and
tear-dimmed eye as she watched the starved babe taking from her hand the
food that the brutish mother on the opposite side of the hearth was
incapable of giving it. He never forgot that picture--the girl's face beautiful with a divine
compassion, the mother's large sensual features half hidden by her snaky
locks as she leaned stupidly over the fire, the dusky flickering shadows
that filled the room, in which the mountaineer's head loomed like that of
a shaggy beast. Even his rude nature was impressed, and he exclaimed,

"Gad! the likes of that was never seen in these parts afore!" "Oh, sir," cried Amy, turning to him, "can you not see that your little
child is hungry?" "Well,--the woman, she's drunk, and s'pose I be too, somewhat." "Come, Lumley, be more civil," said Leonard. "The young lady isn't used
to such talk." The man drew a step or two nearer, and looked at her wonderingly; then,
stretching out his great grimy hand, he said: "I s'pose you think I
hain't no feelings, miss, but I have. I'll take keer on the young un, and
I won't tech another drop to-night. To Leonard's surprise, Amy took the hand, as she said, "I believe you
will keep your word." "That's right, Lumley," added Leonard, heartily. "Now you are acting like
a man. I've brought you a fair lot of things, but they are in trade. In
exchange for them I want the jug of liquor you brought up from the
village to-day." The man hesitated, and looked at his wife. "Come, Lumley, you've begun well. For your
wife and baby's sake, as well as your own, give me the jug. You mean
well, but you know your failing." Clifford," said the man, going to a cupboard, "I guess it'll
be safer. But you don't want the darned stuff," and he opened the door
and dashed the vessel against an adjacent bowlder. Now brace up, get your axe and cut some wood in a
civilized way. You can't keep up a fire
with this shiftless contrivance," indicating with his foot one of the
logs lying along the floor. "As soon as you get things straightened up
here a little we'll give you work. The young lady has found out that you
have the making of a man in you yet. If she'll take your word for your
conduct to-night, she also will for the future." "Yes," added Amy, "if you will try to do better, we will all try to help
you. Oh, Leonard," she added, as she
placed the child in its cradle, "can't we leave one of the blankets from
the sleigh? the little darling is smiling up
at me! "Never had any sich wisitors afore." When Amy had tucked the child in warm he followed her and Leonard to the
sleigh and said, "Good-by, miss; I'm a-going to work like a man, and
there's my hand on it agin." Going to work was Lumley's loftiest idea of reformation, and many others
would find it a very good beginning. As they drove away they heard the
ring of his axe, and it had a hopeful sound. For a time Leonard was closely occupied with the intricacies of the road,
and when at last he turned and looked at Amy, she was crying. "There, don't take it so to heart," he said, soothingly. "Oh, Leonard, I never saw anything like it before. That poor little
baby's smile went right to my heart. They paused on an eminence and looked back on the dim outline of the
hovel. Then Leonard drew her close to him as he said, "Don't cry any
more. You have acted like a true little woman--just as Maggie would have
done--and good may come of it, although they'll always be Lumleys. As
Webb says, it would require several generations to bring them up. Haven't
I given you a good lesson in contentment?" "Yes; but I did not need one. I'm glad I went, however, but feel that I
cannot rest until there is a real change for the better." You may bring it about"

The supper-table was waiting for them when they returned. The gleam of the
crystal and silver, the ruddy glow from the open stove, the more genial
light of every eye that turned to welcome them, formed a delightful
counter-picture to the one they had just looked upon, and Leonard beamed
with immeasurable satisfaction. To Amy the contrast was almost too sharp,
and she could not dismiss from her thoughts the miserable dwelling in the
mountains. Leonard's buoyant, genial nature had been impressed, but not depressed,
by the scene he had witnessed. Modes of life in the mountains were
familiar to him, and with the consciousness of having done a kind deed
from which further good might result, he was in a mood to speak freely of
the Lumleys, and the story of their experience was soon drawn from him. Impulsive, warm-hearted Burt was outspoken in his admiration of Amy's
part in the visit of charity, but Webb's intent look drew her eyes to
him, and with a strange little thrill at her heart she saw that he had
interpreted her motives and feelings. "I will take you there again, Amy," was all he said, but for some reason
she dwelt upon the tone in which he spoke more than upon all the uttered
words of the others. Later in the evening he joined her in the sitting-room, which, for the
moment, was deserted by the others, and she spoke of the wintry gloom of
the mountains, and how Leonard was fond of making the forbidding aspect a
foil for Maggie's room. Webb smiled as he replied:

"That is just like Len. Maggie's room is the centre of his world, and he
sees all things in their relation to it. I also was out this afternoon,
and I took my gun, although I did not see a living thing to fire at. But
the'still, cold woods,' as you term them, were filled with a beauty and
suggestiveness of which I was never conscious before. I remembered how
different they had appeared in past summers and autumns, and I saw how
ready they were for the marvellous changes that will take place in a few
short weeks. The hillsides seemed like canvases on which an artist had
drawn his few strong outlines which foretold the beauty to come so
perfectly that the imagination supplied it." "Why, Webb, I did not know you had so much imagination." "Nor did I, and I am glad that I am discovering traces of it. I have always
loved the mountains, because so used to them--they were a part of my life
and surroundings--but never before this winter have I realized they were so
beautiful. When I found that you were going up among the hills, I thought I
would go also, and then we could compare our impressions." "It was all too dreary for me," said the young girl, in a low tone. "It
reminded me of the time when my old life ceased, and this new life had
not begun. There were weeks wherein my heart was oppressed with a cold,
heavy despondency, when I just wished to be quiet, and try not to think
at all, and it seemed to me that nature looked to-day just I felt." "I think it very sad that you have learned to interpret nature in this
way so early in life. And yet I think I can understand you and your
analogy." "I think you can, Webb," she said, simply. CHAPTER XIII

ALMOST A TRAGEDY


The quiet sequence of daily life was soon interrupted by circumstances
that nearly ended in a tragedy. One morning Burt saw an eagle sailing
over the mountains. The snow had been greatly wasted, and in most places
was so strongly incrusted that it would bear a man's weight. Therefore
the conditions seemed favorable for the eagle hunt which he had promised
himself; and having told his father that he would look after the wood
teams and men on his way, he took his rifle and started. The morning was not cold, and not a breath of air disturbed the sharp,
still outlines of the leafless trees. The sky was slightly veiled with a
thin scud of clouds. As the day advanced these increased in density and
darkened in hue. Webb remarked at dinner that the atmosphere over the Beacon Hills in the
northeast was growing singularly obscure and dense in its appearance, and
that he believed a heavy storm was coming. "I am sorry Burt has gone to the mountains to-day," said Mrs. "Oh, don't worry about Burt," was Webb's response; "there is no more
danger of his being snowed in than of a fox's." Before the meal was over, the wind, snow-laden, was moaning about the
house. With every hour the gale increased in intensity. Early in the
afternoon the men with the two teams drove to the barn. Amy could just
see their white, obscure figures through the blinding snow, Even old Mr. Burt come up in de mawnin'
an' stirred us all up right smart, slashed down a tree hisself to show a
new gawky hand dat's cuttin' by de cord how to 'arn his salt; den he put
out wid his rafle in a bee-line toward de riber. Dat's de last we seed ob
him;" and Abram went stolidly on to unhitch and care for his horses. Clifford and his two elder sons returned to the house with traces of
anxiety on their faces, while Mrs. Clifford was so worried that,
supported by Amy, she made an unusual effort, and met them at the door. "Don't be disturbed, mother," said Webb, confidently. "Burt and I have
often been caught in snowstorms, but never had any difficulty in finding
our way. Burt will soon appear, or, if he doesn't, it will be because he
has stopped to recount to Dr. Indeed, they all tried to reassure her, but, with woman's quick instinct
where her affections are concerned, she read what was passing in their
minds. Her husband led her back to her couch, where she lay with her
large dark eyes full of trouble, while her lips often moved in prayer. The thought of her youngest and darling son far off and alone among those
cloud-capped and storm-beaten mountains was terrible to her. Another hour passed, and still the absent youth did not return. Leonard,
his father, and Amy, often went to the hall window and looked out. The
storm so enhanced the early gloom of the winter afternoon that the
outbuildings, although so near, loomed out only as shadows. The wind was
growing almost fierce in its violence. Webb had so long kept up his
pretence of reading that Amy began in her thoughts to resent his seeming
indifference as cold-blooded. At last he laid down his book, and went
quietly away. She followed him, for it seemed to her that something ought
to be done, and that he was the one to do it. She found him in an upper
chamber, standing by an open window that faced the mountains. Joining
him, she was appalled by the roar of the wind as it swept down from the
wooded heights. "Oh, Webb," she exclaimed--he started at her words and presence, and
quickly closed the window--"ought not something to be done? The bare
thought that Burt is lost in this awful gloom fills me with horror. The
sound of that wind was like the roar of the ocean in a storm we had. How
can he see in such blinding snow? How could he breast this gale if he
were weary?" He was silent a moment, looking with contracted brows at the gloomy
scene. At last he began, as if reassuring himself as well as the agitated
girl at his side:

"Burt, you must remember, has been brought up in this region. He knows
the mountains well, and--"

"Oh, Webb, you take this matter too coolly," interrupted Amy, impulsively. "Something tells me that Burt is in danger;" and in her deep solicitude she
put her hand on his arm. She noticed that it trembled, and that he still
bent the same contracted brow toward the region where his brother must be
if her fears were true. "Yes," he said, quietly, "I take it coolly. You may be right, and there may be need of prompt, wise action. If so, a
man will need the full control of all his wits. I will not, however, give
up my hope--my almost belief--that he is at Dr. I shall
satisfy myself at once. Try not to show your fears to father and mother,
that's a brave girl." He was speaking hurriedly now as they were descending the stairs. He
found his father in the hall, much disturbed, and querying with his
eldest son as to the advisability of taking some steps immediately. Leonard, although evidently growing anxious, still urged that Burt, with
his knowledge and experience as a sportsman, would not permit himself to
be caught in such a storm. "He surely must be at the house of Dr. Marvin or some other neighbor on
the mountain road." "I also think he is at the doctor's, but shall see," Webb remarked,
quietly, as he drew on his overcoat. "I don't think he's there; I don't think he is at any neighbor's house,"
cried Mrs. Clifford, who, to the surprise of all, had made her way to the
hall unaided. "Burt is thoughtless about little things, but he would not
leave me in suspense on such a night as this." "Mother, I promise you Burt shall soon be here safe and sound;" and Webb
in his shaggy coat and furs went hastily out, followed by Leonard. A few
moments later the dusky outlines of a man and a galloping horse appeared
to Amy for a moment, and then vanished toward the road. It was some time before Leonard returned, for Webb had said: "If Burt is
not at the doctor's, we must go and look for him. Had you not better have
the strongest wood-sled ready? Having admitted the possibility of danger, Leonard acted promptly. With
Abram's help a pair of stout horses were soon attached to the sled, which
was stored with blankets, shovels to clear away drifts, etc. Webb soon came galloping back, followed a few moments later by the
doctor, but there were no tidings of Burt. Clifford would become deeply agitated, but was
mistaken. She lay on her couch with closed eyes, but her lips moved
almost continuously. She had gone to Him whose throne is beyond all
storms. Clifford was with difficulty restrained from joining his sons in the
search. The old habit of resolute action returned upon him, but Webb
settled the question by saying, in a tone almost stern in its authority,
"Father, you _must_ remain with mother." Amy had no further reason to complain that Webb took the matter too
coolly. He was all action, but his movements were as deft as they were
quick. In the basket which Maggie had furnished with brandy and food he
placed the conch-shell used to summon Abram to his meals. Then, taking
down a double-barrelled breech-loading gun, he filled his pocket with
cartridges. Amy asked, with white lips, for, as he seemed the
natural leader, she hovered near him. "If we do not find him at one of the houses well up on the mountain, as I
hope we shall, I shall fire repeatedly in our search. The reports would
be heard further than any other sound, and he might answer with his
rifle." Leonard now entered with the doctor, who said, "All ready; we have
stored the sledge with abundant material for fires, and if Burt has
met with an accident, I am prepared to do all that can be done under
the circumstances." "All ready," responded Webb, again putting on his coat and fur cap. Amy sprang to his side and tied the cap securely down with her scarf. "Forgive me," she whispered, "for saying that you took Bart's danger
coolly. I now see that you are thinking of Burt only." "Of you also, little sister, and I shall be the stronger for such
thoughts. We shall find Burt, and all come home
hungry as wolves. "May the blessing of Him who came to seek and save the lost go with you!" A moment later they dashed away, followed by Burt's hound and the
watch-dog, and the darkness and storm hid them from sight. Oh, the heavy cross of watching and waiting! Many claim that woman is not
the equal of man because she must watch and wait in so many of the dread
emergencies of life, forgetting that it is infinitely easier to act, to
face the wildest storm that sweeps the sky or the deadliest hail crashing
from cannons' mouths, than to sit down in sickening suspense waiting for
the blow to fall. The man's duty requires chiefly the courage which he
shares with the greater part of the brute creation, and only as he adds
woman's patience, fortitude, and endurance does he become heroic. Nothing
but his faith in God and his life-long habit of submission to his will
kept Mr. Clifford from chafing like a caged lion in his enforced
inaction. Clifford, her mother's heart yearning after her youngest
and darling boy with an infinite tenderness, alone was calm. Amy's young heart was oppressed by an unspeakable dread. It was partly
due to the fear and foreboding of a child to whom the mountains were a
Siberia-like wilderness in their awful obscurity, and still more the
result of knowledge of the sorrow that death involves. The bare possibility
that the light-hearted, ever-active Burt, who sometimes perplexed her with
more than fraternal devotion, was lying white and still beneath the
drifting snow, or even wandering helplessly in the blinding gale, was so
terrible that it blanched her cheek, and made her lips tremble when she
tried to speak. She felt that she had been a little brusque to him at
times, and now she reproached herself in remorseful compunction, and with
the abandonment of a child to her present overwrought condition, felt that
she could never refuse him anything should his blue eyes turn pleadingly to
her again. At first she did not give way, but was sustained, like Maggie,
by the bustle of preparation for the return, and in answering the
innumerable questions of Johnnie and Alf. Webb's assurance to his mother
that he would bring Burt back safe and sound was her chief hope. From the
first moment of greeting he had inspired her with a confidence that had
steadily increased, and from the time that he had admitted the possibility
of this awful emergency he had acted so resolutely and wisely as to
convince her that all that man could do would be done. She did not think of
explaining to herself why her hope centred more in him than in all the
others engaged in the search, or why she was more solicitous about him in
the hardships and perils that the expedition involved, and yet Webb shared
her thoughts almost equally with Burt. If the latter were reached, Webb
would be the rescuer, but her sickening dread was that in the black night
and howling storm he could not be found. As the rescuing party pushed their way up the mountain with difficulty they
became more and more exposed to the northeast gale, and felt with
increasing dread how great was the peril to which Burt must be exposed had
he not found refuge in some of the dwellings nearer to the scene of his
sport. The roar of the gale up the rugged defile was perfectly terrific,
and the snow caught up from the overhanging ledges was often driven into
their faces with blinding force. They could do little better than give the
horses their heads, and the poor brutes floundered slowly through the
drifts. The snow had deepened incredibly fast, and the fierce wind piled it
up so fantastically in every sheltered place that they were often in danger
of upsetting, and more than once had to spring out with their shovels. At
last, after an hour of toil, they reached the first summit, but no tidings
could be obtained of Burt from the people residing in the vicinity. They
therefore pushed on toward the gloomy wastes beyond, and before long left
behind them the last dwelling and the last chance that he had found shelter
before night set in. Two stalwart men had joined them in the search,
however, and formed a welcome re-inforcement. With terrible forebodings
they pressed forward, Webb firing his breech-loader rapidly, and the rest
making what noise they could, but the gale swept away these feeble sounds,
and merged them almost instantly in the roar of the tempest. It was their
natural belief that in attempting to reach home Burt would first try to
gain the West Point road that crossed the mountains, for here would be a
pathway that the snow could not obliterate, and also his best chance of
meeting a rescuing party. It was therefore their purpose to push on until
the southern <DW72> of Cro' Nest was reached, but they became so chilled and
despondent over their seemingly impossible task that they stopped on an
eminence near a rank of wood. They knew that the outlook commanded a wide
view to the south and north, and that if Burt were cowering somewhere in
that region, it would be a good point from which to attract his attention. "I move that we make a fire here," said Leonard. "Abram is half-frozen,
we are all chilled to the bone, and the horses need rest. I think, too,
that a fire can be seen further than any sound can be heard." The instinct of self-preservation caused them all to accede, and,
moreover, they must keep up themselves in order to accomplish anything. They soon had a roaring blaze under the partial shield of a rock, while
at the same time the flames rose so high as to be seen on both sides of
the ridge as far as the storm permitted. The horses were sheltered as
well as possible, and heavily blanketed. As the men thawed out their
benumbed forms, Webb exclaimed, "Great God! what chance has Burt in such
a storm? The others shook their heads gloomily, but answered nothing. "There is no use in disguising the truth," said the doctor, slowly. "If
Burt's alive, he must have a fire. But
how can one see anything through this swirl of snow, that is almost as
thick in the air as on the ground?" To their great joy the storm soon began to abate, and the wind to blow in
gusts. They clambered to the highest point near them, and peered eagerly
for some glimmer of light; but only a dim, wild scene, that quickly
shaded off into utter obscurity, was around them. The snowflakes were
growing larger, however, and were no longer swept with a cutting slant
into their faces. cried Webb, "I believe the gale is nearly blown out. I shall
follow this ridge toward the river as far as I can." "I'll go with you," said he doctor, promptly. "No," said Webb; "it will be your turn next. It won't do for us all to
get worn out together. I'll go cautiously; and with this ridge as guide,
and the fire, I can't lose my way. I'll take one of the dogs, and fire my
gun about every ten minutes. If I fire twice in succession, follow me;
meanwhile give a blast on the conch every few moments;" and with these
words he speedily disappeared. The doctor and Leonard returned to the fire, and watched the great flakes
fall hissing into the flames. Hearing of Webb's expedition, the two
neighbors who had recently joined them pushed on up the road, shouting
and blowing the conch-shell as often as they deemed it necessary. Their
signal also was to be two blasts should they meet with any success. Leonard and the doctor were a _corps de reserve_. The wind soon ceased
altogether, and a stillness that was almost oppressive took the place of
the thunder of the gale. They threw themselves down to rest, and Leonard
observed with a groan how soon his form grew white. "Oh, doctor," he said
in a tone of anguish, "can it be that we shall never find Burt till the
snow melts?" "Do not take so gloomy a view," was the reply. "Burt must have been able
to make a fire, and now that the wind has ceased we can attract his
attention." Webb's gun was heard from time to time, the sounds growing steadily
fainter. At last, far away to the east, came two reports in quick
succession. The two men started up, and with the aid of lanterns followed
Webb's trail, Abram bringing up the rear with an axe and blankets. Sometimes up to his waist in snow, sometimes springing from rock to rock
that the wind had swept almost bare, Webb had toiled on along the broken
ridge, his face scratched and bleeding from the shaggy, stunted trees
that it was too dark to avoid; but he thought not of such trifles, and
seemed endowed with a strength ten times his own. Every few moments he
would stop, listen, and peer about him on every side. Finally, after a
rather long upward climb, he knew he had reached a rock of some altitude. The echoes soon died away, and there was no sound
except the low tinkle of the snowflakes through the bushes. He was just
about to push on, when, far down to the right and south of him, he
thought he saw a gleam of light. He looked long and eagerly, but in vain. He passed over to that side of the ridge, and fired again; but there was
no response--nothing but the dim, ghostly snow on every side. Concluding
that it had been but a trick of the imagination, he was about to give up
the hope that had thrilled his heart, when feebly but unmistakably a ray
of light shot up, wavered, and disappeared. At the same moment his dog
gave a loud bark, and plunged down the ridge. A moment sufficed to give
the preconcerted signal, and almost at the risk of life and limb Webb
rushed down the precipitous <DW72>. He had not gone very far before he
heard a long, piteous howl that chilled his very soul with dread. He
struggled forward desperately, and, turning the angle of a rock, saw a
dying fire, and beside it a human form merely outlined through the snow. As the dog was again raising one of his ill-omened howls, Webb stopped
him savagely, and sprang to the prostrate figure, whose face was buried
in its arm. Webb placed a hand that trembled like an aspen over his
brother's heart, and with a loud cry of joy felt its regular beat. Burt
had as yet only succumbed to sleep, which in such cases is fatal when no
help interposes. Webb again fired twice to guide the rescuing party, and
then with some difficulty caused Burt to swallow a little brandy. He next
began to chafe his wrists with the spirits, to shake him, and to shout in
his ear. Slowly Burt shook off his fatal lethargy, and by the time the
rest of the party reached him, was conscious. he exclaimed, "did I go to sleep? I vowed I would not a
hundred times. Nor would I if I could have moved around; but I've
sprained my ankle, and can't walk." With infinite difficulty, but with hearts light and grateful, they
carried him on an improvised stretcher to the sled. Bart explained that
he had been lured further and further away by a large eagle that had kept
just out of range, and in his excitement he had at first paid no
attention to the storm. Finally its increasing fury and the memory of his
distance from home had brought him to his senses, and he had struck out
for the West Point road. Still he had no fears or misgivings, but while
climbing the <DW72> on which he was found, he slipped, fell, and in trying
to save himself came down with his whole weight on a loose stone, and
sprained his left ankle. He tried to crawl and hobble forward, and for a
time gave way to something like panic. He soon found that he was using up
his strength, and that he would perish with the cold before he could make
half a mile. He then crawled under the sheltering ledge where Webb
discovered him, and by the aid of his good woodcraft soon had a fire, for
it was his fortune to have some matches. A dead and partially decayed
tree, a knife strong enough to cut the saplings when bent over, supplied
him with fuel. Finally the drowsiness which long exposure to cold induces
began to oppress him. He fought against it desperately for a time, but,
as events proved, was overpowered. "We have all had a hand at it," was the quiet reply. "I couldn't have
done anything alone." Wrapped up beyond the possibility of further danger from the cold, and
roused from time to time, Burt was carried homeward as fast as the drifts
permitted, the horses' bells now chiming musically in the still air. *       *       *       *       *

As hour after hour passed and there was nothing left to do, Amy took
Johnnie on her lap, and they rocked back and forth and cried together. Soon the heavy lids closed over the little girl's eyes, and shut off the
tears. Alf had already coiled up on a lounge and sobbed himself to sleep. Maggie took up the little girl, laid her down beside him, and covered
them well from the draughts that the furious gale drove through every
crack and cranny of the old house, glad that they had found a happy
oblivion. Amy then crept to a footstool at Mrs. Clifford's side--the
place where she had so often seen the youth whom the storm she now almost
began to believe had swept from them forever--and she bowed her head on
the old lady's thin hand and sobbed bitterly. "Don't give way so, darling," said the mother, as her other hand stroked
the brown hair. We have prayed, and we
now feel that he will do what is best." "It will come in time--when long years have taught you his goodness." She slowly wiped her eyes, and stole a glance at Mr. His
earlier half-desperate restlessness had passed away, and he sat quietly
in his chair gazing into the fire, occasionally wiping a tear from his
eyes, and again looking upward with an expression of sublime submission. Soon, as if conscious of her wondering observation, he said, "Come to me,
Amy." She stood beside him, and he drew her close as he continued:

"My child, one of the hardest lessons we can learn in this world is to
say, 'Not my will, but Thine be done.' I have lived fourscore years, and
yet I could not say it at first; but now" (with a calm glance heavenward)
"I can say, 'My Father, thy will be done.' If he takes Burt, he has given
us you;" and he kissed her so tenderly that she bowed her head upon his
shoulder, and said, brokenly:

"You are my father in very truth." There was a Presence in the room that
filled her with awe, and yet banished her former overwhelming dread and
grief. They watched and waited; there was no sound in the room except the soft
crackle of the fire, and Amy thought deeply on the noble example before
her of calm, trustful waiting. At last she became conscious that the
house was growing strangely still; the faint tick of the great clock on
the landing of the stairs struck her ear; the rush and roar of the wind
had ceased. Bewildered, she rose softly and went to Maggie's room, and
found that the tired mother in watching over her children had fallen
asleep in her chair. She lifted a curtain, and could scarcely believe her
eyes when she saw that the trees that had been writhing and moaning in
the gale now stood white and spectral as the lamp-light fell upon them. It seemed as if the calm that had fallen upon
her spirit had extended to nature; that the storm had hushed its rude
clamor even while it continued. From the window she watched the white
flakes flutter through the light she knew not how long: the old clock
chimed out midnight, and then, faint and far away, she thought she heard
the sleigh-bells. With swift, silent tread, she rushed to a side door and
threw it open. Yes, clear and distinct she now heard them on the mountain
road. With a low cry she returned and wakened Maggie, then flew to the
old people, and, with a voice that she tried in vain to steady, said,
"They are coming." Clifford started up, and was about to rush from the room, but paused
a moment irresolutely, then returned, sat down by his wife, and put his
arm around her. The invalid had grown
faint and white, but his touch and presence were the cordials she needed. Amy fled back to the side door, and the sled soon appeared. There was no
light at this entrance, and she was unobserved. She saw them begin to
lift some one out, and she dashed through an intervening drift nearly to
her waist. Webb felt a hand close on his arm with a grip that he long
remembered. she cried, in a tone of agonizing inquiry. "Heigh-ho, Amy," said the much-muffled figure that they were taking from
the sled; "I'm all right." In strong reaction, the girl would have fallen, had not Webb supported
her. He felt that she trembled and clung almost helplessly to him. "Why, Amy," he said, gently, "you will take your death out here in the
cold and snow"; and leaving the others to care for Burt, he lifted her in
his arms and carried her in. "Thank God, he's safe," she murmured. There,
I'm better now," she said, hastily, and with a swift color coming into
her pale cheeks, as they reached the door. "You must not expose yourself so again, sister Amy." "I thought--I thought when you began to lift Burt out--" But she could
not finish the sentence. Perhaps there is no joy like that which fills loving hearts when the lost
is found. It is so pure and exalted that it is one of the ecstasies of
heaven. It would be hard to describe how the old house waked up with its
sudden accession of life--life that was so warm and vivid against the
background of the shadow of death. There were murmured thanksgivings as
feet hurried to and fro, and an opening fire of questions, which Maggie
checked by saying:

"Possess your souls in patience. Burt's safe--that's enough to know until
he is cared for, and my half-famished husband and the rest get their
supper. Pretty soon we can all sit down, for I want a chance to hear
too." "And no one has a better right, Maggie," said her husband, chafing his
hands over the fire. "After what we've seen to-night, this place is the
very abode of comfort, and you its presiding genius;" and Leonard beamed
and thawed until the air grew tropical around him. Clifford's request (for it was felt that it was not best to cross
the invalid), Burt, in the rocking-chair wherein he had been placed, was
carried to her room, and received a greeting from his parents that
brought tears to the young fellow's eyes. Marvin soon did all within
his power at that stage for the sprained ankle and frost-bitten fingers,
the mother advising, and feeling that she was still caring for her boy as
she had done a dozen years before. Then Burt was carried back to the
dining-room, where all were soon gathered. The table groaned under
Maggie's bountiful provision, and lamp-light and fire-light revealed a
group upon which fell the richer light of a great joy. Burt was ravenously hungry, but the doctor put him on limited diet,
remarking, "You can soon make up for lost time." He and Leonard, however,
made such havoc that Amy pretended to be aghast; but she soon noted that
Webb ate sparingly, that his face was not only scratched and torn, but
almost haggard, and that he was unusually quiet. When all were helped, and Maggie had a chance to sit down, she
said:

"Now tell us about it. We just heard enough when you first arrived to
curdle our blood. How in the world, Burt, did you allow yourself to get
caught in such a storm?" "If it had not been for this confounded sprain I should have come out all
right;" and then followed the details with which the reader is acquainted,
although little could be got out of Webb. "The upshot of it all is," said Leonard, as he beamed upon the party with
ineffable content, "between mother's praying and Webb's looking, Burt is
here, not much the worse for his eagle hunt." They would not hear of the doctor's departure, and very soon afterward
old Mr. Clifford gathered them around the family altar in a thanksgiving
prayer that moistened every eye. Then all prepared for the rest so sorely needed. As Webb went to the hall
to hang up his gun, Amy saw that he staggered in his almost mortal
weariness, and she followed him. "There are your colors, Amy," he said, laughingly, taking her scarf from
an inner pocket. "I wore it till an envious scrub-oak tore it off. It was
of very great help to me--the scarf, not the oak." "Webb," she said, earnestly, "you can't disguise the truth from me by any
such light words. I've been watching
you ever since your return. You are ill--you have gone beyond your
strength, and in addition to it all I let you carry me in. "It's wonderfully nice to have a little sister to worry about a fellow." "But can't I do something for you? You've thought about everybody, and no
one thinks for you." "_You_ have, and so have the rest, as far as there was occasion. Let me
tell you how wan and weary you look. Oh, Amy, our home is so much more to
us since you came!" "What would our home be to us to-night, Webb, were it not for you! And I
said you took Burt's danger too coolly. How I have reproached myself for
those words. you did not resent them; and you saved
Burt;" and she impulsively put her arm around his neck and kissed him,
then fled to her room. The philosophical Webb might have had much to think about that night had
he been in an analytical mood, for by some magic his sense of utter
weariness was marvellously relieved. With a low laugh, he thought,

"I'd be tempted to cross the mountains again for such a reward." CHAPTER XIV

HINTS OF SPRING


When Amy awoke on the following morning she was almost dazzled, so
brilliant was the light that flooded the room. Long, quiet sleep and the
elasticity of youth had banished all depression from mind and body, and
she sprang eagerly to the window that she might see the effects of the
storm, expecting to witness its ravages on every side. Imagine her wonder
and delight when, instead of widespread wreck and ruin, a scene of
indescribable beauty met her eyes! The snow had draped all things in
white. The trees that had seemed so gaunt and skeleton-like as they
writhed and moaned in the gale were now clothed with a beauty surpassing
that of their summer foliage, for every branch, even to the smallest
twig, had been incased in the downy flakes. The evergreens looked like
old-time gallants well powdered for a festival. The shrubbery of the
garden was scarcely more than mounds of snow. The fences had almost
disappeared; while away as far as the eye could reach all was sparkling
whiteness. Nature was like a bride adorned for her nuptials. Under the
earlier influences of the gale the snow had drifted here and there,
making the undulations of her robe, and under the cloudless sun every
crystal glittered, as if over all had been flung a profusion of diamond
dust. Nor did she seem a cold, pallid bride without heart or gladness. Her breath was warm and sweet, and full of an indefinable suggestion of
spring. She seemed to stand radiant in maidenly purity and loveliness,
watching in almost breathless expectation the rising of the sun above the
eastern mountains. A happy group gathered at the breakfast-table that morning. Best of mind
and thankfulness of heart had conduced to refreshing repose, and the
brightness of the new day was reflected in every face. Burt's ankle was
painful, but this was a slight matter in contrast with what might have
been his fate. He had insisted on being dressed and brought to the lounge
in the breakfast-room. Webb seemed wonderfully restored, and Amy thought
he looked almost handsome in his unwonted animation, in spite of the
honorable scars that marked his face. Marvin exclaimed, exultingly:

"Miss Amy, you can begin the study of ornithology at once. There are
bluebirds all about the house, and you have no idea what exquisite bits
of color they are against the snow on this bright morning. After
breakfast you must go out and greet these first arrivals from the South." "Yes, Amy," put in Leonard, laughing, "it's a lovely morning for a
stroll. The snow is only two feet deep, and drifted in many places higher
than your head. The 'beautiful snow' brings us plenty of prose in the
form of back-aching work with our shovels." "No matter," said Webb; "it has also brought us warmth, exquisitely pure
air, and a splendid covering for grass and grain that will be apt to last
well into the spring. Anything rather than mud and the alternate freezing
and thawing that are as provoking as a capricious friend." "Why, Webb, what a burst of sentiment!" "Doctor, the bluebirds seem to come like the south wind that Leonard says
is blowing this morning," Mrs. and how have they reached us after such a storm?" "I imagine that those we hear this morning have been with us all winter,
or they may have arrived before the storm. I scarcely remember a winter
when I have not seen some around, and their instinct guides them where to
find shelter. When the weather is very cold they are comparatively
silent, but even a January thaw will make them tuneful. They are also
migrants, and have been coming northward for a week or two past, and this
accounts for the numbers this morning. they must have
had a hard time of it last night, wherever they were." "Oh, I do wish I could make them know how glad I'd be to take them in and
keep them warm every cold night!" "They have a better mother than even you could be," said the doctor,
nodding at the little girl. "Indeed they have, and all the other birds also, and this mother takes
care of them the year round--Mother Nature, that's her name. Your heart
may be big enough, but your house would not begin to hold all the
bluebirds, so Mother Nature tells the greater part of them to go where
it's warm about the 1st of December, and she finds them winter homes all
the way from Virginia to Florida. Then toward spring she whispers when it
is safe to come back, and if you want to see how she can take care of
those that are here even during such a storm as that of last night,
bundle up and come out on the sunny back piazza." There all the household soon after assembled, the men armed with shovels
to aid in the path-making in which Abram was already engaged. Burt was
placed in a rocking-chair by a window that he might enjoy the prospect
also. A charming winter outlook it was, brilliant with light and gemmed
with innumerable crystals. To Amy's delight, she heard for the first time
the soft, down-like notes of the bluebird. At first they seemed like mere
"wandering voices in the air," sweet, plaintive, and delicate as the
wind-swayed anemone. Then came a soft rustle of wings, and a bird darted
downward, probably from the eaves, but seemingly it was a bit of the sky
that had taken form and substance. He flew past her and dislodged a
miniature avalanche from the spray on which he alighted. The little
creature sat still a moment, then lifted and stretched one wing by an odd
coquettish movement while it uttered its low musical warble. "Why," exclaimed Amy, "he is almost the counterpart of our robin-redbreast
of England!" Marvin, "he resembles your English redbreast closely
both in appearance and habits, and our New England forefathers called him
the 'blue robin.' To my taste the bluebird is the superior of the two,
for what he lacks in stronger and more varied song he makes up in softer,
sweeter notes. You have no blue birds of any
kind in England, Amy. It seems to require our deeper-tinted skies to
produce them. You can tell her by the lighter
blue of her plumage, and the tinge of brown on her head and back. She is
a cold, coy beauty, even as a wife; but how gallant is her azure-coated
beau! Flirt away, my little chap, and make the most of your courting and
honeymoon. You will soon have family cares enough to discourage anybody
but a bluebird;" and the doctor looked at his favorites with an exulting
affection that caused a general laugh. "I shall give our little friends something better than compliments," said
Mr. Clifford, obeying his hospitable instincts, and he waded through the
snow to the sunny side of an evergreen, and there cleared a space until
the ground was bare. Then he scattered over this little plot an abundance
of bread-crumbs and hay seed, and they all soon had the pleasure of
seeing half a dozen little bobbing heads at breakfast. Johnnie and Alf,
who on account of the deep snow did not go to school, were unwearied in
watching the lovely little pensioners on their grandfather's bounty--not
pensioners either, for, as the old man said, "They pay their way with
notes that I am always glad to accept." The work of path-making and shovelling snow from the doors and roofs of
the out-buildings went on vigorously all the morning. Abram also attached
the farm horses to the heavy snow-plow, to which he added his weight, and
a broad, track-like furrow was made from the house to the road, and then
for a mile or more each way upon the street, for the benefit of the
neighbors. Before the day was very far advanced, the south wind, which
had been a scarcely perceptible breath, freshened, and between the busy
shovels and the swaying branches the air was full of glittering crystals. The bride-like world was throwing off her ornaments and preparing for the
prose of every-day life; and yet she did so in a cheerful, lightsome
mood. The sunny eaves dropped a profusion of gems from the melting snow. There was a tinkle of water in the pipes leading to the cistern. From the
cackle in the barn-yard it appeared that the hens had resolved on
unwonted industry, and were receiving applause from the oft-crowing
chanticleers. The horses, led out to drink, were in exuberant spirits,
and appeared to find a child's delight in kicking up the snow. The cows
came briskly from their stalls to the space cleared for them, and were
soon ruminating in placid content. What though the snow covered the
ground deeper than at any time during the winter, the subtile spirit of
spring was recognized and welcomed not only by man, but also by the lower
creation! After putting Burt in a fair way of recovery, Dr. Marvin, armed with a
shovel to burrow his way through the heavier drifts, drove homeward. Alf
floundered off to his traps, and returned exultant with two rabbits. Amy
was soon busy sketching them previous to their transformation into a
pot-pie, Burt looking on with a deeper interest in the artist than in her
art, although he had already learned that she had not a little skill with
her pencil. Indeed, Burt promised to become quite reconciled to his part of
invalid, in spite of protestations to the contrary; and his inclination to
think that Amy's companionship would be an antidote for every ill of life
was increasing rapidly, in accordance with his hasty temperament, which
arrived at conclusions long before others had begun to consider the steps
leading to them. Amy was still more a child than a woman; but a girl must be young indeed
who does not recognize an admirer, especially so transparent a one as
Burt would ever be. His ardent glances and compliments both amused and
annoyed her. From his brothers she had obtained several hints of his
previous and diversified gallantries, and was not at all assured that
those in the future might not be equally varied. She did not doubt the
sincerity of his homage, however; and since she had found it so easy to
love him as a brother, it did not seem impossible that she should learn
to regard him in another light, if all thought it best, and he "would
only be sensible and understand that she did not wish to think about such
things for years to come." Thus it may be seen that in one respect her
heart was not much more advanced than that of little Johnnie. She
expected to be married some time or other, and supposed it might as well
be to Burt as to another, if their friends so desired it; but she was for
putting off submission to woman's natural lot as long as possible. Possessing much tact, she was able in a great measure to repress the
young fellow's demonstrativeness, and maintain their brotherly and
sisterly relations; but it cost her effort, and sometimes she left his
society flurried and wearied. With Webb she enjoyed perfect rest and a
pleasing content. He was so quiet and strong that his very presence
seemed to soothe her jarring nerves. He appeared to understand her, to
have the power to make much that interested her more interesting, while
upon her little feminine mysteries of needle and fancy work he looked
with an admiring helplessness, as if she were more unapproachable in her
sphere than he could ever be in his, with all his scientific facts and
theories. Women like this tribute to their womanly ways from the sterner
sex. Maggie's wifehood was made happy by it, for by a hundred little
things she knew that the great, stalwart Leonard would be lost without
her. Moreover, by his rescue of Burt, Webb had won a higher place in
Amy's esteem. He had shown the prompt energy and courage which satisfy
woman's ideal of manhood, and assure her of protection. Amy did not
analyze her feelings or consciously assure herself of all this. She only
felt that Webb was restful, and would give her a sense of safety, no
matter what happened. CHAPTER XV

NATURE'S BUILDING MATERIALS


Some days after Burt's adventure, Dr. Marvin made his professional call
in the evening. Alvord, Squire Bartley, and the minister also
happened in, and all were soon chatting around Mr. The pastor of this country parish was a sensible man, who, if he
did not electrify his flock of a Sunday morning, honestly tried to guide
it along safe paths, and led those whom he asked to follow. His power lay
chiefly in the homes of his people, where his genial presence was ever
welcomed. He did not regard those to whom he ministered as so many souls
and subjects of theological dogma, but as flesh-and-blood men, women, and
children, with complex interests and relations; and the heartiness of his
laugh over a joke, often his own, and the havoc that he made in the
dishes of nuts and apples, proved that he had plenty of good healthful
blood himself. Although his hair was touched with frost, and he had never
received any degree except his simple A.M., although the prospect of a
metropolitan pulpit had grown remote indeed, he seemed the picture of
content as he pared his apple and joined in the neighborly talk. Squire Bartley had a growing sense of shortcoming in his farming
operations. Notwithstanding his many acres, he felt himself growing
"land-poor," as country people phrase it. He was not a reader, and looked
with undisguised suspicion on book-farming. As for the agricultural
journals, he said "they were full of new-fangled notions, and were kept
up by people who liked to see their names in print." Nevertheless, he was
compelled to admit that the Cliffords, who kept abreast of the age,
obtained better crops, and made their business pay far better than he
did, and he was inclined to turn his neighborly calls into thrifty use by
questioning Leonard and Webb concerning their methods and management. Therefore he remarked to Leonard: "Do you find that you can keep your
land in good condition by rotation of crops? Folks say this will do it,
but I find some of our upland is getting mighty thin, and crops uncertain." "What is your idea of rotation, squire?" "Why, not growin' the same crop too often on the same ground." For the majority of soils the following
rotation has been found most beneficial: corn and potatoes, which
thoroughly subdue the sod the first year; root crops, as far as we grow
them, and oats the second; then wheat or rye, seeded at the same time
with clover or grass of some kind. We always try to plow our sod land in
the fall, for in the intervening time before planting the sod partially
decays, the land is sweetened and pulverized by the action of frost, and
a good many injurious insects are killed also. But all rules need
modification, and we try to study the nature of our various soils, and
treat them accordingly". have a chemist prescribe for 'em like a doctor?" Walters, the rich city chap who bought Roger's worn-out
farm, tried that to his heart's content, and mine too. He had a little of
the dirt of each part of his farm analyzed, you know, and then he sent to
New York for his phosphates, his potashes, his muriates, and his
compound-super-universal panacea vegetates, and with all these bad-smelling
mixtures--his barn was like a big agricultural drug-store--he was going to
put into his skinned land just the elements lacking. In short, he gave his
soil a big dose of powders, and we all know the result. If he had given his
farm a pinch of snuff better crops ought to have been sneezed. No chemicals
and land doctors for me, thank you. no reflections on
your calling, but doctorin' land don't seem profitable for those who pay
for the medicine." They all laughed except Webb, who seemed nettled, but who quietly said,
"Squire, will you please tell us what your house is made of?" "Well, when passing one day, I saw a fine stalk of corn in one of your
fields. Will you also tell us what that was made of? It must have
weighed, with the ears upon it, several pounds, and it was all of six
feet high. "Why, it grew," said the squire, sententiously. "That utterance was worthy of Solomon," remarked Dr. "It grew," continued Webb, "because it found the needed material at hand. I do not see how Nature can build a well-eared stalk of corn without
proper material any more than you could have built your house without
lumber. Suppose we have a soil in which the elements that make a crop of
corn do not exist, or are present in a very deficient degree, what course
is left for us but to supply what is lacking? Walters did not
do this in the right way, is no reason why we should do nothing. If soil
does not contain the ingredients of a crop, we must put them there, or
our labor goes for nothing". "Well, of course there's no gettin' around that; but yard manure is all I
want. It's like a square meal to a man, and not a bit of powder on his
tongue." "No one wants anything better than barn-yard manure for most purposes,
for it contains nearly all the elements needed by growing plants, and its
mechanical action is most beneficial to the soil. But how many acres will
you be able to cover with this fertilizer this spring?" "That's just the rub," the squire answered. "We use all we have, and when
I can pick it up cheap I buy some; but one can't cover a whole farm with
it, and so in spite of you some fields get all run out." "I don't think there's any need of their running out," said Leonard,
emphatically. "I agree with Webb in one thing, if I can't follow him in
all of his scientific theories--we have both decided never to let a
field grow poor, any more than we would permit a horse or cow to so lose
in flesh as to be nearly useless; therefore we not only buy fertilizers
liberally, but use all the skill and care within our power to increase
them. Barn-yard manure can be doubled in bulk and almost doubled in value
by composting with the right materials. We make the most of our peat
swamps, fallen leaves, and rubbish in general. Enough goes to waste on
many farms every year to keep several acres in good heart. But, as you
say, we cannot begin to procure enough to go over all the land from which
we are taking crops of some kind; therefore we maintain a rotation which
is adapted to our various soils, and every now and then plow under a
heavy green crop of clover, buckwheat, or rye. A green crop plowed under
is my great stand-by." "I plowed under a crop of buckwheat once," said the squire, discontentedly,
"and I didn't see much good from it, except that the ground was light and
mellow afterward." "That, at least, was a gain," Leonard continued; "but I can tell you why
your ground was not much benefited, and perhaps injured. You scarcely
plowed under a green crop, for I remember that the grain in your
buckwheat straw was partly ripe. It is the forming seed or grain that
takes the substance out of land. You should have plowed the buckwheat
under just as it was coming into blossom. Up to that time the chief
growth had been derived from the air, and there had been very little
drain upon the soil." exclaimed the squire, incredulously, "I didn't know the air was
so nourishing." Webb had been showing increasing signs of disquietude during the last few
moments, and now said, with some emphasis: "It seems to me, squire, that
there is not much hope of our farming successfully unless we do know
something of the materials that make our crops, and the conditions under
which they grow. When you built your house you did not employ a man who
had only a vague idea of how it was to be constructed, and what it was to
be built of. Before your house was finished you had used lumber as your
chief material, but you also employed brick, stone, lime, sand, nails,
etc. If we examine a house, we find all these materials. If we wish to
build another house, we know we must use them in their proper proportions. Now it is just as much a matter of fact, and is just as capable of proof,
that a plant of any kind is built up on a regular plan, and from
well-defined materials, as that a house is so built. The materials in
various houses differ just as the elements in different kinds of plants
vary. A man can decide what he will build of; Nature has decided forever
what she will build of. She will construct a stalk of corn or wheat with
its grain out of essentially the same materials to the end of time. Now
suppose one or more of these necessary ingredients is limited in the soil,
or has been taken from it by a succession of crops, what rational hope can
we have for a good crop unless we place the absent material in the ground,
and also put it there in a form suitable for the use of the plant?" "What you say sounds plausible enough," answered the squire, scratching
his head with the worried, perplexed air of a man convinced against his
will. "How was it, then, that Walters made such a mess of it? He had his
soil analyzed by a land doctor, and boasted that he was going to put into
it just what was lacking. His soil may not be lacking now, but his crops
are." "It is possible that there are quacks among land doctors, as you call
them, as well as among doctors of medicine", remarked Dr. "Or doctors of theology," added the minister. "I looked into the Walters experiment somewhat carefully," Webb resumed,
"and the causes of his failure were apparent to any one who has given a
little study to the nature of soils and plant food. The ground is sour and cold from stagnant water beneath
the surface, and the plant food which Nature originally placed in it is
inert and in no condition to be used. Nearly all of his uplands have been
depleted of organic or vegetable matter. He did not put into the soil all
that the plants needed, and the fact that his crops were poor proves it. The materials he used may have been adulterated, or not in a form which
the plants could, assimilate at the time. Give Nature a soil in the right
mechanical condition--that is, light, mellow, moist, but not wet, and
containing the essential elements of a crop--and she will produce it
unless the season is so adverse that it cannot grow. I do not see how one
can hope to be successful unless he studies Nature's methods and learns
her needs, adapting his labor to the former, and supplying the latter. For instance, nitrogen in the form of ammonia is so essential to our
crops that without it they could never come to maturity were all the
other elements of plant food present in excess. Suppose that for several
successive years we grow wheat upon a field with an average crop of
twenty-five bushels to the acre. This amount of grain with its straw will
take from the soil about fifty-one pounds of ammonia annually, and when
the nitrogen (which is the main element of ammonia) gives out, the wheat
will fail, although other plant food may be present in abundance. This is
one reason why dairy farms from which all the milk is sold often grow
poor. Milk is exceedingly rich in nitrogen, and through the milk the farm
is depleted of this essential element faster than it is replaced by
fertilizers. A man may thus be virtually selling his farm, or that which
gives it value, without knowing it." asked the squire, with a look of helpless
perplexity. "How is one to know when his land needs nitrogen or ammonia
and all the other kinds of plant food, as you call it, and how must he go
to work to get and apply it?" "You are asking large questions, squire," Webb replied, with a quiet
smile. "In the course of a year you decide a number of legal questions,
and I suppose read books, consult authorities, and use considerable
judgment. It certainly never would do for people to settle these
questions at hap-hazard or according to their own individual notions. Whatever the courts may do, Nature is
certain to reverse our decisions and bring to naught our action unless we
comply with her laws and requirements." The squire's experience coincided so truly with Webb's words that he
urged no further objections against accurate agricultural knowledge, even
though the information must be obtained in part at least from books and
journals. CHAPTER XVI

GOSSIP ABOUT BIRD-NEIGHBORS


"Doctor," said Mrs. Leonard, "Amy and I have been indulging in some
surmises over a remark you made the other day about the bluebirds. You
said the female was a cold, coy beauty, and that her mate would soon be
overburdened with family cares. Indeed, I think you rather reflected on
our sex as represented by Mrs. The female bluebird is singularly devoid of
sentiment, and takes life in the most serious and matter-of-fact way. Her
nest and her young are all in all to her. John Burroughs, who is a very
close observer, says she shows no affection for the male and no pleasure
in his society, and if he is killed she goes in quest of another mate in
the most business-like manner, as one would go to a shop on an errand." cried Maggie, with a glance at Leonard which
plainly said that such was not her style at all. "Nevertheless," continued the doctor, "she awakens a love in her husband
which is blind to every defect. He is gallantry itself, and at the same
time the happiest and most hilarious of lovers. Since she insists on
building her nest herself, and having everything to her own mind, he does
not shrug his blue shoulders and stand indifferently or sullenly aloof. He goes with her everywhere, flying a little in advance as if for
protection, inspects her work with flattering minuteness, applauds and
compliments continually. Indeed, he is the ideal French beau very much in
love." "In other words, the counterpart of Leonard," said Burt, at which they
all laughed. "But you spoke of his family cares," Webb remarked: "he contributes
something more than compliments, does he not?" He settles down into the most devoted of husbands and
fathers. The female usually hatches three broods, and as the season
advances he has his hands, or his beak rather, very full of business. I
think Burroughs is mistaken in saying that he is in most cases the
ornamental member of the firm. He feeds his wife as she sits on the nest,
and often the first brood is not out of the way before he has another to
provide for. Therefore he is seen bringing food to his wife and two sets
of children, and occasionally taking her place on the nest. Nor does he
ever get over his delusion that his mate is delighted with his song and
little gallantries, for he kepps them up also to the last. So he has to
be up early and late, and altogether must be a very tired little bird
when he gets a chance to put his head under his wing." and to think that she doesn't care for him!" sighed
Amy, pityingly; and they all laughed so heartily that she bent her head
over her work to hide the rich color that stole into her face--all
laughed except Mr. Alvord, who, as usual, was an attentive and quiet
listener, sitting a little in the background, so that his face was in
partial shadow. Keen-eyed Maggie, whose sympathies were deeply enlisted
in behalf of her sad and taciturn neighbor, observed that he regarded Amy
with a close, wistful scrutiny, as if he were reading her thoughts. Then
an expression of anguish, of something like despair, flitted across his
face. "He has lavished the best treasures of his heart and life on some
one who did not care," was her mental comment. "You won't be like our little friend in blue, eh, Amy?" Clifford; but with girlish shyness she would not reply to any such
question. "Don't take it so to heart, Miss Amy. B. is never disenchanted," the
doctor remarked. B. at all," said Maggie, decidedly; "and it seems to
me that I know women of whom she is a type--women whose whole souls are
engrossed with their material life. Human husbands are not so blind as
bluebirds, and they want something more than housekeepers and nurses in
their wives." Barkdale; "you improve the occasion better
than I could. But, doctor, how about our callous widow bluebird finding
another mate after the mating season is over?" "There are always some bachelors around, unsuccessful wooers whose early
blandishments were vain." "And are there no respectable spinsters with whom they might take up as a
last resort?" Think of that, ye maiden of New England, where the
males are nearly all migrants and do not return! The only chance for a
bird-bachelor is to console some widow whom accident has bereaved of her
mate. Widowers also are ready for an immediate second marriage. Birds and
beasts of prey and boys--hey, Alf--bring about a good many step-parents." "Alf don't kill any little birds, do you, Alf?" You said they felt so bad over it But if they get over
it so easy as the doctor says--"

"Now, doctor, you see the result of your scientific teaching." Leonard, are you in sympathy with the priestcraft that would
keep people virtuous through ignorance?" "Alf must learn to do right, knowing all the facts. I don't believe he
will shy a stone at a bird this coming year unless it is in mischief." "Well," said Squire Bartley, who had relapsed into a half-doze as the
conversation lost its practical bent, "between the birds and boys I don't
see as we shall be able to raise any fruit before long. If our boys
hadn't killed about all the robins round our house last summer, I don't
think we'd 'a had a cherry or strawberry." "I'm afraid, squire," put in Webb, quietly, "that if all followed your
boys' example, insects would soon have the better of us. They are far
worse than the birds. I've seen it stated on good authority that a
fledgling robin eats forty per cent more than its own weight every
twenty-four hours, and I suppose it would be almost impossible to compute
the number of noxious worms and moths destroyed by a family of robins in
one season. "Webb is right, squire," added the doctor, emphatically. "Were it not for
the birds, the country would soon be as bare as the locusts left Egypt. Even the crow, against which you are so vindictive, is one of your best
friends." "Oh, now, come, I can't swallow that. Crows pull up my corn, rob hens'
nests', carry off young chickens. They even rob the nests of the other
birds you're so fond of. Why, some state legislatures give a bounty for
their destruction." "If there had only been a bounty for killing off the legislators, the
states would have fared better," replied the doctor, with some heat. "It
can be proved beyond a doubt that the crow is unsurpassed by any other
bird in usefulness. He is one of the best friends you have." "Deliver me from my friends, then," said the squire, rising; and he
departed, with his prejudices against modern ideas and methods somewhat
confirmed. Like multitudes of his class, he observed in nature only that which was
forced upon his attention through the medium of immediate profit and
loss. The crows pulled up his corn, and carried off an occasional
chicken; the robins ate a little fruit; therefore death to crows and
robins. They all felt a certain sense of relief at his departure, for
while their sympathies touched his on the lower plane of mere utility and
money value, it would be bondage to them to be kept from other and higher
considerations. Moreover, in his own material sphere his narrow prejudices
were ever a jarring element that often exasperated Webb, who had been known
to mutter, "Such clods of earth bring discredit on our calling." Burt, with a mischievous purpose illuminating his face, remarked: "I'll
try to put the squire into a dilemma. If I can catch one of his boys
shooting robins out of season, I will lodge a complaint with him, and
insist on the fine;" and his design was laughingly applauded. Clifford, "that Webb has won me over to a toleration
of crows, but until late years I regarded them as unmitigated pests." "Undeserved enmity comes about in this way," Webb replied. "We see a crow
in mischief occasionally, and the fact is laid up against him. If we
sought to know what he was about when not in mischief, our views would
soon change. It would be far better to have a little corn pulled up than
to be unable to raise corn at all. Crows can be kept from the field
during the brief periods when they do harm, but myriads of grasshoppers
cannot be managed. Moreover, the crow destroys very many field-mice and
other rodents, but chief of all he is the worst enemy of the May-beetle
and its larvae. In regions of the country where the crow has been almost
exterminated by poison and other means, this insect has left the meadows
brown and sear, while grasshoppers have partially destroyed the most
valuable crops. Why can't farmers get out of their plodding, ox-like
ways, and learn to co-work with Nature like men?" "Who would have thought that the squire
and a crow could evoke such a peroration? That flower of eloquence surely
grew from a rank, dark soil." "Squire Bartley amuses me very much," said Mrs. Clifford, from the sofa,
with a low laugh. "He seems the only one who has the power to ruffle
Webb." "Little wonder," thought Amy, "for it would be hard to find two natures
more antagonistic." "It seems to me that this has been a very silent winter," the minister
remarked. "In my walks and drives of late I have scarcely heard the chirp
of a bird. Are there many that stay with us through this season, doctor?" But you would not be apt to meet many of
them unless you sought for them. At this time they are gathered in
sheltered localities abounding in their favorite food. Shall I tell you
about some that I have observed throughout several successive winters?" Having received eager encouragement, he resumed: "My favorites, the
bluebirds, we have considered quite at length. They are very useful, for
their food in summer consists chiefly of the smaller beetles and the
larvae of little butterflies and moths. It
is a question of food, not climate, with them. In certain valleys of the
White Mountains there is an abundance of berries, and flocks of robins
feed on them all winter, although the cold reaches the freezing-point of
mercury. As we have said, they are among the most useful of the insect
destroyers. The golden-crested kinglet is a little mite of a bird, not
four inches long, with a central patch of orange-red on his crown. He
breeds in the far North, and wintering here is for him like going to the
South. In summer he is a flycatcher, but here he searches the bark of
forest trees with microscopic scrutiny for the larvae of insects. We all
know the lively black-capped chickadees that fly around in flocks
throughout the winter. Sometimes their search for food leads them into
the heart of towns and cities, where they are as bold and as much at home
as the English sparrow. They also gather around the camps of log-cutters
in the forest, become very tame, and plaintively cry for their share in
the meals. They remain all the year, nesting in decayed logs, posts,
stumps, and even in sides of houses, although they prefer the edge of a
wood. If they can find a hole to suit them, very well; if they can't,
they will make one. A nest
in a decayed stump was uncovered, and the mother bird twice taken off by
hand, and each time she returned and covered her brood. She uttered no
cries or complaints, but devotedly interposed her little form between
what must have seemed terrific monsters and her young, and looked at the
human ogres with the resolute eyes of self-sacrifice. If she could have
known it, the monsters only wished to satisfy their curiosity, and were
admiring her beyond measure. Chickadees are exceedingly useful birds, and
make great havoc among the insects. "Our next bird is merely a winter sojourner, for he goes north in spring
like the kinglet. The scientists, with a fine sense of the fitness of
things, have given him a name in harmony, _Troglodytes parvulus_, var. "He is about as big as your thumb, and ordinary mortals are content to
call him the winter wren. He is a saucy little atom of a bird, with his
tail pointing rakishly toward his head. I regret exceedingly to add that
he is but a winter resident with us, and we rarely hear his song. Burroughs says that he is a'marvellous songster,' his notes having a
'sweet rhythmical cadence that holds you entranced.' By the way, if you
wish to fall in love with birds, you should read the books of John
Burroughs. A little mite of a creature, like the hermit-thrush, he fills
the wild, remote woods of the North with melody, and has not been known
to breed further south than Lake Mohunk. The brown creeper and the
yellow-rumped warbler I will merely mention. Both migrate to the North in
the spring, and the latter is only an occasional winter resident. The
former is a queer little creature that alights at the base of a tree and
creeps spirally round and round to its very top, when it sweeps down to
the base of another tree to repeat the process. Purple finches are usually abundant in winter, though, not very
numerous in summer. I value them because they are handsome birds, and
both male and female sing in autumn and winter, when bird music is at a
premium. I won't speak of the Carolina wax-wing, _alias_ cedar or cherry
bird, now. Next June, when strawberries and cherries are ripe, we can
form his intimate acquaintance." "We have already made it, to the cost of both our patience and purse,"
said Webb. "He is one of the birds for whom I have no mercy." "That is because you are not sufficiently acquainted with him. I admit
that he is an arrant thief of fruit, and that, as his advocate, I have a
difficult case. I shall not plead for him until summer, when he is in
such imminent danger of capital punishment He's a little beauty, though,
with his jaunty crest and gold-tipped tail. I shall not say one word in
favor of the next bird that I mention, the great Northern shrike, or
butcher-bird. He is not an honest bird of prey that all the smaller
feathered tribes know at a glance, like the hawk; he is a disguised
assassin, and possessed by the very demon of cruelty. He is a handsome
fellow, little over ten inches long, with a short, powerful beak, the
upper mandible sharply curved. His body is of a bluish-gray color, with
'markings of white' on his dusky wings and tail. Three shrikes once made
such havoc among the sparrows of Boston Common that it became necessary
to take much pains to destroy them. He is not only a murderer, but an
exceedingly treacherous one, for both Mr. Nuttall speak
of his efforts to decoy little birds within his reach by imitating their
notes, and he does this so closely that he is called a mocking-bird in
some parts of New England. When he utters his usual note and reveals
himself, his voice very properly resembles the 'discordant creaking of a
sign-board hinge.' A flock of snow-birds or finches may be sporting and
feeding in some low shrubbery, for instance. They may hear a bird
approaching, imitating their own notes. A moment later the shrike will be
seen among them, causing no alarm, for his appearance is in his favor. Suddenly he will pounce upon an unsuspecting neighbor, and with one blow
of his beak take off the top of its head, dining on its brains. If there
is a chance to kill several more, he will, like a butcher, hang his prey
on a thorn, or in the crotch of a tree, and return for his favorite
morsel when his hunt is over. After devouring the head of a bird he will
leave the body, unless game is scarce. It is well they are not plentiful,
or else our canary pets would be in danger, for a shrike will dart
through an open window and attack birds in cages, even when members of
the family are present. Brewer, the ornithologist,
was sitting by a closed window with a canary in a cage above his head,
and a shrike, ignorant of the intervening glass, dashed against the
window, and fell stunned upon the snow. He was taken in, and found to be
tame, but sullen. He refused raw meat, but tore and devoured little birds
very readily. As I said before, it is fortunate he is rare, though why he
is so I scarcely know. He may have enemies in the North, where he breeds;
for I am glad to say that he is only a winter resident. "It gives one a genuine sense of relief to turn from this Apache, this
treacherous scalper of birds, to those genuinely useful little songsters,
the tree and the song sparrow. The former is essentially a Northern bird,
and breeds in the high arctic regions. He has a fine song, which we hear
in early April as his parting souvenir. The song sparrow will be a great
favorite with you, Miss Amy, for he is one of our finest singers, whose
song resembles the opening notes of a canary, but has more sweetness and
expression. Those that remain with us depart for the North at the first
tokens of spring, and are replaced by myriads of other migrants that
usually arrive early in March. They are very useful in destroying the worst kinds of insects. A fit
associate for the song sparrow is the American goldfinch, or yellow-bird,
which is as destructive of the seeds of weeds as the former is of the
smaller insect pests. In summer it is of a bright gamboge yellow, with
black crown, wings, and tail. At this time he is a little olive-brown
bird, and mingles with his fellows in small flocks. They are sometimes
killed and sold as reed-birds. "The snow-bird and snow-bunting are not identical by any means; indeed,
each is of a different genus. The bunting's true home is in the far
North, and it is not apt to be abundant here except in severe weather. Specimens have been found, however, early in November, but more often
they appear with a late December snowstorm, their wild notes suggesting
the arctic wastes from which they have recently drifted southward. The
sleigh tracks on the frozen Hudson are among their favorite haunts, and
they are not often abundant in the woods on this side of the river. Flocks can usually be found spending the winter along the railroad on the
eastern shore. Here they become very fat, and so begrimed with the dirt
and grease on the track that you would never associate them with the
snowy North. They ever make, however, a singular and pretty spectacle
when flying up between one and the late afternoon sun, for the predominant
white in their wings and tail seems almost transparent. They breed at the
extreme North, even along the Arctic Sea, in Greenland and Iceland, and are
fond of marine localities at all times. It's hard to realize that the
little fellows with whom we are now so familiar start within a month for
regions above the Arctic Circle. I once, when a boy, fired into a flock
feeding in a sleigh track on the ice of the river. Some of those that
escaped soon returned to their dead and wounded companions, and in their
solicitude would let me come very near, nor, unless driven away, would they
leave the injured ones until life was extinct. On another occasion I
brought some wounded ones home, and they ate as if starved, and soon became
very tame, alighting upon the table at mealtimes with a freedom from
ceremony which made it necessary to shut them up. They spent most of their
time among the house plants by the window, but toward spring the migratory
instinct asserted itself, and they became very restless, pecking at the
panes in their eagerness to get away. Soon afterward our little guests may
have been sporting on an arctic beach. An effort was once made in
Massachusetts to keep a wounded snow-bunting through the summer, but at
last it died from the heat. They are usually on the wing northward early in
March. "The ordinary snow-bird is a very unpretentious and familiar little
friend. You can find him almost any day from the 1st of October to the
1st of May, and may know him by his grayish or ashy black head, back, and
wings, white body underneath from the middle of his breast backward, and
white external tail-feathers. He is said to be abundant all over America
east of the Black Hills, and breeds as far south as the mountains of
Virginia. There are plenty of them in summer along the Shawangunk range,
just west of us, in the Catskills, and so northward above the Arctic
Circle. In the spring, before it leaves us, you will often hear its
pretty little song. They are very much afraid of hawks, which make havoc
among them at all times, but are fearless of their human--and especially
of their humane--neighbors. Severe weather will often bring them to our
very doors, and drive them into the outskirts of large cities. They are
not only harmless, but very useful, for they devour innumerable seeds,
and small insects with their larvae. "And we could listen to you," chorused several voices. "I never before realized that we had such interesting winter neighbors
and visitors," said Mrs. Clifford, and the lustre of her eyes and the
faint bloom on her cheeks proved how deeply these little children of
nature had enlisted her sympathies. "They are interesting, even when in one short evening I can give but in
bald, brief outline a few of their characteristics. Your words suggest
the true way of becoming acquainted with them. Regard them as neighbors
and guests, in the main very useful friends, and then you will naturally
wish to know more about them. In most instances they are quite susceptible
to kindness, and are ready to be intimate with us. That handsome bird, the
blue jay, so wild at the East, is as tame and domestic as the robin in many
parts of the West, because treated well. He is also a winter resident, and
one of the most intelligent birds in existence. Indeed, he is a genuine
humorist, and many amusing stories are told of his pranks. His powers of
mimicry are but slightly surpassed by those of the mocking-bird, and it is
his delight to send the smaller feathered tribes to covert by imitating the
cries of the sparrow, hawk, and other birds of prey. When so tame as to
haunt the neighborhood of dwellings, he is unwearied in playing his tricks
on domestic fowls, and they--silly creatures!--never learn to detect the
practical joke, for, no matter how often it is repeated, they hasten
panic-stricken to shelter. Wilson speaks of him as the trumpeter of the
feathered chorus, but his range of notes is very great, passing from harsh,
grating sounds, like the screeching of an unlubricated axle, to a warbling
as soft and modulated as that of a bluebird, and again, prompted by his
mercurial nature, screaming like a derisive fish-wife. Fledglings will
develop contentedly in a cage, and become tame and amusing pets. They will
learn to imitate the human voice and almost every other familiar sound. A
gentleman in South Carolina had one that was as loquacious as a parrot, and
could utter distinctly several words. In this region they are hunted, and
too shy for familiar acquaintance. When a boy, I have been tantalized
almost beyond endurance by them, and they seemed to know and delight in the
fact. I was wild to get a shot at them, but they would keep just out of
range, mocking me with discordant cries, and alarming all the other game in
the vicinity. They often had more sport than I. It is a pity that the small
boy with his gun cannot be taught to let them alone. If they were as
domestic and plentiful as robins, they would render us immense service. A
colony of jays would soon destroy all the tent-caterpillars on your place,
and many other pests. In Indiana they will build in the shrubbery around
dwellings, but we usually hear their cries from mountain-sides and distant
groves. Pleasant memories of rambles and nutting excursions they always
awaken. The blue jay belongs to the crow family, and has all the brains of
his black-coated and more sedate cousins. At the North, he will, like a
squirrel, lay up for winter a hoard of acorns and beech mast. An
experienced bird-fancier asserts that he found the jay'more ingenious,
cunning, and teachable than any other species of birds that he had ever
attempted to instruct.' "One of our most beautiful and interesting winter visitants is the pine
grosbeak. Although very abundant in some seasons, even extending its
migrations to the latitude of Philadelphia, it is irregular, and only the
coldest weather prompts its excursions southward. The general color of
the males is a light carmine, or rose, and if only plentiful they would
make a beautiful feature in our snowy landscape. As a general thing, the
red tints are brighter in the American than in the European birds. The
females, however, are much more modest in their plumage, being ash-
above, with a trace of carmine behind their heads and upon their upper tail
coverts, and sometimes tinged with greenish-yellow beneath. The females are
by far our more abundant visitants, for in the winter of '75 I saw numerous
flocks, and not over two per cent were males in red plumage. Still, strange
to say, I saw a large flock of adult males the preceding November, feeding
on the seeds of a Norway spruce before our house. Oh, what a brilliant
assemblage they made among the dark branches! In their usual haunts they
live a very retired life. The deepest recesses of the pine forests at the
far North are their favorite haunts, and here the majority generally remain
throughout the year. In these remote wilds is bred the fearlessness of man
which is the result of ignorance, for they are among the tamest of all wild
birds, finding, in this respect, their counterpart in the American red
cross-bill, another occasional cold-weather visitant. For several winters
the grosbeaks were exceedingly abundant in the vicinity of Boston, and were
so tame that they could be captured in butterfly nets, and knocked down
with poles. The markets became full of them, and many were caged. While
tame they were very unhappy in confinement, and as spring advanced their
mournful cries over their captivity became incessant. They can be kept as
pets, however, and will often sing in the night. Audubon observed that
when he fired at one of their number, the others, instead of flying away,
would approach within a few feet, and gaze at him with undisguised
curiosity, unmingled with fear. I have seen some large flocks this winter,
and a few fed daily on a bare plot of ground at the end of our piazza. I
was standing above this plot one day, when a magnificent red male flew just
beneath my feet and drank at a little pool. I never saw anything more
lovely in my life than the varying sheen of his brilliant tropical-like
plumage. He was like a many-hued animated flower, and was so fearless that
I could have touched him with a cane. One very severe, stormy winter the
grosbeaks fairly crowded the streets of Pictou. A gentleman took one of
these half-starved birds into his room, where it lived at large, and soon
became the tamest and most affectionate of pets. But in the spring, when
its mates were migrating north, Nature asserted herself, and it lost its
familiarity, and filled the house with its piteous wailings, refused food,
and sought constantly to escape. When the grosbeaks are with us you would
not be apt to notice them unless you stumbled directly upon them, for they
are the most silent of birds, which is remarkable, since the great majority
of them are females". "That is just the reason why they are so still," remarked Mrs. "Ladies never speak unless they have something to say." "Far be it from me to contradict you. The lady grosbeaks certainly have
very little to say to one another, though when mating in their secluded
haunts they probably express their preferences decidedly. If they have an
ear for music, they must enjoy their wooing immensely, for there is
scarcely a lovelier song than that of the male grosbeak. I never heard it
but once, and may never again; but the thrill of delight that I experienced
that intensely cold March day can never be forgotten. I was following the
course of a stream that flowed at the bottom of a deep ravine, when, most
unexpectedly, I heard a new song, which proceeded from far up the glen. The
notes were loud, rich, and sweet, and I hastened on to identify the new
vocalist. I soon discovered a superb red pine grosbeak perched on the top
of a tall hemlock. His rose- plumage and mellow notes on that bleak
day caused me to regret exceedingly that he was only an uncertain and
transient visitor to our region. "We have a large family of resident hawks in this vicinity; indeed, there
are nine varieties of this species of bird with us at this time, although
some of them are rarely seen. The marsh-hawk has a bluish or brown
plumage, and in either case is distinguished by a patch of white on its
upper tail coverts. You would not be apt to meet with it except in its
favorite haunts. I found a nest in the centre of Consook Marsh, below
West Point. The nests of this hawk are usually made
of hay, lined with pine needles, and sometimes at the North with
feathers. This bird is found nearly everywhere in North America, and
breeds as high as Hudson Bay. In the marshes on the Delaware it is often
called the mouse-hawk, for it sweeps swiftly along the low ground in
search of a species of mouse common in that locality. It is said to be
very useful in the Southern rice-fields, since, as it sails low, it
interrupts the flocks of bobolinks, or rice-birds, in their depredations. Planters say that one marsh-hawk accomplishes more than several <DW64>s
in alarming these greedy little gourmands. In this region they do us no
practical harm. "Our most abundant hawk is the broad-winged, which will measure about
thirty-six inches with wings extended. The plumage of this bird is so
dusky as to impart a prevalent brownish color, and the species is
distributed generally over eastern North America. Unlike the marsh-hawk,
it builds in trees, and Mr. Audubon describes a nest as similar to that
of the crow--a resemblance easily accounted for by the frequency with
which this hawk will repair crows' nests of former years for its own use. I once shot one upon such a nest, from which I had taken crows' eggs the
preceding summer. I had only wounded the bird, and he clawed me severely
before I was able to capture him. I once took a fledgling from a nest,
and he became very fond of me, and quite gentle, but he would not let any
one else handle him. On another occasion, when I was examining a nest,
the male bird flew to a branch just over it, uttering loud, squealing
cries, thence darted swiftly past me, and so close that I could feel the
rush of air made by his wings; then he perched near again, and threatened
me in every way he could, extending his wings, inclining his head and
body toward me, making meanwhile a queer whistling sound. Only when I
reached the nest would the female leave it, and then she withdrew but a
short distance, returning as soon as I began to descend. The devotion of
these wild creatures to their young is often marvellous. Audubon
describes this hawk as'spiritless, inactive, and so deficient in courage
that he is often chased by the little sparrow-hawk and kingbird.' Another
naturalist dissents emphatically from this view, and regards the
broad-winged as the most courageous and spirited of his family, citing an
instance of a man in his employ who, while ascending to a nest, was
assailed with great fury. His hat was torn from his head, and he would
have been injured had not the bird been shot. He also gives another
example of courage in an attack by this hawk upon a boy seeking to rob
its nest. It fastened its talons in his arm, and could not be beaten off
until it was killed. It is brave and
fierce when its home is disturbed, and lacks the courage to attack other
birds of its own kind. At any rate, it has no hesitancy in making
hawk-love to chickens and ducklings, but as a rule subsists on insects
and small quardrupeds. It is not a very common winter resident, but early
in March it begins to come northward in flocks. "Next to the broad-winged, the sharp-shinned is our most abundant hawk,
and is found throughout the entire continent from Hudson Bay to Mexico. It
usually builds its nest in trees, and occasionally on ledges of rocks,
and as a general thing takes some pains in its construction. Its domicile
approaches the eagle's nest in form, is broad and shallow, and made of
sticks and twigs lined thinly with dried leaves, mosses, etc. A full-grown
female--which, as I told you once before, is always larger than the male
among birds of prey--measures about twenty-six inches with wings extended. It is lead- above, and lighter beneath. You can easily recognize
this hawk by its short wings, long tail, and swift, irregular flight. One
moment it is high in the air, the next it disappears in the grass, having
seized the object of its pursuit. It is capable of surprisingly sudden
dashes, and its pursuit is so rapid that escape is wellnigh hopeless. Audubon saw one dart into a thicket of
briers, strike and instantly kill a thrush, and emerge with it on the
opposite side. One came every
day to a poultry-yard until it had carried off over twenty. It does not
hesitate to pounce down upon a chicken even in the farmer's presence; and
one, in a headlong pursuit, broke through the glass of a greenhouse, then
dashed through another glass partition, and was only brought up by a third. Pigeons are also quite in its line. Indeed, it is a bold red-taloned
freebooter, and only condescends to insects and the smaller reptiles when
there are no little birds at hand. During the spring migration this hawk
is sometimes seen in large flocks. "The American goshawk is the next bird of this family that I will
mention, and I am very glad to say that he is only a winter resident. He
is the dreaded blue hen-hawk of New England, and is about twenty-three
inches long, and forty-four from tip to tip of wings. One good authority
says that for strength, intrepidity, and fury he cannot be surpassed. He
will swoop down into a poultry-yard and carry off a chicken almost before
you can take a breath. He is swift, cunning, and adroit rather than
heedless and headlong, like the sharp-shinned hawk, and although the
bereaved farmer may be on the alert with his gun, this marauder will
watch his chance, dash into the yard, then out again with his prey, so
suddenly that only the despairing cries of the fowl reveal the murderous
onslaught. A housewife will
hear a rush of wings and cries of terror, and can only reach the door in
time to see one of these robbers sailing off with the finest of her
pullets. Hares and wild-ducks are favorite game also. The goshawk will
take a mallard with perfect ease, neatly and deliberately strip off the
feathers, and then, like an epicure, eat the breast only. Audubon once
saw a large flock of blackbirds crossing the Ohio. Like an arrow a
goshawk darted upon them, while they, in their fright, huddled together. The hawk seized one after another, giving each a death-squeeze, then
dropping it into the water. In this way he killed five before the flock
escaped into the woods. He then leisurely went back, picked them up one
by one, and carried them to the spot selected for his lunch. With us, I
am happy to say, he is shy and distant, preferring the river marshes to
the vicinity of our farmyards. He usually takes his prey while swooping
swiftly along on the wing. "Have we any hawks similar to those employed in the old-time falconry of
Europe?" "Yes; our duck or great-footed hawk is almost identical with the
well-known peregrine falcon of Europe. It is a permanent resident, and
breeds on the inaccessible cliffs of the Highlands, although preferring
similar localities along a rocky sea-coast. There is no reason to doubt
that our duck-hawk might be trained for the chase as readily as its
foreign congener. It has the same wonderful powers of flight, equal
docility in confinement, and can be taught to love and obey its master. I
have often wondered why falconry has not been revived, like other ancient
sports. The Germans are said to have employed trained hawks to capture
carrier-pigeons that were sent out with missives by the French during the
siege of Paris. In a few instances the duck-hawk has been known to nest
in trees. It is a solitary bird, and the sexes do not associate except at
the breeding season. While it prefers water-fowl, it does not confine
itself to them. I shot one on a Long Island beach and found in its crop
whole legs of the robin, Alice's thrush, catbird, and warblers. It
measures about forty-five inches in the stretch of its wings, and its
prevailing color is of a dark blue. "The pigeon-hawk is not very rare at this season. Professor Baird
describes this bird as remarkable for its rapid flight, its courage, and
its enterprise in attacking birds even larger than itself. This accords
with my experience, for my only specimen was shot in the act of destroying
a hen. He is about the size of our common flicker, or high-holder, which
bird, with robins, pigeons, and others of similar size, is his favorite
game. The sparrow-hawk is rare at this time, and is only abundant
occasionally during its migrations. The red-shouldered hawk is a handsome
bird, with some very good traits, and is a common permanent resident. Unless hunted, these birds are not shy, and they remain mated throughout
the year. Many a human pair might learn much from their affectionate and
considerate treatment of each other. They do not trouble poultry-yards, and
are fond of frogs, cray-fish, and even insects. Occasionally they will
attack birds as large as a meadow-lark. They have a high and very irregular
flight, but occasionally they so stuff themselves with frogs that they can
scarcely move. Wilson found one with the remains of ten frogs in his crop. "Last among the winter residents I can merely mention the red-tailed
hawk, so named from the deep rufus color of its tail feathers. It is a
heavy, robust bird, and while it usually feeds on mice, moles, and shrews
that abound in meadows, its depredations on farmyards are not infrequent. It is widely distributed throughout the continent, and abundant here. It
is a powerful bird, and can compass long distances with a strong, steady
flight, often moving with no apparent motion of the wings. It rarely
seizes its prey while flying, like the goshawk, but with its keen vision
will inspect the immediate vicinity from the branch of a tree, and thence
dart upon it. Insects, birds, and
reptiles are alike welcome game, and in summer it may be seen carrying a
writhing snake through the air. While flying it utters a very harsh,
peculiar, and disagreeable scream, and by some is called the squealing
hawk. The social habits of this bird are in appropriate concord with its
voice. After rearing their young the sexes separate, and are jealous of
and hostile to each other. It may easily happen that if the wife of the
spring captures any prey, her former mate will struggle fiercely for its
possession, and the screaming clamor of the fight will rival a conjugal
quarrel in the Bowery. In this respect they form an unpleasing contrast
with the red-shouldered hawks, among whom marriage is permanent, and
maintained with lover-like attentions. Thus it would appear that there
are contrasts of character even in the hawk world; and when you remember
that we have fifteen other varieties of this bird, besides the nine I
have mentioned, you may think that nature, like society, is rather
prodigal in hawks. As civilization advances, however, innocence stands a
better chance. At least this is true of the harmless song-birds. "I have now given you free-hand sketches of the great majority of our
winter residents, and these outlines are necessarily very defective from
their brevity as well as for other reasons. I have already talked an
unconscionably long time; but what else could you expect from a man with
a hobby? As it is, I am not near through, for the queer little
white-bellied nut-hatch, and his associates in habits, the downy, the
hairy, the golden-winged, and the yellow-bellied woodpeckers, and four
species of owls, are also with us at this season. With the bluebirds the
great tide of migration has already turned northward, and all through
March, April, and May I expect to greet the successive arrivals of old
friends every time I go out to visit my patients. I can assure you that I
have no stupid, lonely drives, unless the nights are dark and stormy. Little Johnnie, I see, has gone to sleep. I must try to meet some fairies
and banshees in the moonlight for her benefit But, Alf, I'm delighted to
see you so wide-awake. Shooting birds as game merely is very well, but
capturing them in a way to know all about them is a sport that is always
in season, and would grow more and more absorbing if you lived a thousand
years." A bent for life was probably given to the boy's mind that night. CHAPTER XVII

FISHING THROUGH THE ICE


Every day through the latter part of February the sun grew higher, and
its rays more potent. The snow gave rapidly in warm southern nooks and
<DW72>s, and the icicles lengthened from the eaves and overhanging rocks,
forming in many instances beautiful crystal fringes. On northern <DW72>s
and shaded places the snow scarcely wasted at all, and Amy often wondered
how the vast white body that covered the earth could ever disappear in
time for spring. But there soon came a raw, chilly, cloudy day, with a
high south wind, and the snow sank away, increasing the apparent height
of the fences, and revealing objects hitherto hidden, as if some magic
were at work. Clifford, "that a day like this, raw
and cold as it seems, does more to carry off the snow than a week of
spring sunshine, although it may be warm for the season. What is more,
the snow is wasted evenly, and not merely on sunny <DW72>s. The wind seems
to soak up the melting snow like a great sponge, for the streams are not
perceptibly raised." "The air does take it up the form of vapor," said Webb, "and that is why
we have such a chilly snow atmosphere. Rapidly melting snow tends to
lower the temperature proportionately, just as ice around a form of
cream, when made to melt quickly the addition of salt, absorbs all heat
in its vicinity so fast that the cream is congealed. But this accumulation
of vapor in the air must come down again, perhaps in the form of snow, and
so there will be no apparent gain." "If no apparent gain, could there be a real gain by another fall of
snow?" Amy asked; for to inexperienced eyes there certainly seemed more
than could be disposed of in time for April flowers. "Yes," he replied, "a fall of snow might make this whole section warmer
for a time, and so hasten spring materially. We shall have
plenty of snowstorms yet, and still spring will be here practically on
time." But instead of snow the vapor-burdened air relieved itself by a rain of
several hours' duration, and in the morning the river that had been so
white looked icy and glistening, and by the aid of a glass was seen to be
covered with water, which rippled under the rising breeze. The following
night was clear and cold, and the surface of the bay became a comparatively
smooth glare of ice. At dinner next day Webb remarked:

"I hear that they are catching a good many striped bass through the ice,
and I learned that the tide would be right for them to raise the nets
this afternoon. I propose, Amy, that we go down and see the process, and
get some of the fish direct from the water for supper." Burt groaned, and was almost jealous that during his enforced confinement
so many opportunities to take Amy out fell naturally to Webb. The latter,
however, was so entirely fraternal in his manner toward the young girl
that Burt was ever able to convince himself that his misgivings were
absurd. Webb was soon ready, and had provided himself with his skates and a small
sleigh with a back. When they arrived at the landing he tied his horse,
and said:

"The ice is too poor to drive on any longer, I am informed, but perfectly
safe still for foot-passengers. As a precaution we will follow the tracks
of the fishermen, and I will give you a swift ride on this little sledge,
in which I can wrap you up well." Like most young men brought up in the vicinity, he was a good and powerful
skater, and Amy was soon enjoying the exhilarating sense of rapid motion
over the smooth ice, with a superb view of the grand mountains rising on
either side of the river a little to the south. They soon reached the nets,
which stretched across the river through narrow longitudinal cuts so as to
be at right angles to each tide, with which the fish usually swim. These
nets are such in shape as were formerly suspended between the old-fashioned
shad-poles, and are sunk perpendicularly in the water by weights at each
end, so that the meshes are expanded nearly to their full extent. The fish
swim into these precisely as do the shad, and in their attempts to back out
their gills catch, and there they hang. The nests are about twelve feet square, and the meshes of different nets
are from to and a half to five and a quarter inches in size. A bass of
nine pounds' weight can be "gilled" in the ordinary manner; but in one
instance a fish weighing one hundred and two pounds was caught, and
during the present season they were informed that a lucky fisherman at
Marlborough had secured "a 52-pounder." These heavy fellows, it was
explained, "would go through a net like a cannon-ball" if they came "head
on," and with ordinary speed; but if they are playing around gently, the
swift tide carries them sidewise into the "slack of the net," from which
they seem unable to escape. There are usually about forty-five feet
between the surface of the water and the top of the nets, therefore the
fish are caught at an average depth of fifty feet. The best winter
fishing is from December to March, and as many as one hundred and seventy
pounds, or about two hundred bass, have been taken in twenty-four hours
from one line of nets; at other times the luck is very bad, for the fish
seem to run in streaks. The luck was exceedingly moderate on the present occasion, but enough
fish were caught to satisfy Webb's needs. As they were watching the
lifting of the nets and angling for information, they saw an ice-boat
slowly and gracefully leaving the landing, and were told that since the
ice had grown thin it had taken the place of the sleigh in which the
passengers were conveyed to and from the railroad station on the further
shore. The wind, being adverse, necessitated several tacks, and on one of
them the boat passed so near Webb and Amy that they recognized Mr. Barkdale, the clergyman, who, as he sped by, saluted them. When the boat
had passed on about an eighth of a mile, it tacked so suddenly and
sharply that the unwary minister was rolled out upon the ice. The speed
and impetus of the little craft were so great that before it could be
brought up it was about half a mile away, and the good man was left in
what might be a dangerous isolation, for ice over which the boat could
skim in security might be very unsafe under the stationary weight of a
solidly built man like Mr. Webb therefore seized a pole
belonging to one of the fishermen, and came speedily to the clergyman's
side. Happily the ice, although it had wasted rapidly from the action of
the tide in that part of the river, sustained them until the boat
returned, and the good man resumed his journey with laughing words, by
which he nevertheless conveyed to Webb his honest gratitude for the
promptness with which the young fellow had shared his possible danger. When Webb returned he found Amy pale and agitated, for an indiscreet
fisherman had remarked that the ice was "mighty poor out in that
direction." "Won't you please come off the river?" "But you were not here a moment since, and I've no confidence in your
discretion when any one is in danger." "I did not run any risks worth speaking of." The men explained, in answer to my questions, that the
ice toward spring becomes honeycombed--that's the way they expressed
it--and lets one through without much warning. They also said the tides
wore it away underneath about as fast as the rain and sun wasted the
surface." "Supposing it had let me through, I should have caught on the pole, and
so have easily scrambled out, while poor Mr. "Oh, I know it was right for you to go, and I know you will go again
should there be the slightest occasion. Therefore I am eager to reach
solid ground. Her tone was so earnest that he complied, and they were soon in the
sleigh again. As they were driving up the hill she turned a shy glance
toward him, and said, hesitatingly: "Don't mistake me, Webb. I am proud
to think that you are so brave and uncalculating at times; but then I--I
never like to think that you are in danger. Remember how very much you
are to us all." "Well, that is rather a new thought to me. "Yes, you are," she said, gravely and earnestly, looking him frankly in
the face. "From the first moment you spoke to me as'sister Amy' you made
the relation seem real. And then your manner is so strong and even that
it's restful to be with you. You may give one a terrible fright, as you
did me this afternoon, but you would never make one nervous." His face flushed with deep pleasure, but he made good her opinion by
quietly changing the subject, and giving her a brisk, bracing drive over
one of her favorite roads. All at the supper table agreed that the striped bass were delicious, and
Burt, as the recognized sportsman of the family, had much to say about
the habits of this fine game fish. Among his remarks he explained that
the "catch" was small at present because the recent rain and melting snow
had made the water of the river so fresh that the fish had been driven
back toward the sea. "But they reascend," he said, "as soon as the
freshet subsides. They are a sea fish, and only ascend fresh-water
streams for shelter in winter, and to breed in spring. They spawn in May,
and by August the little fish will weigh a quarter of a pound. A good
many are taken with seines after the ice breaks up, but I never had any
luck with pole and line in the river. While striped bass are found all
along the coast from Florida to Cape Cod, the largest fish are taken
between the latter place and Montauk Point. I once had some rare sport
off the east end of Long Island. I was still-fishing, with a pole and
reel, and fastened on my hook a peeled shedder crab. My line was of
linen, six hundred feet long, and no heavier than that used for trout,
but very strong. By a quick movement which an old bass-fisherman taught
me I made my bait dart like an arrow straight over the water more than
one hundred feet, my reel at the same moment whirling, in paying out, as
if it would fuse from friction. Well, I soon hooked a fifty-pound fish,
and we had a tussle that I shall never forget. It took me an hour to tire
him out, and I had to use all the skill I possessed to keep him from
breaking the line. It was rare sport, I can tell you--the finest bit of
excitement I ever had fishing;" and the young fellow's eyes sparkled at
the memory. Strange as it may appear to some, his mother shared most largely in his
enthusiasm. The reason was that, apart from the interest which she took
in the pleasure of all her children, she lived much in her imagination,
which was unusually strong, and Burt's words called up a marine picture
with an athletic young fellow in the foreground all on the _qui
vive_, his blue eyes flashing with the sparkle and light of the sea as
he matched his skill and science against a creature stronger than
himself. "Are larger bass ever taken with rod and line?" "Yes, one weighing seventy-five pounds has been captured. "How big do they grow, anyhow?" "To almost your size, Len, and that's a heavy compliment to the bass. They have been known to reach the weight of one hundred and fifty
pounds." CHAPTER XVIII

PLANNING AND OPENING THE CAMPAIGN


The last day of February was clear, cloudless, and cold, the evening
serene and still. Winter's tempestuous course was run, its icy breath
apparently had ceased, and darkness closed on its quiet, pallid face. "March came in like a lamb"--an ominous circumstance for the future
record of this month of most uncertain weather, according to the
traditions of the old weather-prophets. The sun rose clear and warm, the
snow sparkled and melted, the bluebirds rejoiced, and their soft notes of
mutual congratulation found many echoes among their human neighbors. By
noon the air was wonderfully soft and balmy, and Webb brought in a number
of sprays from peach-trees cut in different parts of the place, and
redeemed his promise to Amy, showing her the fruit germs, either green,
or rather of a delicate gold-color, or else blackened by frost. She was
astonished to find how perfect the embryo blossom appeared under the
microscope. It needed no glass, however, to reveal the blackened heart of
the bud, and Webb, having cut through a goodly number, remarked: "It
would now appear as if nature had performed a very important labor for
us, for I find about eight out of nine buds killed. It will save us
thinning the fruit next summer, for if one-ninth of the buds mature into
peaches they will not only bring more money, but will measure more by the
bushel." "How can one peach measure more than eight peaches?" If all these buds grew into peaches, and
were left on these slender boughs, the tree might be killed outright by
overbearing, and would assuredly be much injured and disfigured by broken
limbs and exhaustion, while the fruit itself would be so small and poor
as to be unsalable. Thousands of trees annually perish from this cause,
and millions of peaches are either not picked, or, if marketed, may bring
the grower into debt for freight and other expenses. A profitable crop of
peaches can only be grown by careful hand-thinning when they are as large
as marbles, unless the frost does the work for us by killing the greater
part of the buds. It is a dangerous ally, however, for our constant fear
is that it will destroy _all_ the buds. There are plenty left yet, and I
find that cherry, apple, plum, and pear buds are still safe. Indeed,
there is little fear for them as long as peach buds are not entirely
destroyed, for they are much hardier." In the afternoon Burt, who had become expert in the use of crutches,
determined on an airing, and invited Amy to join him. "I now intend to
begin giving you driving lessons," he said. "You will soon acquire entire
confidence, for skill, far more than strength, is required. As long as
one keeps cool and shows no fear there is rarely danger. Horses often
catch their senseless panic from their drivers, and, even when frightened
with good cause, can usually be reassured by a few quiet words and a firm
rein." Amy was delighted at the prospect of a lesson in driving, especially as
Bart, because of his lameness, did not venture to take his over-spirited
steed Thunder. She sincerely hoped, however, that he would confine his
thoughts and attentions to the ostensible object of the drive, for his
manner at times was embarrassingly ardent. Burt was sufficiently politic
to fulfil her hope, for he had many other drives in view, and had
discovered that attentions not fraternal were unwelcome to Amy. With a
self-restraint and prudence which he thought most praiseworthy and
sagacious, but which were ludicrous in their limitations, he resolved to
take a few weeks to make the impression which he had often succeeded in
producing in a few hours, judging from the relentings and favors received
in a rather extended career of gallantry, although it puzzled the young
fellow that he could have been so fascinated on former occasions. He
merely proposed that now she should enjoy the drive so thoroughly that
she would wish to go again, and his effort met with entire success. During the first week of March there were many indications of the opening
campaign on the Clifford farm. There was the overhauling and furbishing
of weapons, otherwise tools, and the mending or strengthening of those in
a decrepit state. A list of such additional ones as were wanted was made
at this time, and an order sent for them at once. Amy also observed that
practical Leonard was conning several catalogues of implements. "Len is
always on the scent of some new patent hoe or cultivator," Burt remarked. "My game pays better than yours," was the reply, "for the right kind of
tools about doubles the effectiveness of labor." The chief topic of discussion and form of industry at this time were the
pruning and cleansing of trees, and Amy often observed Webb from her
windows in what seemed to her most perilous positions in the tops of
apple and other trees, with saw and pruning shears or nippers--a light
little instrument with such a powerful leverage that a good-sized bough
could be lopped away by one slight pressure of the hand. "It seems to me," remarked Leonard, one evening, "that there is much
diversity of opinion in regard to the time and method of trimming trees. While the majority of our neighbors prune in March, some say fall or
winter is the best time. Others are in favor of June, and in some paper
I've read, 'Prune when your knife is sharp.' As for cleansing the bark of
the trees, very few take the trouble." "Well," replied his father, "I've always performed these labors in March
with good results. I have often observed that taking off large limbs from
old and feeble trees is apt to injure them. A decay begins at the point
of amputation and extends down into the body of the tree. Sap-suckers and
other wood peckers, in making their nests, soon excavate this rotten wood
back into the trunk, to which the moisture of every storm is admitted,
and the life of the tree is shortened." At this point Webb went out, and soon returned with something like
exultation blending with his usually grave expression. "I think father's views are correct, and I have confirmation here in
autograph letters from three of the most eminent horticulturists in the
world--"

"Good gracious, Webb! don't take away our breath in that style,"
exclaimed Burt. "Have you autograph letters from several autocrats also?" As usual Webb ignored his brother's nonsense, and resumed: "The first is
from the Hon. Marshall P. Wilder, President of the American Pomological
Society, and is as follows: 'I prune my trees early in March, as soon as
the heavy frosts are over, when the sap is dormant. If the branch is
large I do not cut quite close in, and recut close in June, when the
wound heals more readily. I do not approve of rigorous pruning of old
trees showing signs of feebleness. Such operations would increase
decline--only the dead wood should be removed, the loss of live wood
depriving old trees of the supply of sap which they need for support. Grafting-wax is good to cover the wounds of trees, or a thick paint of
the color of the bark answers well. Trees also may be pruned in safety in
June after the first growth is made--then the wounds heal quickly.' Charles Downing, editor of 'The Fruits and
Fruit-Trees of America.' 'When the extreme cold weather is over,' he
says,'say the last of February or first of March, begin to trim trees,
and finish as rapidly as convenient. Do not trim a tree too much at one
time, and cut no large limbs if possible, but thin out the small
branches. If the trees are old and bark-bound, scrape off the roughest
bark and wash the bodies and large limbs with whale-oil soap, or
soft-soap such as the farmers make, putting it on quite thick. Give the
ground plenty of compost manure, bone-dust, ashes, and salt. The best and
most convenient preparation for covering wounds is gum-shellac dissolved
in alcohol to the thickness of paint, and put on with a brush.' Patrick Barry, of the eminent Rochester firm, and author of
'The Fruit Garden.' 'In our climate pruning may be done at convenience,
from the fall of the leaf until the 1st of April. In resuscitating old
neglected apple-trees, _rigorous_ pruning may be combined with plowing
and manuring of the ground. For covering wounds made in pruning, nothing
is better than common grafting wax laid on warm with a brush.' Hon P. T.
Quinn, in his work on 'Pear Culture,' writes: 'On our own place we begin
to prune our pear-trees from the 1st to the 15th of March, and go on with
the work through April. It is not best to do much cutting, except on very
young trees, while the foliage is coming out.'" "Well," remarked Leonard, "I can go to work to-morrow with entire
content; and very pleasant work it is, too, especially on the young
trees, where by a little forethought and a few cuts one can regulate the
form and appearance of the future tree." "Well, you see there are plenty of buds on all the young branches, and we
can cut a branch just above the bud we wish to grow which will continue
to grow in the direction in which it points. Thus we can shape each
summer's growth in any direction we choose." "How can you be sure to find a bud just where you want it?" "Of course we do," said Webb, "for buds are arranged spirally on trees
in mathematical order. On most trees it is termed-the 'five-ranked
arrangement,' and every bud is just two-fifths of the circumference of the
stem from the next. This will bring every sixth bud or leaf over the first,
or the one we start with. Thus in the length of stem occupied by five buds
you have buds facing in five different directions--plenty of choice for
all pruning purposes." "Oh, nonsense, Webb; you are too everlastingly scientific. Buds and
leaves are scattered at haphazard all over the branches." "That shows you observe at haphazard. Wait, and I'll prove I'm right;"
and he seized his hat and went out. Returning after a few minutes with
long, slender shoots of peach, apple, and pear trees, he said: "Now put
your finger on any bud, and count. See if the sixth bud does not stand
invariably over the one you start from, and if the intervening buds do
not wind spirally twice around the stem, each facing in a different
direction." He laughed, and said: "There, Len,
you've seen buds and branches for over forty years, and never noticed
this. Here, Alf, you begin right, and learn to see things just as they
are. There's no telling how often accurate knowledge may be useful." "But, Webb, all plants have not the five-ranked arrangement, as you term
it," his mother protested. There is the two-ranked, in which the third leaf stands over the
first; the three-ranked, in which the fourth leaf stands over the first. Then we also find the eighth and thirteenth ranked arrangements,
according to the construction of various species of plants or trees. But
having once observed an arrangement of buds or leaves in a species, you
will find it maintained with absolute symmetry and accuracy, although the
spaces between the buds lengthwise upon the stem may vary very much. Nature, with all her seeming carelessness and _abandon_, works on strict
mathematical principles." "Well," said Alf, "I'm going to see if you are right tomorrow. And on the following day he tried his best to
prove Webb wrong, but failed. Before the week was over there was a decided return of winter. The sky
lost its spring-like blue. Cold, ragged clouds were driven wildly by a
northeast gale, which, penetrating the heaviest wraps, caused a shivering
sense of discomfort. Only by the most vigorous exercise could one cope
with the raw, icy wind, and yet the effort to do so brought a rich return
in warm, purified blood. All outdoor labor, except such as required
strong, rapid action, came to an end, for it was the very season and
opportunity for pneumonia to seize upon its chilled victim. To a family
constituted like the Cliffords such weather brought no _ennui_. They
had time for more music and reading aloud than usual. The pets in the
flower-room needed extra care and watching, for the bitter wind searched
out every crevice and cranny. Entering the dining-room on one occasion,
Amy found the brothers poring over a map spread out on the table. "It certainly is a severe stress of
weather that has brought you all to that. "These are our Western Territories," Burt promptly responded. "This
prominent point here is Fort Totem, and these indications of adjacent
buildings are for the storage of furs, bear-meat, and the accommodation
of Indian hunters." Burt tried to look serious, but Webb's and Leonard's
laughter betrayed him. Amy turned inquiringly to Webb, as she ever did
when perplexed. "Don't mind Burt's chaff," he said. "This is merely a map of the farm,
and we are doing a little planning for our spring work--deciding what
crop we shall put on that field and how treat this one, etc. You can see,
Amy, that each field is numbered, and here in this book are corresponding
numbers, with a record of the crops grown upon each field for a good many
years back, to what extent and how often they have been enriched, and the
kind of fertilizers used. Of course such a book of manuscript would be
the dreariest prose in the world to you, but it is exceedingly interesting
to us; and what's more, these past records are the best possible guides for
future action." "Oh, I know all about your book now," she said, with an air of entire
confidence, "for I've heard papa say that land and crop records have been
kept in England for generations. I don't think I will sit up nights to
read your manuscript, however. If Burt's version had been true, it might
have been quite exciting." Clifford in overhauling the seed-chest,
however. This was a wooden box, all tinned over to keep out the mice, and
was divided into many little compartments, in which were paper bags of
seeds, with the date on which they were gathered or purchased. Some of
the seeds were condemned because too old; others, like those of melons
and cucumbers, improved with a moderate degree of age, she was told. Clifford brought out from her part of the chest a rich store of flower
seeds, and the young girl looked with much curiosity on the odd-appearing
little grains and scale-like objects in which, in miniature, was wrapped
some beautiful and fragrant plant. "Queer little promises, ain't they?" said the old lady; "for every seed is a promise to me." "I tell you what it is, Amy," the old gentleman remarked, "this chest
contains the assurance of many a good dinner and many a beautiful
bouquet. Now, like a good girl, help us make an inventory. We will first
have a list of what we may consider trustworthy seeds on hand, and then,
with the aid of these catalogues, we can make out another list of what we
shall buy. Seed catalogues, with their long list of novelties, never lose
their fascination for me. I know that most of the new things are not half
so good as the old tried sorts, but still I like to try some every year. It's a harmless sort of gambling, you see, and now and then I draw a
genuine prize. Mother has the gambling mania far worse than I, as is
evident from the way she goes into the flower novelties." "I own up to it," said Mrs. Clifford, "and I do love to see the almost
endless diversity in beauty which one species of plants will exhibit. Why, do you know, Amy, I grew from seeds one summer fifty distinct
varieties of the dianthus. Suppose we take asters this year, and see how
many distinct kinds we can grow. Here, in this catalogue, is a long list
of named varieties, and, in addition, there are packages of mixed seeds
from which we may get something distinct from all the others." "How full of zest life becomes in the country," cried Amy, "if one only
goes to work in the right way!" Life was growing fuller and richer to her
every day in the varied and abounding interests of the family with which
she was now entirely identified. "Webb," his mother asked at dinner, "how do you explain the varying
vitality of seeds? Some we can keep six or eight years, and others only
two." "That's a question I am unable to answer. It cannot be the amount of
material stored up in the cotyledons, or embryo seed leaves, for small
seeds like the beet and cucumber will retain their vitality ten years,
and lettuce, turnip, and tomato seed five or more years, while I do not
care to plant large, fleshy seeds like pease and beans that are over
three years old, and much prefer those gathered the previous season. The
whole question of the germinating of seeds is a curious one. Wheat taken
from the wrappings of an Egyptian mummy has grown. Many seeds appear to
have a certain instinct when to grow, and will lie dormant in the ground
for indefinite periods waiting for favorable conditions. For instance,
sow wood-ashes copiously and you speedily have a crop of white clover. Again, when one kind of timber is cut from land, another and diverse kind
will spring up, as if the soil were full of seeds that had been biding
their time. For all practical purposes the duration of vitality is known,
and is usually given in seed catalogues, I think, or ought to be." "Some say that certain fertilizers or conditions will produce certain
kinds of vegetation without the aid of seeds--just develop them, you
know," Leonard remarked. "Well, I think the sensible answer is that all vegetation is developed
from seeds, spores, or whatever was designed to continue the chain of
being from one plant to another. For the life of me I can't see how mere
organic or inorganic matter can produce life. It can only sustain and
nourish the life which exists in it or is placed in it, and which by a
law of nature develops when the conditions are favorable. I am quite sure
that there is not an instance on record of the spontaneous production of
life, even down to the smallest animalcule in liquids, or the minutest
plant life that is propagated by invisible spores. That the microscope
does not reveal these spores or germs proves nothing, for the strongest
microscope in the world has not begun to reach the final atom of which
matter is composed. Indeed, it would seem to be as limited in its power
to explore the infinitely little and near as the telescope to reveal the
infinitely distant and great. Up to this time science has discovered
nothing to contravene the assurance that God, or some one, 'created every
living creature that moveth, and every herb yielding seed after his
kind.' After a series of most careful and accurate experiments, Professor
Tyndall could find no proof of the spontaneous production of even
microscopic life, and found much proof to the contrary. How far original
creations are changed or modified by evolution, natural selection, is a
question that is to be settled neither by dogmatism on the one hand, nor
by baseless theories on the other, but by facts, and plenty of them." "Do you think there is anything atheistical in evolution?" his mother
asked, and with some solicitude in her large eyes, for, like all trained
in the old beliefs, she felt that the new philosophies led away into a
realm of vague negations. Webb understood her anxiety lest the faith she
had taught him should become unsettled, and he reassured her in a
characteristic way. "If evolution is the true explanation of the world,
as it now appears to us, it is no more atheistical than some theologies I
have heard preached, which contained plenty of doctrines and attributes,
but no God. If God with his infinite leisure chooses to evolve his
universe, why shouldn't he? In any case a creative, intelligent power is
equally essential. It would be just as easy for me to believe that all
the watches and jewelry at Tiffany's were the result of fortuitous causes
as to believe that the world as we find it has no mind back of it." Mother smiled with satisfaction, for she saw that he still stood just
where she did, only his horizon had widened. "Well," said his father, contentedly, "I read much in the papers and
magazines of theories and isms of which I never heard when I was young,
but eighty years of experience have convinced me that the Lord reigns." They all laughed at this customary settlement of knotty problems, on the
part of the old gentleman, and Burt, rising from the table, looked out,
with the remark that the prospects were that "the Lord would rain heavily
that afternoon." The oldest and most infallible weather-prophet in the
region--Storm King--was certainly giving portentous indications of a
storm of no ordinary dimensions. The vapor was pouring over its summit in
Niagara-like volume, and the wind, no longer rushing with its recent
boisterous roar, was moaning and sighing as if nature was in pain and
trouble. The barometer, which had been low for two days, sank lower; the
temperature rose as the gale veered to the eastward. This fact, and the
moisture laden atmosphere, indicated that it came from the Gulf Stream
region of the Atlantic. The rain, which began with a fine drizzle,
increased fast, and soon fell in blinding sheets. The day grew dusky
early, and the twilight was brief and obscure; then followed a long night
of Egyptian darkness, through which the storm rushed, warred, and
splashed with increasing vehemence. Before the evening was over, the
sound of tumultuously flowing water became an appreciable element in the
uproar without, and Webb, opening a window on the sheltered side of the
house, called Amy to hear the torrents pouring down the sides of Storm
King. "What tremendous alternations of mood Nature indulges in!" she said, as
she came shivering back to the fire. "Contrast such a night with a sunny
June day." "It would seem as if'mild, ethereal spring' had got her back up," Burt
remarked, "and regarding the return of winter as a trespass, had taken
him by the throat, determined to have it out once for all. Something will
give way before morning, probably half our bridges." "Well, that _is_ a way of explaining the jar among the elements that I
had not thought of," she said, laughing. "You needn't think Webb can do all the explaining. I have my theories
also--sounder than his, too, most of 'em." "There is surely no lack of sound accompanying your theory to-night. Indeed, it is not all'sound and fury!'" "It's all the more impressive, then. What's the use of your delicate,
weak-backed theories that require a score of centuries to substantiate
them?" "Your theory about the bridges will soon be settled," remarked Leonard,
ominously, "and I fear it will prove correct. At this rate the town will
have to pay for half a dozen new ones--bridges, I mean." There was a heavy body of
snow still in the mountains and on northern <DW72>s, and much ice on the
streams and ponds. "There certainly will be no little trouble if this
continues." "Don't worry, children," said Mr. "I have generally
found everything standing after the storms were over." CHAPTER XIX

WINTER'S EXIT


The old house seemed so full of strange sounds that Amy found it
impossible to sleep. Seasoned as were its timbers, they creaked and
groaned, and the casements rattled as if giant hands were seeking to open
them. The wind at times would sigh and sob so mournfully, like a human
voice, that her imagination peopled the darkness with strange creatures
in distress, and then she would shudder as a more violent gust raised the
prolonged wail into a loud shriek. Thoughts of her dead father--not the
resigned, peaceful thoughts which the knowledge of his rest had brought
of late--came surging into her mind. Her organization was peculiarly fine
and especially sensitive to excited atmospherical conditions, and the
tumult of the night raised in her mind an irrepressible, although
unreasoning, panic. At last she felt that she would scream if she
remained alone any longer. She put on her wrapper, purposing to ask Mrs. Leonard to come and stay with her for a time, feeling assured that if she
could only speak to some one, the horrid spell of nervous fear would be
broken. As she stepped into the hall she saw a light gleaming from the
open door of the sitting-room, and in the hope that some one was still
up, she stole noiselessly down the stairway to a point that commanded a
view of the apartment. Only Webb was there, and he sat quietly reading by
the shaded lamp and flickering fire. The scene and his very attitude
suggested calmness and safety. There was nothing to be afraid of, and he
was not afraid. With every moment that she watched him the nervous
agitation passed from mind and body. His strong, intent profile proved
that he was occupied wholly with the thought of his author. The quiet
deliberation with which he turned the leaves was more potent than
soothing words. "I wouldn't for the world have him know I'm so weak and
foolish," she said to herself, as she crept noiselessly back to her room. "He little dreamed who was watching him," she whispered, smilingly, as
she dropped asleep. When she waked next morning the rain had ceased, the wind blew in fitful
gusts, and the sky was still covered with wildly hurrying clouds that
seemed like the straggling rearguard which the storm had left behind. So
far as she could see from her window, everything was still standing, as
Mr. Familiar objects greeted her reassuringly, and
never before had the light even of a lowering morning seemed more blessed
in contrast with the black, black night. As she recalled the incidents of
that night--her nervous panic, and the scene which had brought quiet and
peace--she smiled again, and, it must be admitted, blushed slightly. "I
wonder if he affects others as he does me," she thought. "Papa used to
say, when I was a little thing, that I was just a bundle of nerves, but
when Webb is near I am not conscious I ever had a nerve." Every little brook had become a torrent; Moodna Creek was reported to be
in angry mood, and the family hastened through breakfast that they might
drive out to see the floods and the possible devastation. Several bridges
over the smaller streams had barely escaped, and the Idlewild brook,
whose spring and summer music the poet Willis had caused to be heard even
in other lands, now gave forth a hoarse roar from the deep glen through
which it raved. An iron bridge over the Moodna, on the depot road, had
evidently been in danger in the night. The ice had been piled up in the
road at each end of the bridge, and a cottage a little above it was
surrounded by huge cakes. The inmates had realized their danger, for part
of their furniture had been carried to higher ground. Although the volume
of water passing was still immense, all danger was now over. As they were
looking at the evidences of the violent breaking up of winter, the first
phoebe-bird of the season alighted in a tree overhanging the torrent, and
in her plaintive notes seemed to say, as interpreted by John Burroughs,
"If you please, spring has come." They gave the brown little harbinger
such an enthusiastic welcome that she speedily took flight to the further
shore. "Where was that wee bit of life last night?" said Webb; "and how could it
keep up heart?" "Possibly it looked in at a window and saw some one reading," thought
Amy; and she smiled so sweetly at the conceit that Webb asked, "How many
pennies will you take for your thoughts?" "They are not in the market;" and she laughed outright as she turned
away. "The true place to witness the flood will be at the old red bridge
further down the stream," said Leonard; and they drove as rapidly as the
bad wheeling permitted to that point, and found that Leonard was right. Just above the bridge was a stone dam, by which the water was backed up a
long distance, and a precipitous wooded bank rose on the south side. This
had shielded the ice from the sun, and it was still very thick when the
pressure of the flood came upon it. Up to this time it had not given way,
and had become the cause of an ice-gorge that every moment grew more
threatening. The impeded torrent chafed and ground the cakes together,
surging them up at one point and permitting them to sink at another, as
the imprisoned waters struggled for an outlet. The solid ice still held
near the edge of the dam, although it was beginning to lift and crack
with the tawny flood pouring over, under, and around it. "Suppose we cross to the other side, nearest home," said Burt, who was
driving; and with the word he whipped up the horses and dashed through
the old covered structure. "You ought not to have done that, Burt," said Webb, almost sternly. "The
gorge may give way at any moment, and the bridge will probably go with
it. We shall now have to drive several hundred yards to a safe place to
leave the horses, for the low ground on this side will probably be
flooded." cried Amy; and they all noticed that she was trembling. But a few minutes sufficed to tie the horses and return to a point of
safety near the bridge. "I did not mean to expose you to the slightest
danger," Burt whispered, tenderly, to Amy. "See, the bridge is safe
enough, and we might drive over it again." Even as he spoke there was a long grinding, crunching sound. A great
volume of black water had forced its way under the gorge, and now lifted
it bodily over the dam. It sank in a chaotic mass, surged onward and
upward again, struck the bridge, and in a moment lifted it from its
foundations and swept it away, a shattered wreck, the red covering
showing in the distance like ensanguined stains among the tossing cakes
of ice. They all drew a long breath, and Amy was as pale as if she had witnessed
the destruction of some living creature. No doubt she realized what would
have been their fate had the break occurred while they were crossing. "Good-by, old bridge," said Leonard, pensively. "I played and fished
under you when a boy, and in the friendly dusk of its cover I kissed
Maggie one summer afternoon of our courting days--"

"Well, well," exclaimed Burt, "the old bridge's exit has been a moving
object in every sense, since it has evoked such a flood of sentiment from
Len. Let us take him home to Maggie at once." As they were about to depart they saw Dr. Marvin driving down to the
opposite side, and they mockingly beckoned him to cross the raging
torrent. He shook his head ruefully, and returned up the hill again. A
rapid drive through the Moodna Valley brought them to the second bridge,
which would evidently escape, for the flats above it were covered with
_debris_ and ice, and the main channel was sufficiently clear to permit
the flood to pass harmlessly on. They then took the river road homeward. The bridge over the Idlewild brook, near its entrance into the Moodna,
was safe, although it had a narrow graze. They also found that the ice in
the river at the mouth of the creek had been broken up in a wide
semicircle, and as they ascended a hill that commanded an extensive view
of Newburgh Bay they saw that the ice remaining had a black, sodden
appearance. "It will all break up in a few hours," said Burt, "and then hurrah for
duck-shooting!" Although spring had made such a desperate onset the previous night, it
seemed to have gained but a partial advantage over winter. The weather
continued raw and blustering for several days, and the overcast sky
permitted but chance and watery gleams of sunshine. Slush and mud
completed the ideal of the worst phase of March. The surface of the earth
had apparently returned to that period before the dry land was made to
appear. As the frost came out of the open spaces of the garden, plowed
fields, and even the country roads, they became quagmires in which one
sank indefinitely. Seeing the vast advantage afforded to the men-folk by
rubber boots, Amy provided herself with a pair, and with something of the
exultation of the ancient Hebrews passed dry-shod through the general
moisture. CHAPTER XX

A ROYAL CAPTIVE


In the midst of this dreary transition period Nature gave proof that she
has unlimited materials of beauty at her command at any time. Early one
afternoon the brothers were driven in from their outdoor labors by a cold,
sleety rain, and Leonard predicted an ice-storm. The next morning the world
appeared as if heavily plated with silver. The sun at last was unclouded,
and as he looked over the top of Storm King his long-missed beams
transformed the landscape into a scene of wonder and beauty beyond anything
described in Johnnie's fairy tales. Trees, shrubs, the roofs and sidings of
the buildings, the wooden and even the stone fences, the spires of dead
grass, and the unsightly skeletons of weeds, were all incased in ice and
touched by the magic wand of beauty. The mountain-tops, however, surpassed
all other objects in the transfigured world, for upon them a heavy mist had
rested and frozen, clothing every branch and spray with a feathery
frost-work of crystals, which, in the sun-lighted distance, was like a
great shock of silver hair. There were drawbacks, however, to this
marvellous scene. There were not a few branches already broken from the
trees, and Mr. Clifford said that if the wind rose the weight of the ice
would cause great destruction. They all hastened through breakfast, Leonard
and Webb that they might relieve the more valuable fruit and evergreen
trees of the weight of ice, and Burt and Amy for a drive up the mountain. As they slowly ascended, the scene under the increasing sunlight took on
every moment more strange and magical effects. The ice-incased twigs and
boughs acted as prisms, and reflected every hue of the rainbow, and as
they approached the summit the feathery frost-work grew more and more
exquisitely delicate and beautiful, and yet it was proving to be as
evanescent as a dream, for in all sunny place it was already vanishing. They had scarcely passed beyond the second summit when Burt uttered an
exclamation of regretful disgust. "By all that's unlucky," he cried, "if
there isn't an eagle sitting on yonder ledge! I could kill him with
bird-shot, and I haven't even a popgun with me." "It's too bad," sympathized Amy. "Let us drive as near as we can, and get
a good view before he flies." To their great surprise, he did not move as they approached, but only
glared at them with his savage eye. "Well," said Burt, "after trying for hours to get within rifle range,
this exceeds anything I ever saw. I wonder if he is wounded and cannot
fly." Suddenly he sprang out, and took a strap from the harness. I think I know what is the trouble with his majesty, and
we may be able to return with a royal captive." He drew near the eagle slowly and warily, and soon perceived that he was
incased in ice from head to foot, and only retained the power of slightly
moving his head. The creature was completely helpless, and must remain so
until his icy fetters thawed out. His wings were frozen to his sides, his
legs covered with ice, as were also his talons, and the dead branch of a
low pine on which he had perched hours before. Icicles hung around him,
making a most fantastic fringe. Only his defiant eye and open beak could
give expression to his untamed, undaunted spirit. It was evident that the
bird made a fierce internal struggle to escape, but was held as in a
vise. Burt was so elated that his hand trembled with eagerness; but he resolved
to act prudently, and grasping the bird firmly but gently by the neck, he
succeeded in severing the branch upon which the eagle was perched, for it
was his purpose to exhibit the bird just as he had found him. Having
carefully carried his prize to the buggy, he induced Amy, who viewed the
creature with mingled wonder and alarm, to receive this strange addition
to their number for the homeward journey. He wrapped her so completely
with the carriage robe that the eagle could not injure her with his beak,
and she saw he could no more move in other respects than a block of ice. As an additional precaution, Burt passed the strap around the bird's neck
and tied him to the dash-board. Even with his heavy gloves he had to act
cautiously, for the eagle in his disabled state could still strike a
powerful blow. Then, with an exultation beyond all words, he drove to Dr. Marvin's, in order to have one of the "loudest crows" over him that he
had ever enjoyed. The doctor did not mind the "crow" in the least, but
was delighted with the adventure and capture, for the whole affair had
just the flavor to please him. As he was a skilful taxidermist, he
good-naturedly promised to "set the eagle up" on the selfsame branch on
which he had been found, for it was agreed that he would prove too
dangerous a pet to keep in the vicinity of the irrepressible little Ned. Indeed, from the look of this fellow's eye, it was evident that he would
be dangerous to any one. "I will follow you home, and after you have
exhibited him we will kill him scientifically. He is a splendid specimen,
and not a feather need be ruffled." Barkdale's and some others of his
nearest neighbors and friends in a sort of triumphal progress; but Amy
grew uneasy at her close proximity to so formidable a companion, fearing
that he would thaw out. Many were the exclamations of wonder and
curiosity when they reached home. Alf went nearly wild, and little
Johnnie's eyes overflowed with tears when she learned that the regal bird
must die. As for Ned, had he not been restrained he would have given the
eagle a chance to devour him. "So, Burt, you have your eagle after all," said his mother, looking with
more pleasure and interest on the flushed, eager face of her handsome boy
than upon his captive. "Well, you and Amy have had an adventure." "I always have good fortune and good times when you are with me," Burt
whispered in an aside to Amy. "Always is a long time," she replied, turning away; but he was too
excited to note that she did not reciprocate his manner, and he was
speedily engaged in a discussion as to the best method of preserving the
eagle in the most life-like attitude. After a general family council it
was decided that his future perch should be in a corner of the parlor,
and within a few days he occupied it, looking so natural that callers
were often startled by his lifelike appearance. As the day grew old the ice on the trees melted and fell away in myriads
of gemlike drops. Although the sun shone brightly, there was a sound
without as of rain. By four in the afternoon the pageant was over, the
sky clouded again, and the typical March outlook was re-established. CHAPTER XXI

SPRING'S HARBINGERS


Amy was awakened on the following morning by innumerable bird-notes, not
songs, but loud calls. Hastening to the window, she witnessed a scene
very strange to her eyes. All over the grass of the lawn and on the
ground of the orchard beyond was a countless flock of what seemed to her
quarter-grown chickens. A moment later the voice of Alf resounded through
the house, crying, "The robins have come!" Very soon nearly all the
household were on the piazza to greet these latest arrivals from the
South; and a pretty scene of life and animation they made, with their
yellow bills, jaunty black heads, and brownish red breasts. "_Turdus migratorius_, as the doctor would say," remarked Burt; "and
migrants they are with a vengeance. Last night there was not one to be
seen, and now here are thousands. They are on their way north, and have
merely alighted to feed." "Isn't it odd how they keep their distance from each other?" "You can scarcely see two near together, but every few feet there is a
robin, as far as the eye can reach. Yes, and there are some high-holders
in the orchard also. They are shyer than the robins, and don't come so
near the house. You can tell them, Amy, by their yellow bodies and brown
wings. I have read that they usually migrate with the robins. I wonder
how far this flock flew last--ah, listen!" Clear and sweet came an exquisite bird-song from an adjacent maple. Webb
took off his hat in respectful greeting to the minstrel. "Why," cried Amy, "that little brown bird cannot be a robin." "No," he answered, "that is my favorite of all the earliest birds--the
song-sparrow. Marvin said about him the other
evening? I have been looking for my little friend for a week past, and
here he is. The great tide of migration has turned northward." "He is my favorite too," said his father. "Every spring for over seventy
years I remember hearing his song, and it is just as sweet and fresh to
me as ever. Indeed, it is enriched by a thousand memories." For two or three days the robins continued plentiful around the house,
and their loud "military calls," as Burroughs describes them, were heard
at all hours from before the dawn into the dusk of night, but they seemed
to be too excited over their northward journey or their arrival at their
old haunts to indulge in the leisure of song. They reminded one of the
advent of an opera company. There was incessant chattering, a flitting to
and fro, bustle and excitement, each one having much to say, and no one
apparently stopping to listen. The majority undoubtedly continued their
migration, for the great flocks disappeared. It is said that the birds
that survive the vicissitudes of the year return to their former haunts,
and it would seem that they drop out of the general advance as they reach
the locality of the previous summer's nest, to which they are guided by
an unerring instinct. The evening of the third day after their arrival was comparatively mild,
and the early twilight serene and quiet. The family were just sitting
down to supper when they heard a clear, mellow whistle, so resonant and
penetrating as to arrest their attention, although doors and windows were
closed. Hastening to the door they saw on the top of one of the tallest
elms a robin, with his crimson breast lighted up by the setting sun, and
his little head lifted heavenward in the utterance of what seemed the
perfection of an evening hymn. Indeed, in that bleak, dim March evening,
with the long, chill night fast falling and the stormy weeks yet to come,
it would be hard to find a finer expression of hope and faith. Peculiarly domestic in his haunts and
habits, he resembles his human neighbors in more respects than one. He is
much taken up with his material life, and is very fond of indulging his
large appetite. He is far from being aesthetic in his house or
housekeeping, and builds a strong, coarse nest of the handiest materials
and in the handiest place, selecting the latter with a confidence in
boy-nature and cat-nature that is often misplaced. He is noisy, bustling,
and important, and as ready to make a raid on a cherry-tree or a
strawberry-bed as is the average youth to visit a melon-patch by
moonlight. He has a careless, happy-go-lucky air, unless irritated, and
then is as eager for a "square set-to" in robin fashion as the most
approved scion of chivalry. Like man, he also seems to have a spiritual
element in his nature; and, as if inspired and lifted out of his grosser
self by the dewy freshness of the morning and the shadowy beauty of the
evening, he sings like a saint, and his pure, sweet notes would never
lead one to suspect that he was guilty of habitual gormandizing. He
settles down into a good husband and father, and, in brief, reminds one
of the sturdy English squire who is sincerely devout over his prayer-book
on proper occasions, and between times takes all the goods the gods send. In the morning little Johnnie came to the breakfast-table in a state of
great excitement. It soon appeared that she had a secret that she would
tell no one but Amy--indeed, she would not tell it, but show it; and
after breakfast she told Amy to put on her rubber boots and come with
her, warning curious Alf meanwhile to keep his distance. Leading the way
to a sunny angle in the garden fence, she showed Amy the first flower of
the year. Although it was a warm, sunny spot, the snow had drifted there
to such an extent that the icy base of the drift still partially covered
the ground, and through a weak place in the melting ice a snow-drop had
pushed its green, succulent leaves and hung out its modest little
blossom. The child, brought up from infancy to feel the closest sympathy
with nature, fairly trembled with delight over this _avant-coureur_ of
the innumerable flowers which it was her chief happiness to gather. As if
in sympathy with the exultation of the child, and in appreciation of all
that the pale little blossom foreshadowed, a song-sparrow near trilled
out its sweetest lay, a robin took up the song, and a pair of bluebirds
passed overhead with their undulating flight and soft warble. Truly
spring had come in that nook of the old garden, even though the mountains
were still covered with snow, the river was full of floating ice, and the
wind chill with the breath of winter. Could there have been a fairer or
more fitting committee of reception than little Johnnie, believing in all
things, hoping all things, and brown-haired, hazel-eyed Amy, with the
first awakenings of womanhood in her heart? CHAPTER XXII

"FIRST TIMES"


At last Nature was truly awakening, and color was coming into her pallid
face. On every side were increasing movement and evidences of life. Sunny
hillsides were free from snow, and the oozing frost loosed the hold of
stones upon the soil or the clay of precipitous banks, leaving them to
the play of gravitation. Will the world become level if there are no more
upheavals? The ice of the upper Hudson was journeying toward the sea that
it would never reach. The sun smote it, the high winds ground the
honey-combed cakes together, and the ebb and flow of the tide permitted
no pause in the work of disintegration. By the middle of March the blue
water predominated, and adventurous steamers had already picked and
pounded their way to and from the city. Only those deeply enamored of Nature feel much enthusiasm for the first
month of spring; but for them this season possesses a peculiar fascination. The beauty that has been so cold and repellent in relenting--yielding,
seemingly against her will, to a wooing that cannot be repulsed by even her
harshest moods. To the vigilance of love, sudden, unexpected smiles are
granted; and though, as if these were regretted, the frown quickly returns,
it is often less forbidding. It is a period full of delicious,
soul-thrilling "first times," the coy, exquisite beginnings of that final
abandonment to her suitor in the sky. Although she veils her face for days
with clouds, and again and again greets him in the dawn, wrapped in her old
icy reserve, he smiles back his answer, and she cannot resist. Indeed,
there soon come warm, still, bright days whereon she feels herself going,
but does not even protest. Then, as if suddenly conscious of lost ground,
she makes a passionate effort to regain her wintry aspect. It is so
passionate as to betray her, so stormy as to insure a profounder relenting,
a warmer, more tearful, and penitent smile after her wild mood is over. She
finds that she cannot return to her former sustained coldness, and so at
last surrenders, and the frost passes wholly from her heart. To Alf's and Johnnie's delight it so happened that one of these gentlest
moods of early spring occurred on Saturday--that weekly millennium of
school-children. With plans and preparations matured, they had risen with
the sun, and, scampering back and forth over the frozen ground and the
remaining patches of ice and snow, had carried every pail and pan that
they could coax from their mother to a rocky hillside whereon clustered a
few sugar-maples. Webb, the evening before, had inserted into the sunny
sides of the trees little wooden troughs, and from these the tinkling
drip of the sap made a music sweeter than that of the robins to the eager
boy and girl. At the breakfast-table each one was expatiating on the rare promise of
the day. Clifford, awakened by the half subdued clatter of the
children, had seen the brilliant, rose tinted dawn. "The day cannot be more beautiful than was the night," Webb remarked. "A
little after midnight I was awakened by a clamor from the poultry, and
suspecting either two or four footed thieves, I was soon covering the
hennery with my gun. As a result, Sir Mephitis, as Burroughs calls him,
lies stark and stiff near the door. After watching awhile, and finding no
other marauders abroad, I became aware that it was one of the most
perfect nights I had ever seen. It was hard to imagine that, a few hours
before, a gale had been blowing under a cloudy sky. The moonlight was so
clear that I could see to read distinctly. So attractive and still was
the night that I started for an hour's walk up the boulevard, and when
near Idlewild brook had the fortune to empty the other barrel of my gun
into a great horned owl. How the echoes resounded in the quiet night! The
changes in April are more rapid, but they are on a grander scale this
month." "It seems to me," laughed Burt, "that your range of topics is even more
sublime. From Sir Mephitis to romantic moonlight and lofty musings, no
doubt, which ended with a screech-owl." "The great horned is not a screech-owl, as you ought to know. Well,
Nature is to blame for my alternations. I only took the goods the gods
sent." "I hope you did not take cold," said Maggie. "The idea of prowling around
at that time of night!" "Webb was in hopes that Nature might bestow upon him some confidences by
moonlight that he could not coax from her in broad day. I shall seek
better game than you found. Ducks are becoming plenty in the river, and
all the conditions are favorable for a crack at them this morning. So I
shall paddle out with a white coat over my clothes, and pretend to be a
cake of ice. If I bring you a canvas-back, Amy, will you put the wishbone
over the door?" "Not till I have locked it and hidden the key." Without any pre-arranged purpose the day promised to be given up largely
to country sport. Burt had taken a lunch, and would not return until
night, while the increasing warmth and brilliancy of the sunshine, and
the children's voices from the maple grove, soon lured Amy to the piazza. "Come," cried Webb, who emerged from the wood-house with an axe on his
shoulder, "don rubber boots and wraps, and we'll improvise a male-sugar
camp of the New England style a hundred years ago. We should make the
most of a day like this." They soon joined the children on the hillside, whither Abram had already
carried a capacious iron pot as black as himself. On a little terrace
that was warm and bare of snow, Webb set up cross-sticks in gypsy
fashion, and then with a chain supended the pot, the children dancing
like witches around it. Clifford and little Ned now appeared, the
latter joining in the eager quest for dry sticks. Not far away was a
large tree that for several years had been slowly dying, its few living
branches having flushed early in September, in their last glow, which had
been premature and hectic. Dry sticks would make little impression on the
sap that now in the warmer light dropped faster from the wounded maples,
and therefore to supply the intense heat that should give them at least a
rich syrup before night, Webb threw off his coat and attacked the defunct
veteran of the grove. Amy watched his vigorous strokes with growing zest;
and he, conscious of her eyes, struck strong and true. Leonard, not far
away, was removing impediments from the courses, thus securing a more
rapid flow of the water and promoting the drainage of the land. He had
sent up his cheery voice from time to time, but now joined the group, to
witness the fall of a tree that had been old when he had played near it
like his own children to-day. The echoes of the ringing axe came back to
them from an adjacent hillside; a squirrel barked and "snickered," as if
he too were a party to the fun; crows overhead cawed a protest at the
destruction of their ancient perch; but with steady and remorseless
stroke the axe was driven through the concentric rings on either side
into the tree's dead heart. At last, as fibre after fibre was cut away,
it began to tremble. The children stood breathless and almost pitying as
they saw the shiver, apparently conscious, which followed each blow. Something of the same callousness of custom with which the fall of a man
is witnessed must blunt one's nature before he can look unmoved upon the
destruction of a familiar tree. As the dead maple trembled more and more violently, and at last swayed to
and fro in the breathless air, Amy cried, "Webb! She had hardly spoken when, with a slow and stately motion, the lofty
head bowed; there was a rush through the air, an echoing crash upon the
rocks. She sprang forward with a slight cry, but Webb, leaning his axe on
the prostrate bole, looked smilingly at her, and said, "Why, Amy, there
is no more danger in this work than in cutting a stalk of corn, if one
knows how." "There appears to be more," she replied. "I never saw a large tree cut
down before, but have certainly read of people being crushed. "By the way, Amy," said Leonard, "the wood-chopper that you visited with
me is doing so well that we shall give him work on the farm this summer. There was a little wheat in all that chaff of a man, and it's beginning
to grow. He says he would like to work where he
can see you occasionally." "I have been there twice with Webb since, and shall go oftener when the
roads are better," she replied, simply. "That's right, Amy; follow up a thing," said Mr. "It's better
to _help_ one family than to try to help a dozen. That was a good
clean cut, Webb," he added, examining the stump. "I dislike to see a tree
haggled down." "I suppose that if you had lived a
few hundred years ago you would have been hacking at people in the same
way." "And so might have been a hero, and won your admiration if you had lived
then in some gray castle, with the floor of your bower strewn with
rushes. Now there is no career for me but that of a plain farmer." "What manly task was given long before knighthood, eh, Webb? It seems to me
that you are striving after the higher mastery, one into which you can
put all your mind as well as muscle. Knocking people on the head wasn't a
very high art." "I imagine there will always be distressed damsels in the world. Indeed,
in fiction it would seem that many would be nothing if not distressed. You can surely find one, Webb, and so be a knight in spite of our prosaic
times." "I shall not try," he replied, laughing. "I am content to be a farmer,
and am glad you do not think our work is coarse and common. You obtained
some good ideas in England, Amy. The tastes of the average American girl
incline too much toward the manhood of the shop and office. There, Len, I
am rested now;" and he took the axe from his brother, who had been
lopping the branches from the prostrate tree. Amy again watched his athletic figure with pleasure as he rapidly
prepared billets for the seething caldron of sap. The blue of the sky
seemed intense after so many gray and steel-hued days, and there was not
a trace of cloud. The flowing sap was not sweeter than the air, to which
the brilliant sunlight imparted an exhilarating warmth far removed from
sultriness. From the hillside came the woody odor of decaying leaves, and
from the adjacent meadow the delicate perfume of grasses whose roots
began to tingle with life the moment the iron grip of the frost relaxed. Sitting on a rock near the crackling fire, Amy made as fair a gypsy as
one would wish to see. On every side were evidences that spring was
taking possession of the land. In the hollows of the meadow at her feet
were glassy pools, kept from sinking away by a substratum of frost, and
among these migratory robins and high-holders were feeding. The brook
beyond was running full from the melting of the snow in the mountains,
and its hoarse murmur was the bass in the musical babble and tinkle of
smaller rills hastening toward it on either side. Thus in all directions
the scene was lighted up with the glint and sparkle of water. The rays of
the sun idealized even the muddy road, of which a glimpse was caught, for
the pasty clay glistened like the surface of a stream. The returning
birds appeared as jubilant over the day as the children whose voices
blended with their songs--as do all the sounds that are absolutely
natural. The migratory tide of robins, song-sparrows, phoebes, and other
early birds was still moving northward; but multitudes had dropped out of
line, having reached their haunts of the previous year. The sunny
hillsides and its immediate vicinity seemed a favorite lounging-place
both for the birds of passage and for those already at home. The
excitement of travel to some, and the delight at having regained the
scene of last year's love and nesting to others, added to the universal
joy of spring, so exhilarated their hearts that they could scarcely be
still a moment. Although the sun was approaching the zenith, there was
not the comparative silence that pervades a summer noon. Bird calls
resounded everywhere; there was a constant flutter of wings, as if all
were bent upon making or renewing acquaintance--an occupation frequently
interrupted by transports of song. "Do you suppose they really recognize each other?" Amy asked Webb, as he
threw down an armful of wood near her. Marvin would insist that they do," he replied, laughing. "When with
him, one must be wary in denying to the birds any of the virtues and
powers. He would probably say that they understood each other as well as
we do. They certainly seem to be comparing notes, in one sense of the
word at least. Listen, and you will hear at this moment the song of
bluebird, robin, both song and fox sparrow, phoebe, blue jay, high-holder,
and crow--that is, if you can call the notes of the last two birds a song." she cried, after a few moments' pause. "Wait till two months have passed, and you will hear a grand symphony
every morning and evening. All the members of our summer opera troupe do
not arrive till June, and several weeks must still pass before the great
star of the season appears." "Both he and she--the woodthrush and his mate. They are very aristocratic
kin of these robins. A little before them will come two other
blood-relations, Mr. Brownthrasher, who, notwithstanding their
family connection with the high toned woodthrush and jolly, honest robin,
are stealthy in their manner, and will skulk away before you as if ashamed
of something. When the musical fit is on them, however, they will sing
openly from the loftiest tree-top, and with a sweetness, too, that few
birds can equal." "Why, Webb, you almost equal Dr. "Oh no; I only become acquainted with my favorites. If a bird is rare,
though commonplace in itself, he will pursue it as if it laid golden
eggs." A howl from Ned proved that even the brightest days and scenes have their
drawbacks. The little fellow had been prowling around among the pails and
pans, intent on obtaining a drink of the sap, and thus had put his hand on
a honey-bee seeking the first sweet of the year. In an instant Webb reached
his side, and saw what the trouble was. Carrying him to the fire, he drew a
key from his pocket, and pressed its hollow ward over the spot stung. This
caused the poison to work out. Nature's remedy--mud--abounded, and soon a
little moist clay covered the wound, and Amy took him in her arms and tried
to pacify him, while his father, who had strolled away with Mr. The grandfather looked down commiseratingly on the
sobbing little companion of his earlier morning walk, and soon brought, not
merely serenity, but joy unbounded, by a quiet proposition. "I will go back to the house," he said, "and have mamma put up a nice
lunch, and you and the other children can eat your dinner here by the fire. So can you, Webb and Amy, and then you can look after the youngsters. Suppose you have a little picnic, which, in March, will
be a thing to remember. Alf, you can come with me, and while mamma is
preparing the lunch you can run to the market and get some oysters and
clams, and these, with potatoes, you can roast in the ashes of a smaller
fire, which Ned and Johnnie can look after under Webb's superintendence. Wouldn't you like my little plan, Amy?" "Yes, indeed," she replied, putting her hands caressingly within his arm. "It's hard to think you are old when you know so well what we young
people like. I didn't believe that this day could be brighter or jollier,
and yet your plan has made the children half-wild." Indeed, Alf had already given his approval by tearing off toward the
house for the materials of this unprecedented March feast in the woods,
and the old gentleman, as if made buoyant by the good promise of his
little project in the children's behalf, followed with a step wonderfully
elastic for a man of fourscore. "Well, Heaven grant I may attain an age like that!" said Webb, looking
wistfully after him. "There is more of spring than autumn in father yet,
and I don't believe there will be any winter in his life. Well, Amy, like
the birds and squirrels around us, we shall dine out-of-doors today. You
must be mistress of the banquet; Ned, Johnnie, and I place ourselves
under your orders; don't we, Johnnie?" "To be sure, uncle Webb; only I'm so crazy over all this fun that I'm
sure I can never do anything straight." "Well, then, 'bustle! "I believe with Maggie that
housekeeping and dining well are high arts, and not humdrum necessities. Webb, I need a broad, flat rock. Please provide one at once, while
Johnnie gathers clean dry leaves for plates. You, Ned, can put lots of
dry sticks between the stones there, and uncle Webb will kindle the right
kind of a fire to leave plenty of hot coals and ashes. Now is the time
for him to make his science useful." Was it the exquisitely pure air
and the exhilarating spring sunshine that sent the blood tingling through
his veins? Or was it the presence, tones, and gestures of a girl with
brow and neck like the snow that glistened on the mountain <DW72>s above
them, and large true eyes that sometimes seemed gray and again blue? Amy's developing beauty was far removed from a fixed type of prettiness,
and he felt this in a vague way. The majority of the girls of his
acquaintance had a manner rather than an individuality, and looked and
acted much the same whenever he saw them. They were conventionalized
after some received country type, and although farmers' daughters, they
seemed unnatural to this lover of nature. Allowing for the difference in
years, Amy was as devoid of self-consciousness as Alf or Johnnie. Not the
slightest trace of mannerism perverted her girlish ways. She moved,
talked, and acted with no more effort or thought of effort than had the
bluebirds that were passing to and fro with their simple notes and
graceful flight, She was nature in its phase of girlhood. To one of his
temperament and training the perfect day itself would have been full of
unalloyed enjoyment, although occupied with his ordinary labors; but for
some reason this unpremeditated holiday, with Amy's companionship, gave
him a pleasure before unknown--a pleasure deep and satisfying, unmarred
by jarring discords or uneasy protests of conscience or reason. Truly, on
this spring day a "first time" came to him, a new element was entering
into his life. He did not think of defining it; he did not even recognize
it, except in the old and general way that Amy's presence had enriched them
all, and in his own case had arrested a tendency to become materialistic
and narrow. On a like day the year before he would have been absorbed in
the occupations of the farm, and merely conscious to a certain extent of
the sky above him and the bird song and beauty around him. His zest in living
and working was enhanced a thousand-fold, because life and work were
illumined by happiness, as the scene was brightened by sunshine. He felt
that he had only half seen the world before; now he had the joy of one
gradually gaining vision after partial blindness. Amy saw that he was enjoying the day immensely in his quiet way; she also
saw that she had not a little to do with the result, and the reflection
that she could please and interest the grave and thoughtful man, who was
six years her senior, conveyed a delicious sense of power. And yet she
was pleased much as a child would be. "He knows so much more than I do,"
she thought, "and is usually so wrapped up in some deep subject, or so
busy, that it's awfully jolly to find that one can beguile him into
having such a good time. Burt is so exuberant in everything that I am
afraid of being carried away, as by a swift stream, I know not where. I
feel like checking and restraining him all the time. For me to add my
small stock of mirth to his immense spirits would be like lighting a
candle on a day like this; but when I smile on Webb the effect is
wonderful, and I can never get over my pleased surprise at the fact." Thus, like the awakening forces in the soil around them, a vital force
was developing in two human hearts equally unconscious. Alf and his grandfather at last returned, each well laden, and preparations
went on apace. Clifford made as if he would return and dine at home,
but they all clamored for his company. With a twinkle in his eye, he said:

"Well, I told mother that I might lunch with you, and I was only waiting
to be pressed a little. I've lived a good many years, but never was on a
picnic in March before." "Grandpa, you shall be squeezed as well as pressed," cried Johnnie,
putting her arms about his neck. "You shall stay and see what a lovely
time you have given us. and she gave
one little sigh, the first of the day. "Possibly Cinderella may appear in time for lunch;" and with a significant
look he directed Amy to the basket he had brought, from the bottom of which
was drawn a doll with absurdly diminutive feet, and for once in her life
Johnnie's heart craved nothing more. "Maggie knew that this little mother could not be content long without
her doll, and so she put it in. You children have a thoughtful mother,
and you must be thoughtful of her," added the old man, who felt that the
incident admitted of a little homily. If some of the potatoes were slightly burned
and others a little raw, the occasion added a flavor better than Attic
salt. A flock of chickadees approached near enough to gather the crumbs
that were thrown to them. "It's strange," said Webb, "how tame the birds are when they return in
the spring. In the fall the robins are among the wildest of the birds,
and now they are all around us. I believe that if I place some crumbs on
yonder rock, they'll come and dine with us, in a sense;" and the event
proved that he was right. "Hey, Johnnie," said her grandfather, "you never took dinner with the
birds before, did you? This is almost as wonderful as if Cinderella sat
up and asked for an oyster." But Johnnie was only pleased with the fact, not surprised. Wonderland was
her land, and she said, "I don't see why the birds can't understand that
I'd like to have dinner with them every day." "By the way, Webb," continued his father, "I brought out the field-glass
with me, for I thought that with your good eyes you might see Burt;" and
he drew it from his pocket. The idea of seeing Burt shooting ducks nearly broke up the feast, and
Webb swept the distant river, full of floating ice that in the sunlight
looked like snow. "I can see several out in boats," he said, "and Burt,
no doubt, is among them." Then Amy, Alf, and Johnnie must have a look, but Ned devoted himself
strictly to business, and Amy remarked that he was becoming like a little
sausage. "Can the glass make us hear the noise of the gun better?" Johnnie asked,
at which they all laughed, Ned louder than any, because of the laughter
of the others. It required but a little thing to make these banqueters
hilarious. But there was one who heard them and did not laugh. From the brow of the
hill a dark, sad face looked down upon them. Lured by the beauty of the
day, Mr. Alvord had wandered aimlessly into the woods, and, attracted by
merry voices, had drawn sufficiently near to witness a scene that
awakened within him indescribable pain and longing. It was not a fear that he would be unwelcomed that kept him
away; he knew the family too well to imagine that. Something in the past darkened even that bright day, and
built in the crystal air a barrier that he could not pass. They would
give him a place at their rustic board, but he could not take it. He knew
that he would be a discord in their harmony, and their innocent merriment
smote his morbid nature with almost intolerable pain. With a gesture
indicating immeasurable regret, he turned and hastened away to his lonely
home. As he mounted the little piazza his steps were arrested. The
exposed end of a post that supported the inner side of its roof formed a
little sheltered nook in which a pair of bluebirds had begun to build
their nest. They looked at him with curious and distrustful eyes as they
flitted to and fro in a neighboring tree, and he sat down and looked at
them. The birds were evidently in doubt and in perturbed consultation. They would fly to the post, then away and all around the house, but
scarcely a moment passed that Mr. Alvord did not see that he was observed
and discussed. With singular interest and deep suspense he awaited their
decision. The female bird came flying
to the post with a beakful of fine dry grass, and her mate, on a spray
near, broke out into his soft, rapturous song. The master of the house
gave a great sigh of relief. A glimmer of a smile passed over his wan
face as he muttered, "I expected to be alone this summer, but I am to
have a family with me, after all." Soon after the lunch had been discussed leisurely and hilariously the
maple-sugar camp was left in the care of Alf and Johnnie, with Abram to
assist them. Amy longed for a stroll, but even with the protection of
rubber boots she found that the departing frost had left the sodded
meadow too wet and spongy for safety. Under Webb's direction she picked
her way to the margin of the swollen stream, and gathered some pussy
willows that were bursting their sheaths. CHAPTER XXIII

REGRETS AND DUCK-SHOOTING


Saturday afternoon, as is usual in the country, brought an increased number
of duties to the inhabitants of the farmhouse, but at the supper hour they
all, except Burt, looked back upon the day with unwonted satisfaction. He
had returned weary, hungry, and discontented, notwithstanding the fact that
several brace of ducks hung on the piazza as trophies of his skill. He was
in that uncomfortable frame of mind which results from charging one's self
with a blunder. In the morning he had entered on the sport with his usual
zest, but it had soon declined, and he wished he had remained at home. He
remembered the children's intention of spending the day among the maples,
and as the sun grew warm, and the air balmy, the thought occurred with
increasing frequency that he might have induced Amy to join them, and so
have enjoyed long hours of companionship under circumstances most favorable
to his suit. He now admitted that were the river alive with ducks, the
imagined opportunities of the maple grove were tenfold more attractive. At
one time he half decided to return, but pride prevented until he should
have secured a fair amount of game. He would not go home to be laughed at. Moreover, Amy had not been so approachable of late as he could wish, and he
proposed to punish her a little, hoping that she would miss his presence
and attentions. The many reminiscences at the supper-table were not
consoling. It was evident that he had not been missed in the way that he
desired to be, and that the day had been one of rich enjoyment to her. Neither was Webb's quiet satisfaction agreeable, and Burt mildly
anathematized himself at the thought that he might have had his share in
giving Amy so much pleasure. He took counsel of experience, however, and
having learned that even duck-shooting under the most favorable auspices
palled when contrasted with Amy's smiles and society, he resolved to be
present in the future when she, like Nature, was in a propitious mood. Impetuous as he was, he had not yet reached the point of love's blindness
which would lead him to press his suit in season and out of season. He soon
found a chance to inform Amy of his regret, but she laughed merrily back at
him as she went up to her room, saying that the air of a martyr sat upon
him with very poor grace in view of his success and persistence in the
sport, and that he had better put a white mark against the day, as she had
done. Marks, one of the most
noted duck-shooters and fishermen on the river, and they brought in three
superb specimens of a rare bird in this region, the American swan, that
queen of water-fowls and embodiment of grace. "Shot 'em an hour or two ago, near Polopel's Island," said Mr. Marks,
"and we don't often have the luck to get within range of such game. Marvin was down visiting one of my children, and he said how he would
like to prepare the skin of one, and he thought some of you folks here
might like to have another mounted, and he'd do it if you wished." Exclamations of pleasure followed this proposition. Alf examined them
with deep interest, while Burt whispered to Amy that he would rather have
brought her home a swan like one of those than all the ducks that ever
quacked. In accordance with their hospitable ways, the Cliffords soon had the
doctor and Mr. Marks seated by their fireside, and the veteran sportsman
was readily induced to enlarge upon some of his experiences. He had killed two of the swans, he told them, as they were swimming, and
the other as it rose. He did not propose to let any such uncommon
visitors get away. He had never seen more than ten since he had lived in
this region. With the proverbial experience of meeting game when without
a gun, he had seen five fly over, one Sunday, while taking a ramble on
Plum Point. "Have you ever obtained any snow-geese in our waters?" That's the scarcest water-fowl we have. Once in a wild snowstorm I
saw a flock of about two hundred far out upon the river, and would have
had a shot into them, but some fellows from the other side started out
and began firing at long range, and that has been my only chance. I
occasionally get some brant-geese, and they are rare enough. I once saw a
flock of eight, and got them all-took five out of the flock in the first
two shots--but I've never killed more than twenty-five in all." "I don't think I have ever seen one," remarked Mrs. Clifford, who, in her
feebleness and in her home-nook, loved to hear about these bold,
adventurous travellers. They brought to her vivid fancy remote wild
scenes, desolate waters, and storm-beaten rocks. The tremendous endurance
and power of wing in these shy children of nature never ceased to be
marvels to her. "Burt has occasionally shot wild-geese--we have one
mounted there--but I do not know what a brant is, nor much about its
habits," she added. "Its markings are like the ordinary Canada wild-goose," Dr. Marvin
explained, "and it is about midway in size between a goose and a duck." "I've shot a good many of the common wild-geese in my time," Mr. Marks
resumed; "killed nineteen four years ago. I once knocked down ten out of
a flock of thirteen by giving them both barrels. I have a flock of eight
now in a pond not far away--broke their wings, you know, and so they
can't fly. They soon become tame, and might be domesticated easily, only
you must always keep one wing cut, or they will leave in the spring or
fall." "Well, they never lose their instinct to migrate, and if they heard other
wild-geese flying over, they'd rise quick enough if they could and go
with them." "Do you think there would be any profit in domesticating them?" I know a man up the river who used to cross them with
our common geese, and so produced a hybrid, a sort of a mule-goose, that
grew very large. I've known 'em to weigh eighteen pounds or more, and
they were fine eating, I can tell you. I don't suppose there is much in
it, though, or some cute Yankee would have made a business of it before
this." "How many ducks do you suppose you have shot all together?" "Oh, I don't know--a great many. "What's the greatest number you ever got out of a flock, Marks?" "Well, there is the old squaw, or long-tailed duck. They go in big
flocks, you now--have seen four or five hundred together. In the spring,
just after they have come from feeding on mussels in the southern
oyster-beds, they are fishy, but in the fall they are much better, and
the young ducks are scarcely fishy at all. I've taken twenty-three out of
a flock by firing at them in the water and again when they rose; and in
the same way I once knocked over eighteen black or dusky ducks; and they
are always fine, you know." "Are the fancy kinds, like the mallards and canvas-backs that are in such
demand by the epicures, still plentiful in their season?" I get a few now and then, but don't calculate on them any longer. It
was my luck with canvas-backs that got me into my duck-shooting ways. I
was cuffed and patted on the back the same day on their account." In response to their laughing expressions of curiosity he resumed: "I was
but a little chap at the time; still I believed I could shoot ducks, but
my father wouldn't trust me with either a gun or boat, and my only chance
was to circumvent the old man. So one night I hid the gun outside the
house, climbed out of a window as soon as it was light, and paddled round
a point where I would not be seen, and I tell you I had a grand time. I
did not come in till the middle of the afternoon, but I reached a point
when I must have my dinner, no matter what came before it. The old man
was waiting for me, and he cuffed me well. I didn't say a word, but went
to my mother, and she, mother-like, comforted me with a big dinner which
she had kept for me. I was content to throw the cuffing in, and still
feel that I had the best of the bargain. An elder brother began to chaff
me and ask, 'Where are your ducks?' 'Better go and look under the seat in
the stern-sheets before you make any more faces,' I answered, huffily. I
suppose he thought at first I wanted to get rid of him, but he had just
enough curiosity to go and see, and he pulled out sixteen canvas-backs. The old man was reconciled at once, for I had made better wages than he
that day; and from that time on I've had all the duck-shooting I've
wanted." "That's a form of argument to which the world always yields," said
Leonard, laughing. "How many kinds of wild-ducks do we have here in the bay, that you can
shoot so many?" "I've prepared the skins of twenty-four different kinds that were shot in
this vicinity," replied Dr. Clifford, "I think you once had a rather severe
experience while out upon the river. My favorite sport came nigh being the death of me, and it always
makes me shiver to think of it. I started out one spring morning at five
o'clock, and did not get home till two o'clock the next morning, and not
a mouthful did I have to eat. I had fair success during the day, but was
bothered by the quantities of ice running, and a high wind. About four
o'clock in the afternoon I concluded to return home, for I was tired and
hungry. I was then out in the river off Plum Point. I saw an opening
leading south, and paddled into it, but had not gone far before the wind
drove the ice in upon me, and blocked the passage. There I was, helpless,
and it began to blow a gale. The wind held the ice immovable on the west
shore, even though the tide was running out. For a time I thought the
boat would be crushed by the grinding cakes in spite of all I could do. If it had, I'd 'a been drowned at once, but I worked like a Trojan,
shouting, meanwhile, loud enough to raise the dead. No one seemed to hear
or notice me. At last I made my way to a cake that was heavy enough to
bear my weight, and on this I pulled up the boat, and lay down exhausted. It was now almost night, and I was too tired to shout any more. There on
that mass of ice I stayed till two o'clock the next morning. I thought
I'd freeze to death, if I did not drown. I shouted from time to time,
till I found it was of no use, and then gave my thoughts to keeping awake
and warm enough to live. I knew that my chance would be with the next
turn of the tide, when the ice would move with it, and also the wind, up
the river. I was at last able to break my way through
the loosened ice to Plain Point, and then had a two-mile walk home; and I
can tell you that it never seemed so like home before." "Oh, Burt, please don't go out again when the ice is running," was his
mother's comment on the story. "Thoreau speaks of seeing black ducks asleep on a pond whereon thin ice
had formed, inclosing them, daring the March night," said Webb. "Have you
ever caught them napping in this way?" Marks; "though it might easily happen on a still pond. The tides and wind usually break up the very thin ice on the river, and
if there is any open water near, the ducks will stay in it." Marvin, have you caught any glimpses of spring to-day that we have
not?" The doctor laughed--having heard of Webb's exploit in the night near the
hennery--and said: "I might mention that I have seen 'Sir Mephitis'
cabbage, as I suppose I should all it, growing vigorously. It is about
the first green thing we have. Around certain springs, however, the grass
keeps green all winter, and I passed one to-day surrounded by an emerald
hue that was distinct in the distance. It has been very cold and backward
thus far." "Possess your souls in patience," said Mr. "Springtime and
harvest are sure. After over half a century's observation I have noted
that, no matter what the weather may have been, Nature always catches up
with the season about the middle or last of June." CHAPTER XXIV

APRIL


The remainder of March passed quickly away, with more alternations of
mood than there were days; but in spite of snow, sleet, wind, and rain,
the most forbidding frowns and tempestuous tears, all knew that Nature
had yielded, and more often she half-smilingly acknowledged the truth
herself. All sights and sounds about the farmhouse betokened increasing activity. During the morning hours the cackling in the barn and out-buildings
developed into a perfect clamor, for the more commonplace the event of a
new-born egg became, the greater attention the hens inclined to call to
it. Possibly they also felt the spring-time impulse of all the feathered
tribes to use their voice to the extent of its compass. The clatter was
music to Alf and Johnnie, however, for gathering the eggs was one of
their chief sources of revenue, and the hunting of nests--stolen so
cunningly and cackled over so sillily--with their accumulated treasures
was like prospecting for mines. The great basketful they brought in daily
after their return from school proved that if the egg manufactory ran
noisily, it did not run in vain. Occasionally their father gave them a
peep into the dusky brooding-room. Under his thrifty management the
majority of the nests were simply loose boxes, each inscribed with a
number. When a biddy wished to sit, she was removed at night upon the
nest, and the box was placed on a low shelf in the brooding-room. If she
remained quiet and contented in the new location, eggs were placed under
her, a note of the number of the box was taken, with the date, and the
character of the eggs, if they represented any special breed. By these
simple precautions little was left to what Squire Bartley termed "luck." Some of the hens had been on the nest nearly three weeks, and eagerly did
the children listen for the first faint peep that should announce the
senior chick of the year. Webb and Burt had already opened the campaign in the garden. On the black
soil in the hot-bed, which had been made in a sheltered nook, were even
now lines of cabbage, cauliflower, lettuce, tomatoes, etc. These nursling
vegetables were cared for as Maggie had watched her babies. On mild sunny
days the sash was shoved down and air given. High winds and frosty nights
prompted to careful covering and tucking away. The Cliffords were not of
those who believe that pork, cabbage, and potatoes are a farmer's
birthright, when by a small outlay of time and skill every delicacy can
be enjoyed, even in advance of the season. On a warm <DW72> from which the
frost ever took its earliest departure, peas, potatoes, and other hardy
products of the garden were planted, and as the ground grew firm enough,
the fertilizers of the barn-yard were carted to the designated places,
whereon, by Nature's alchemy, they would be transmuted into forms of use
and beauty. It so happened that the 1st of April was an ideal spring day. During the
morning the brow of Storm King, still clothed with snow, was shrouded in
mist, through which the light broke uncertainly in gleams of watery
sunshine. A succession of showers took place, but so slight and mild that
they were scarcely heeded by the busy workers; there was almost a profusion
of half-formed rainbows; and atmosphere and cloud so blended that it was
hard to say where one began and the other ceased. On every twig, dead weed,
and spire of withered grass hung innumerable drops that now were water and
again diamonds when touched by the inconstant sun. Sweet-fern grass
abounded in the lawn, and from it exuded an indescribably delicious odor. The birds were so ecstatic in their songs, so constant in their calls, that
one might think that they, like the children, were making the most of
All-fools' Day, and playing endless pranks on each other. The robins acted
as if nothing were left to be desired. They were all this time in all
stages of relationship. Some had already paired, and were at work upon
their domiciles, but more were in the blissful and excited state of
courtship, and their conversational notes, wooings, and pleadings, as they
warbled the _pros_ and _cons_, were quite different from their
matin and vesper songs. Not unfrequently there were two aspirants for the
same claw or bill, and the rivals usually fought it out like their human
neighbors in the olden time, the red-breasted object of their affections
standing demurely aloof on the sward, quietly watching the contest with a
sidelong look, undoubtedly conscious, however, of a little feminine
exultation that she should be sought thus fiercely by more than one. After
all, the chief joy of the robin world that day resulted from the fact that
the mild, humid air lured the earth-worms from their burrowing, and Amy
laughed more than once as, from her window, she saw a little gourmand
pulling at a worm, which clung so desperately to its hole that the bird at
last almost fell over backward with its prize. Courtship, nest-building,
family cares--nothing disturbs a robin's appetite, and it was, indeed, a
sorry fools'-day for myriads of angle-worms that ventured out. Managing a country place is like sailing a ship: one's labors are, or
should be, much modified by the weather. This still day, when the leaves
were heavy with moisture, afforded Webb the chance he had desired to rake
the lawn and other grass-plots about the house, and store the material
for future use. He was not one to attempt this task when the wind would
half undo his labor. In the afternoon the showery phase passed, and the sun shone with a misty
brightness. Although so early in a backward spring, the day was full of
the suggestion of wild flowers, and Amy and the children started on their
first search into Nature's calendar of the seasons. All knew where to
look for the earliest blossoms, and in the twilight the explorers
returned with handfuls of hepatica and arbutus buds, which, from
experience, they knew would bloom in a vase of water. Who has ever
forgotten his childish exultation over the first wild flowers of the
year! Pale, delicate little blossoms though they be, and most of them
odorless, their memory grows sweet with our age. Burt, who had been away to purchase a horse--he gave considerable of his
time to the buying and selling of these animals--drove up as Amy
approached the house, and pleaded for a spray of arbutus. "But the buds are not open yet," she said. "No matter; I should value the spray just as much, since you gathered
it." "Why, Burt," she cried, laughing, "on that principle I might as well give
you a chip." "Amy," Webb asked at the supper-table, "didn't you hear the peepers this
afternoon while out walking?" "Yes; and I asked Alf what they were. He said they were peepers, and that
they always made a noise in the spring." "Why, Alf," Webb resumed, in mock gravity, "you should have told Amy that
the sounds came from the _Hylodes pickeringii_." "If that is all that you can tell me," said Amy, laughing, "I prefer
Alf's explanation. I have known people to cover up their ignorance by
big words before. Indeed, I think it is a way you scientists have." "I must admit it; and yet that close observer, John Burroughs, gives a
charming account of these little frogs that we call 'hylas' for short. Shy as they are, and quick to disappear when approached, he has seen
them, as they climb out of the mud upon a sedge or stick in the marshes,
inflate their throats until they'suggest a little drummer-boy with his
drum hung high.' In this bubble-like swelling at its throat the noise is
made; and to me it is a welcome note of spring, although I have heard
people speak of it as one of the most lonesome and melancholy of sounds. It is a common saying among old farmers that the peepers must be shut up
three times by frost before we can expect steady spring weather. I
believe that naturalists think these little mites of frogs leave the mud
and marshes later on, and become tree-toads. Try to find out what you can at once about the things you see or hear:
that's the way to get an education." "Please don't think me a born pedagogue," he answered, smiling; "but you
have no idea how fast we obtain knowledge of certain kinds if we follow
up the object-lessons presented every day." CHAPTER XXV

EASTER


Easter-Sunday came early in the month, and there had been great
preparations for it, for with the Cliffords it was one of the chief
festivals of the year. To the children was given a week's vacation, and
they scoured the woods for all the arbutus that gave any promise of
opening in time. Clumps of bloodroot, hepaticas, dicentras, dog-tooth
violets, and lilies-of-the-valley had been taken up at the first
relaxation of frost, and forced in the flower-room. Hyacinth and tulip
bulbs, kept back the earlier part of the winter, were timed to bloom
artificially at this season so sacred to flowers, and, under Mrs. Clifford's fostering care, all the exotics of the little conservatory had
been stimulated to do their best to grace the day. Barkdale's pulpit was embowered with plants and vines growing in
pots, tubs, and rustic boxes, and the good man beamed upon the work,
gaining meanwhile an inspiration that would put a soul into his words on
the morrow. No such brilliant morning dawned on the worship of the Saxon goddess
Eostre, in cloudy, forest-clad England in the centuries long past, as
broke over the eastern mountains on that sacred day. At half-past five
the sun appeared above the shaggy summit of the Beacon, and the steel
hues of the placid Hudson were changed into sparkling silver. A white
mist rested on the water between Storm King, Break Neck, and Mount
Taurus. In the distance it appeared as if snow had drifted in and half
filled the gorge of the Highlands. The orange and rose-tinted sky
gradually deepened into an intense blue, and although the land was as
bare and the forests were as gaunt as in December, a soft glamour over
all proclaimed spring. Spring was also in Amy's eyes, in the oval delicacy of her girlish face
with its exquisite flush, in her quick, deft hands and elastic step as she
arranged baskets and vases of flowers. Webb watched her with his deep eyes,
and his Easter worship began early in the day. True homage it was, because
so involuntary, so unquestioning and devoid of analysis, so utterly free
from the self-conscious spirit that expects a large and definite return for
adoration. His sense of beauty, the poetic capabilities of his nature, were
kindled. Like the flowers that seemed to know their place in a harmony of
color when she touched them, Amy herself was emblematic of Easter, of its
brightness and hopefulness, of the new, richer spiritual life that was
coming to him. He loved his homely work and calling as never before,
because he saw how on every side it touched and blended with the beautiful
and sacred. Its highest outcome was like the blossoms before him which had
developed from a rank soil, dark roots, and prosaic woody stems. The grain
he raised fed and matured the delicate human perfection shown in every
graceful and unconscious pose of the young girl. She was Nature's priestess
interpreting to him a higher, gentler world which before he had seen but
dimly--interpreting it all the more clearly because she made no effort to
reveal it. She led the way, he followed, and the earth ceased to be an
aggregate of forms and material forces. With his larger capabilities he
might yet become her master, but now, with an utter absence of vanity, he
recognized how much she was doing for him, how she was widening his horizon
and uplifting his thoughts and motives, and he reverenced her as such men
ever do a woman that leads them to a higher plane of life. No such deep thoughts and vague homage perplexed Burt as he assisted Amy
with attentions that were assiduous and almost garrulous. The brightness
of the morning was in his handsome face, and the gladness of his buoyant
temperament in his heart. Amy was just to his taste--pretty, piquant,
rose-hued, and a trifle thorny too, at times, he thought. He believed
that he loved her with a boundless devotion--at least it seemed so that
morning. It was delightful to be near her, to touch her fingers
occasionally as he handed her flowers, and to win smiles, arch looks, and
even words that contained a minute prick like spines on the rose stems. He
felt sure that his suit would prosper in time, and she was all the more
fascinating because showing no sentimental tendencies to respond with a
promptness that in other objects of his attention in the past had even
proved embarrassing. She was a little conscious of Webb's silent
observation, and, looking up suddenly, caught an expression that deepened
her color slightly. "That for your thoughts," she said, tossing him a flower with sisterly
freedom. "Webb is pondering deeply," explained the observant Burt, "on the
reflection of light as shown not only by the color in these flowers, but
also in your cheeks under his fixed stare." There was an access of rose-hued reflection at these words, but Webb rose
quietly and said: "If you will let me keep the flower I will tell you my
thoughts another time. That
basket is now ready, and I will take it to the church." Burt was soon despatched with another, while she and Johnnie, who had
been flitting about, eager and interested, followed with light and
delicate vases. Alvord intercepted them near the
church vestibule. He had never been seen at any place of worship, and the
reserve and dignity of his manner had prevented the most zealous from
interfering with his habits. From the porch of his cottage he had seen
Amy and the little girl approaching with their floral offerings. Nature's
smile that morning had softened his bitter mood, and, obeying an impulse
to look nearer upon two beings that belonged to another world than his,
he joined them, and asked:

"Won't you let me see your flowers before you take them into the church?" "Certainly," said Amy, cordially; "but there are lovelier ones on the
pulpit; won't you come in and see them?" cried Johnnie, "not going to church to-day?" She had lost much of
her fear of him, for in his rambles he frequently met her and Alf, and
usually spoke to them. Moreover, she had repeatedly seen him at their
fireside, and he ever had a smile for her. The morbid are often fearless
with children, believing that, like the lower orders of life, they have
little power to observe that anything is amiss, and therefore are neither
apt to be repelled nor curious and suspicious. This in a sense is true,
and yet their instincts are keen. Alvord was not selfish or
coarse; above all he was not harsh. To Johnnie he only seemed strange,
quiet, and unhappy, and she had often heard her mother say, "Poor Mr. Therefore, when he said, "I don't go to church; if I had a
little girl like you to sit by me, I might feel differently," her heart
was touched, and she replied, impulsively: "I'll sit by you, Mr. I'll sit with you all by ourselves, if you will only go to church to-day. Alvord," said Amy, gently, "that's an unusual offer for shy Johnnie
to make. You don't know what a compliment you have received, and I think
you will make the child very happy if you comply." "Could I make you happier by sitting with you in church to-day?" he
asked, in a low voice, offering the child his hand. You lead the way, for you know best where to go." She gave
her vase to Amy, and led him into a side seat near her father's pew--one
that she had noted as unoccupied of late. "It's early yet Do you mind
sitting here until service begins?" I like to sit here and look at the flowers;" and the first
comers glanced wonderingly at the little girl and her companion, who was
a stranger to them and to the sanctuary. Amy explained matters to Leonard
and Maggie at the door when they arrived, and Easter-Sunday had new and
sweeter meanings to them. The spring had surely found its way into Mr. Barkdale's sermon also, and
its leaves, as he turned them, were not autumn leaves, which, even though
brilliant, suggest death and sad changes. One of his thoughts was much
commented upon by the Cliffords, when, in good old country style, the
sermon was spoken of at dinner. "The God we worship," he said, "is the
God of life, of nature. In his own time and way he puts forth his power. We can employ this power and make it ours. Many of you will do this
practically during the coming weeks. You sow seed, plant trees, and seek
to shape others into symmetrical form by pruning-knife and saw. Why, that the great power that is revivifying nature
will take up the work here you leave off, and carry it forward. All the
skill and science in the world could not create a field of waving grain,
nor all the art of one of these flowers. How immensely the power of God
supplements the labor of man in those things which minister chiefly to
his lower nature! Can you believe that he will put forth so much energy
that the grain may mature and the flower bloom, and yet not exert far
greater power than man himself may develop according to the capabilities
of his being? The forces now exist in the earth and in the air to make
the year fruitful, but you must intelligently avail yourselves of them. The power ever exists that can redeem
us from evil, heal the wounds that sin has made, and develop the manhood
and womanhood that Heaven receives and rewards. With the same resolute
intelligence you must lay hold upon this ever-present spiritual force if
you would be lifted up." After the service there were those who would ostentatiously recognize and
encourage Mr. Alvord; but the Cliffords, with better breeding, quietly
and cordially greeted him, and that was all. At the door he placed
Johnnie's hand in her mother's, and gently said, "Good-by;" but the
pleased smile of the child and Mrs. As he entered
his porch, other maternal eyes rested upon him, and the brooding bluebird
on her nest seemed to say, with Johnnie, "I am not afraid of you." Possibly to the lonely man this may prove Easter-Sunday in very truth,
and hope, that he had thought buried forever, come from its grave. In the afternoon all the young people started for the hills, gleaning the
earliest flowers, and feasting their eyes on the sunlit landscapes veiled
with soft haze from the abundant moisture with which the air was charged. As the sun sank low in the many-hued west, and the eastern mountains
clothed themselves in royal purple, Webb chanced to be alone, near Amy,
and she said:

"You have had that flower all day, and I have not had your thoughts." "Oh, yes, you have--a great many of them." "You know that isn't what I mean. You promised to tell me what you were
thinking about so deeply this morning." He looked at her smilingly a moment, and then his face grew gentle and
grave as he replied: "I can scarcely explain, Amy. I am learning that
thoughts which are not clear-cut and definite may make upon us the
strongest impressions. They cause us to feel that there is much that we
only half know and half understand as yet. You and your flowers seemed to
interpret to me the meaning of this day as I never understood it before. Surely its deepest significance is life, happy, hopeful life, with escape
from its grosser elements, and as you stood there you embodied that
idea." "Oh, Webb," she cried, in comic perplexity, "you are getting too deep for
me. I was only arranging flowers, and not thinking about embodying
anything. "If you had been, you would have spoiled everything," he resumed,
laughing. "I can't explain; I can only suggest the rest in a sentence or
two. Look at the shadow creeping up yonder mountain--very dark blue on
the lower side of the moving line and deep purple above. Well, every day I see and hear and appreciate these
things better, and I thought that you were to blame." "Yes, very much," was his laughing answer. "It seems to me that a few
months since I was like the old man with the muck-rake in 'Pilgrim's
Progress,' seeking to gather only money, facts, and knowledge--things of
use. I now am finding so much that is useful which I scarcely looked at
before that I am revising my philosophy, and like it much better. The
simple truth is, I needed just such a sister as you are to keep me from
plodding." Burt now appeared with a handful of rue-anemones, obtained by a rapid
climb to a very sunny nook. They were the first of the season, and he
justly believed that Amy would be delighted with them. But the words of
Webb were more treasured, for they filled her with a pleased wonder. She
had seen the changes herself to which he referred; but how could a simple
girl wield such an influence over the grave, studious man? It was an enigma that she would be long in solving,
and yet the explanation was her own simplicity, her truthfulness to all
the conditions of unaffected girlhood. On the way to the house Webb delighted Johnnie and Alf by gathering
sprays of the cherry, peach, pear, and plum, saying, "Put them in water
by a sunny window, and see which will bloom first, these sprays or the
trees out-of-doors." The supper-table was graced by many woodland
trophies--the "tawny pendants" of the alder that Thoreau said dusted his
coat with sulphur-like pollen as he pressed through them to "look for
mud-turtles," pussy willows now well developed, the hardy ferns, arbutus,
and other harbingers of spring, while the flowers that had been brought
back from the church filled the room with fragrance. Clifford, dwelling as she ever must among the shadows of pain and
disease, this was the happiest day of the year, for it pointed forward to
immortal youth and strength, and she loved to see it decked and garlanded
like a bride. And so Easter passed, and became a happy memory. CHAPTER XXVI

VERY MOODY


The next morning Amy, on looking from her window, could scarcely believe
she was awake. She had retired with her mind full of spring and
spring-time beauty, but the world without had now the aspect of January. The air was one swirl of snow, and trees, buildings--everything was
white. In dismay she hastened to join the family, but was speedily
reassured. "There is nothing monotonous in American weather, and you must get used
to our sharp alternations," said Mr. "This snow will do good
rather than harm, and the lawn will actually look green after it has
melted, as it will speedily. The thing we dread is a severe frost at a
far later date than this. The buds are still too dormant to be injured,
but I have known the apples to be frozen on the trees when as large as
walnuts." "Such snows are called the poor man's manure," Webb remarked, "and
fertilizing gases, to a certain amount, do become entangled in the large
wet flakes, and so are carried into the soil. But the poor man will
assuredly remain poor if he has no other means of enriching his land. The house on the northeast side looks as if built
of snow, so evenly is it plastered over. They have
scarcely sung this morning, and they look as if thoroughly disgusted." Amy and Johnnie shared in the birds' disapproval, but Alf had a boy's
affinity for snow, and resolved to construct an immense fort as soon as
the storm permitted. Before the day had far declined the heavy flakes
ceased, and the gusty wind died away. Johnnie forgot the budding flowers
in their winding-sheet, and joyously aided in the construction of the
fort. Down the sloping lawn they rolled the snowballs, that so increased
with every revolution that they soon rose above the children's heads, and
Webb and Burt's good-natured help was required to pile them into
ramparts. At the entrance of the stronghold an immense snow sentinel was
fashioned, with a cord-wood stick for a musket. The children fairly
sighed for another month of winter. All night long Nature, in a heavy fall of rain, appeared to weep that she
had been so capricious, and the morning found her in as uncomfortable a
mood as could be imagined. The slush was ankle-deep, with indefinite
degrees of mud beneath, the air chilly and raw, and the sky filled with
great ragged masses of cloud, so opaque and low that they appeared as if
disrupted by some dynamic force, and threatened to fall upon the shadowed
land. But between them the sun darted many a smile at his tear-stained
mistress. At last they took themselves off like ill-affected meddlers in
a love match, and the day grew bright and warm. By evening, spring,
literally and figuratively, had more than regained lost ground, for, as
Mr. Clifford had predicted, the lawn had a distinct emerald hue. Thenceforth the season moved forward as if there were to be no more regrets
and nonsense. An efficient ally in the form of a southwest wind came to the
aid of the sun, and every day Nature responded with increasing favor. Amy
no more complained that an American April was like early March in England;
and as the surface of the land grew warm and dry it was hard for her to
remain in-doors, there was so much of life, bustle, and movement without. Those of the lilac were nearly an inch
long, and emitted a perfume of the rarest delicacy, far superior to that of
the blossoms to come. The nests of the earlier birds were in all stages of
construction, and could be seen readily in the leafless trees. Snakes were
crawling from their holes, and lay sunning themselves in the roads, to her
and Johnnie's dismay. Alf captured turtles that, deep in the mud, had
learned the advent of spring as readily as the creatures of the air. "Each rill," as Thoreau wrote, "is
peopled with new life rushing up it." Abram and Alf were planning a
momentous expedition to a tumbling dam on the Moodna, the favorite resort
of the sluggish suckers. New chicks were daily breaking their shells, and
their soft, downy, ball-like little bodies were more to Amy's taste than
the peepers of the marsh. One Saturday morning Alf rushed in, announcing with breathless haste that
"Kitten had a calf." Kitten was a fawn- Alderney, the favorite of
the barnyard, and so gentle that even Johnnie did not fear to rub her
rough nose, scratch her between her horns, or bring her wisps of grass
when she was tied near the house. There was no rest until Amy had seen it, and she admitted that she had
never looked upon a more innocent and droll little visage. At the
children's pleading the infant cow was given to them, but they were
warned to leave it for the present to Abram and Kitten's care, for the
latter was inclined to act like a veritable old cat when any one made too
free with her bovine baby. This bright Saturday occurring about the middle of the month completely
enthroned spring in the children's hearts. The air was sweet with
fragrance from the springing grass and swelling buds, and so still and
humid that sounds from other farms and gardens, and songs from distant
fields and groves, blended softly yet distinctly with those of the
immediate vicinage. The sunshine was warm, but veiled by fleecy clouds;
and as the day advanced every member of the family was out-of-doors, even
to Mrs. Clifford, for whom had been constructed, under her husband's
direction, a low garden-chair which was so light that even Alf or Amy
could draw it easily along the walks. From it she stepped down on her
first visit of the year to her beloved flower-beds, which Alf and Burt
were patting in order for her, the latter blending with, his filial
attentions the hope of seeing more of Amy. Nor was he unrewarded, for his
manner toward his mother, whom he alternately petted and chaffed, while
at the same time doing her bidding with manly tenderness, won the young
girl's hearty good-will. The only drawback was his inclination to pet her
furtively even more. She wished that Webb was preparing the flower-beds,
for then there would be nothing to perplex or worry her. But he, with his
father and Leonard, was more prosaically employed, for they were at work
in the main or vegetable garden. It was with a sense of immense relief
that she heard Mrs. Clifford, after she had given her final directions,
and gloated over the blooming crocuses and daffodils, and the budding
hyacinths and tulips, express a wish to join her husband. "I'm your mother's pony to-day," she replied, and hastened away. A wide
path bordered on either side by old-fashioned perennials and shrubbery
led down through the garden. Amy breathed more freely as soon as she
gained it, and at once gave herself up to the enjoyment of the pleasing
sights and sounds on every side. Clifford was the picture of placid
content as he sat on a box in the sun, cutting potatoes into the proper
size for planting. Johnnie was perched on another box near, chattering
incessantly as she handed him the tubers, and asking no other response
than the old gentleman's amused smile. Leonard with a pair of stout
horses was turning up the rich black mould, sinking his plow to the beam,
and going twice in a furrow. It would require a very severe drought to
affect land pulverized thus deeply, for under Leonard's thorough work the
root pasturage was extended downward eighteen inches. On the side of the
plot nearest to the house Webb was breaking the lumps and levelling the
ground with a heavy iron-toothed rake, and also forking deeply the ends
of the furrows that had been trampled by the turning horses. Clifford chatting and laughing with her husband and Johnnie, Amy stood in
the walk opposite to him, and he said presently:

"Come, Amy, you can help me. You said you wanted a finger in our
horticultural pies, and no doubt had in your mind nothing less plebeian
than flower seeds and roses. Will your nose become _retrousse_ if I ask
you to aid me in planting parsnips, oyster-plant, carrots, and--think of
it!--onions?" "The idea of my helping you, when the best I can do is to amuse you with
my ignorance! I do not look forward to an
exclusive diet of roses, and am quite curious to know what part I can
have in earning my daily vegetables." "A useful and typical part--that of keeping straight men and things in
general. Wait a little;" and taking up a coiled garden line, he attached
one end of it to a stout stake pressed firmly into the ground. He then
walked rapidly over the levelled soil to the further side of the plot,
drew the line "taut," as the sailors say, and tied it to another stake. He next returned toward Amy, making a shallow drill by drawing a
sharp-pointed hoe along under the line. From a basket near, containing
labelled packages of seeds, he made a selection, and poured into a bowl
something that looked like gunpowder grains, and sowed it rapidly in the
little furrow. "Now, Amy," he cried, from the further side of the plot,
"do you see that measuring-stick at your feet? Place one end of it
against the stake to which the line is fastened, and move the stake with
the line forward to the other end of the measuring-stick, just as I am
doing here. You now see how many steps you save me, and how
much faster I can get on." "Are those black-looking grains you are sowing seed?" "Indeed they are, as a few weeks may prove to you by more senses than
one. These are the seeds of a vegetable inseparable in its associations
from classic Italy and renowned in sacred story. You may not share in the
longings of the ancient Hebrews, but with its aid I could easily bring
tears of deep feeling to your eyes." "The vegetable is more pungent than your wit, Webb," she laughed; but she
stood near the path at the end of the line, which she moved forward from
time to time as requested, meanwhile enjoying an April day that lacked
few elements of perfection. The garden is one of the favorite haunts of the song-sparrow. In the
flower-border near, Amy would hear such a vigorous scratching among the
leaves that she might well believe that a motherly hen was at work, but
presently one of these little sober-coated creatures that Thoreau well
calls a "ground-bird" would fly to the top of a plum-tree and trill out a
song as sweet as the perfume that came from the blossoming willows not
far away. The busy plows made it a high festival for the robins, for with
a confidence not misplaced they followed near in the furrows that Leonard
was making in the garden, and that Abram was turning on an adjacent
hillside, and not only the comparatively harmless earth-worms suffered,
but also the pestiferous larvae of the May-beetle, the arch-enemy of the
strawberry plant. Even on that day of such varied and etherealized
fragrance, the fresh, wholesome odor of the upturned earth was grateful. Suddenly Webb straightened himself from the sowing of the scale-like
parsnip-seed in which he was then engaged, and said, "Listen." Remote yet
distinct, like a dream of a bird-song, came a simple melody from a
distant field. "That's our meadow-lark, Amy; not
equal to your skylark, I admit. Indeed, it is not a lark at all, for Dr. Marvin says it belongs to the oriole family. Brief and simple as is its
song, I think you will agree with me that spring brings few more lovely
sounds. That is the first one that I have heard this year." She scarcely more than caught the ethereal song before Burt and Alf came
down the path, trundling immense wheelbarrow-loads of the prunings of the
shrubbery around the house. These were added to a great pile of brush and
refuse that had accumulated on the other side of the walk, and to Alf was
given the wild excitement of igniting the inflammable mass, and soon
there was a fierce crackling as the flames devoured their way into the
loose dry centre of the rejected debris of the previous year. Then to Alf
and Johnnie's unmeasured delight they were permitted to improvise a
miniature prairie fire. A part of the garden had been left to grow very
weedy in the preceding summer, and they were shown how that by lighting
the dry, dead material on the windward side, the flames, driven by a
gentle western breeze, would sweep across the entire plot, leaving it
bare and blackened, ready for the fertilizers and the plow. With merry
cries they followed the sweeping line of fire, aiding it forward by
catching up on iron rakes burning wisps and transferring them to spots in
the weedy plot that did not kindle readily. Little Ned, clinging to the
hand of Maggie, who had joined the family in the garden, looked on with
awe-struck eyes. From the bonfire and the consuming weeds great volumes
of smoke poured up and floated away, the air was full of pungent odors,
and the robins called vociferously back and forth through the garden,
their alarmed and excited cries vying with the children's shouts. In half
an hour only a faint haze of smoke to the eastward indicated the brief
conflagration; the family had gone to the house for their one-o'clock
dinner, and the birds were content with the normal aspect of the old
garden in April. The promise of the bright spring day was not fulfilled. Cold rains
followed by frosty mornings and high cool winds prevailed with depressing
persistency. It required almost as much vigor, courage, and activity as
had been essential in March to enjoy out-door life. In many of her
aspects Nature appeared almost to stand still and wait for more genial
skies, and yet for those who watched to greet and to welcome, the mighty
impulse of spring manifested itself in many ways. The currant and
gooseberry bushes, as if remembering their original haunts in dim, cold,
boggy forests, put forth their foliage without hesitation. From the
elm-trees swung the little pendent blossoms that precede the leaves. The
lilacs and some other hardy shrubs grew green and fragrant daily. Nothing
daunted, the crocuses, hyacinths, and tulips pushed upward their
succulent leaves with steady resolution. In the woods the flowers had all
kinds of experiences. On the north side of Storm King it was still
winter, with great areas of December's ice unmelted. On the south side of
the mountain, spring almost kept pace with the calendar. The only result
was that the hardy little children of April, on which had hung more
snow-flakes than dew, obtained a longer lease of blooming life, and could
have their share in garlanding the May Queen. They bravely faced the
frosty nights and drenching rains, becoming types of those lives whose
beauty is only enhanced by adversity--of those who make better use of a
little sunny prosperity to bless the world than others on whom good-fortune
ever seems to wait. The last Saturday of the month was looked forward to with hopeful
expectations, as a genial earnest of May, and a chance for out-door
pleasures; but with it came a dismal rain-storm, which left the ground as
cold, wet, and sodden as it had been a month before. The backward season,
of which the whole country was now complaining, culminated on the
following morning, which ushered in a day of remarkable vicissitude. By
rapid transition the rain passed into sleet, then snow, which flurried
down so rapidly that the land grew white and wintry, making it almost
impossible to imagine that two months of spring had passed. the whirling flakes ceased, but a more sullen, leaden, March-like sky
never lowered over a cold, dripping earth. On the north side of the house
a white hyacinth was seen hanging its pendent blossoms half in and half
out of the snow, and Alf, who in response to Dr. Marvin's suggestion was
following some of the family fortunes among the homes in the trees, came
in and said that he had found nests well hidden by a covering all too
cold, with the resolute mother bird protecting her eggs, although
chilled, wet, and shivering herself. the clouds grew thin,
rolled away, and disappeared. The sun broke out with a determined warmth
and power, and the snow vanished like a spectre of the long-past winter. The birds took heart, and their songs of exultation resounded from far
and near. A warm south breeze sprang up and fanned Amy's cheek, as she,
with the children and Burt, went out for their usual Sunday-afternoon
walk. They found the flowers looking up hopefully, but with melted snow
hanging like tears on their pale little faces. The sun at last sank into
the unclouded west, illumining the sky with a warm, golden promise for
the future. Amy gazed at its departing glory, but Burt looked at
her--looked so earnestly, so wistfully, that she was full of compunction
even while she welcomed the return of the children, which delayed the
words that were trembling on his lips. He was ready, she was not; and he
walked homeward at her side silent and depressed, feeling that the
receptive, responsive spring was later in her heart than in Nature. CHAPTER XXVII

SHAD-FISHING BY PROXY


According to the almanac, May was on time to a second, but Nature seemed
unaware of the fact. Great bodies of snow covered the Adirondack region,
and not a little still remained all the way southward through the
Catskills and the Highlands, about the headwaters of the Delaware, and
its cold breath benumbed the land. Johnnie's chosen intimates had given
her their suffrages as May Queen; but prudent Maggie had decided that the
crowning ceremonies should not take place until May truly appeared, with
its warmth and floral wealth. Therefore, on the first Saturday of the
month, Leonard planned a half-holiday, which should not only compensate
the disappointed children, but also give his busy wife a little outing. He had learned that the tide was right for crossing the shallows of the
Moodna Creek, and they would all go fishing. Marvin were invited, and great were the preparations. Reed and
all kinds of poles were taken down from their hooks, or cut in a
neighboring thicket, the country store was depleted of its stock of rusty
hooks, and stray corks were fastened on the brown linen lines for floats. Burt disdained to take his scientific tackle, and indeed there was little
use for it in Moodna Creek, but he joined readily in the frolic. He would
be willing to fish indefinitely for even minnows, if at the same time
there was a chance to angle for Amy. Some preferred to walk to the river,
and with the aid of the family rockaway the entire party were at the
boat-house before the sun had passed much beyond the meridian. Burt, from
his intimate knowledge of the channel, acted as pilot, and was jubilant
over the fact that Amy consented to take an oar with him and receive a
lesson in rowing. Marvin held the tiller-ropes, and the doctor was
to use a pair of oars when requested to do so. Webb and Leonard took
charge of the larger boat, of which Johnnie, as hostess, was captain, and
a jolly group of little boys and girls made the echoes ring, while Ned,
with his thumb in his mouth, clung close to his mother, and regarded the
nautical expedition rather dubiously. They swept across the flats to the
deeper water near Plum Point, and so up the Moodna, whose shores were
becoming green with the rank growth of the bordering marsh. Passing under
an old covered bridge they were soon skirting an island from which rose a
noble grove of trees, whose swollen buds were only waiting for a warmer
caress of the sun to unfold. Returning, they beached their boats below
the bridge, under whose shadow the fish were fond of lying. The little
people were disembarked, and placed at safe distances; for, if near, they
would surely hook each other, if never a fin. Silence was enjoined, and
there was a breathless hush for the space of two minutes; then began
whispers more resonant than those of the stage, followed by acclamations
as Johnnie pulled up a wriggling eel, of which she was in mortal terror. They all had good sport, however, for the smaller fry of the finny tribes
that haunted the vicinity of the old bridge suffered from the well-known
tendency of extreme youth to take everything into its mouth. Indeed, at
that season, an immature sun-fish will take a hook if there is but a
remnant of a worm upon it. The day was good for fishing, since thin
clouds darkened the water. Amy was the heroine of the party, for Burt had
furnished her with a long, light pole, and taught her to throw her line
well away from the others. As a result she soon took, amidst excited
plaudits, several fine yellow perch. At last Leonard shouted:

"You shall not have all the honors, Amy. I have a hook in my pocket that
will catch bigger fish than you have seen to-day. Come, the tide is going
out, and we must go out of the creek with it unless we wish to spend the
night on a sand-bar. I shall now try my luck at shad-fishing over by
Polopel's Island." The prospect of crossing the river and following the drift-nets down into
the Highlands was a glad surprise to all, and they were soon in Newburgh
Bay, whose broad lake-like surface was unruffled by a breath. The sun,
declining toward the west, scattered rose-hues among the clouds. Sloops
and schooners had lost steerage-way, and their sails flapped idly against
the masts. The grind of oars between the thole-pins came distinctly
across the water from far-distant boats, while songs and calls of birds,
faint and etherealized, reached them from the shores. Rowing toward a man
rapidly paying out a net from the stern of his boat they were soon hailed
by Mr. Marks, who with genial good-nature invited them to see the sport. He had begun throwing his net over in the middle of the river, his
oarsman rowing eastward with a slight inclination toward the south, for
the reason that the tide is swifter on the western side. The aim is to
keep the net as straight as possible and at right angles with the tide. Marks on either side, the smooth
water and the absence of wind enabling them to keep near and converse
without effort. Away in their wake bobbed the cork floats in an irregular
line, and from these floats, about twenty feet below the surface, was
suspended the net, which extended down thirty or forty feet further,
being kept in a vertical position by iron rings strung along its lower
edge at regular intervals. Thus the lower side of the net was from fifty
to sixty feet below the surface. In shallow water narrower nets are
rigged to float vertically much nearer the surface. Marks explained
that his net was about half a mile long, adding,

"It's fun fishing on a day like this, but it's rather tough in a gale of
wind, with your eyes half blinded by rain, and the waves breaking into
your boat. Yes, we catch just as many then, perhaps more, for there are
fewer men out, and I suppose the weather is always about the same, except
as to temperature, down where the shad are. The fish don't mind wet
weather; neither must we if we make a business of catching them." "Do you always throw out your net from the west shore toward the east?" "No, we usually pay out against the wind. With the wind the boat is apt
to go too fast. The great point is to keep the net straight and not all
tangled and wobbled up. Sometimes a float
will catch on a paddle-wheel, and like enough half of the net will be
torn away. A pilot with any human feeling will usually steer one side,
and give a fellow a chance, and we can often bribe the skipper of
sailing-craft by holding up a shad and throwing it aboard as he tacks
around us. As a rule, however, boats of all kinds pass over a net without
doing any harm. Occasionally a net breaks from the floats and drags on
the bottom. This is covered with cinders thrown out by steamers, and they
play the mischief." "Usually, but they come in on both sides." Marks, how can you catch fish in a net that is straight up and
down?" "You'll soon see, but I'll explain. The meshes of the net will stretch
five inches. A shad swims into one of these and then, like many others
that go into things, finds he can't back out, for his gills catch on the
sides of the mesh and there he hangs. Occasionally a shad will just
tangle himself up and so be caught, and sometimes we take a large striped
bass in this way." In answer to a question of Burt's he continued: "I just let my net float
with the tide as you see, giving it a pull from one end or the other now
and then to keep it as straight and as near at right angles with the
river as possible. When the tide stops running out and turns a little we
begin at one end of the net and pull it up, taking out the fish, at the
same time laying it carefully in folds on a platform in the stern-sheets,
so as to prevent any tangles. If the net comes up clear and free, I may
throw it in again and float back with the tide. So far from being able to
depend on this, we often have to go ashore where there is a smooth beach
before our drift is over and disentangle our net. There, now, I'm
through, with paying out. Haven't you noticed the floats bobbing here and
there?" "We've been too busy listening and watching you," said Leonard. If you see one bob under and wobble, a shad
has struck the net near it, and I can go and take him out. In smooth
water it's like fishing with one of your little cork bobblers there on
your lines. I'll give the shad to the first one that sees a float bob
under." Alf nearly sprang out of the boat as he pointed and shouted, "There,
there." Laughing good-naturedly, Mr. Marks lifted the net beneath the float, and,
sure enough, there was a great roe-shad hanging by his gills, and Alf
gloated over his supper, already secured. The fish were running well, and there were excited calls and frantic
pointings, in which at first even the older members of the party joined,
and every few moments a writhing shad flashed in the slanting rays as it
was tossed into the boat. Up and down the long, irregular line of floats
the boats passed and repassed until excitement verged toward satiety, and
the sun, near the horizon, with a cloud canopy of crimson and gold,
warned the merry fishers by proxy that their boats should be turned
homeward. Leonard pulled out what he termed his silver hook, and supplied
not only the Clifford family, but all of Johnnie's guests, with fish so
fresh that they had as yet scarcely realized that they were out of water. "Now, Amy," said Burt, "keep stroke with me," adding, in a whisper, "no
fear but that we can pull well together." Her response was, "One always associates a song with rowing. Come, strike
up, and let us keep the boats abreast that all may join." He, well content, started a familiar boating song, to which the splash of
their oars made musical accompaniment. A passing steamer saluted them,
and a moment later the boats rose gracefully over the swells. The glassy
river flashed back the crimson of the clouds, the eastern <DW72>s of the
mountains donned their royal purple, the intervening shadows of valleys
making the folds of their robes. As they approached the shore the
resonant song of the robins blended with the human voices. Burt, however,
heard only Amy's girlish soprano, and saw but the pearl of her teeth
through her parted lips, the rose in her cheeks, and the snow of her
neck. Final words were spoken and all were soon at home. Maggie took the
household helm with a fresh and vigorous grasp. The maids never dawdled when she directed, and by the time
the hungry fishermen were ready, the shad that two hours before had been
swimming deep in the Hudson lay browned to a turn on the ample platter. "It is this quick transition that gives to game fish their most exquisite
flavor," Burt remarked. "Are shad put down among the game fish?" "Yes; they were included not very long ago, and most justly, too, as I
can testify to-night. I never tasted anything more delicious, except
trout. If a shad were not so bony it would be almost perfection when
eaten under the right conditions. Not many on the Hudson are aware of the
fact, perhaps, but angling for them is fine sport in some rivers. They
will take a fly in the Connecticut and Housatonic; but angle-worms and
other bait are employed in the Delaware and Southern rivers. The best
time to catch them is early in the morning, and from six to eight in the
evening. At dusk one may cast for them in still water, as for trout. The
Hudson is too big, I suppose, and the water too deep, although I see no
reason why the young fry should not be caught in our river as well as in
the Delaware. I have read of their biting voraciously in September at a
short distance above Philadelphia." "Do you mean to say that our rivers are full of shad in August and
September?" "Yes; that is, of young shad on the way to the sea. The females that are
running up now will spawn in the upper and shallow waters of the river,
and return to the ocean by the end of June, and in the autumn the small
fry will also go to the sea, the females to remain there two years. The
males will come back next spring, and these young males are called
'chicken shad' on the Connecticut. Multitudes of these half-grown fish
are taken in seines, and sold as herrings or 'alewives'; for the true
herring does not run up into fresh water. Young shad are said to have
teeth, and they live largely on insects, while the full-grown fish have
no teeth, and feed chiefly on animalcules that form the greater part of
the slimy growths that cover nearly everything that is long under water." "Well, I never had so much shad before in my life," said his father,
laughing, and pushing lack his chair; "and, Burt, I have enjoyed those
you have served up in the water almost as much as those dished under
Maggie's superintendence." "I should suppose that the present mode of fishing with drift-nets was
cheaper and more profitable than the old method of suspending the nets
between poles," Leonard remarked. "It is indeed," Burt continued, vivaciously, for he observed that Amy was
listening with interest. "Poles, too, form a serious obstruction. Once,
years ago, I was standing near the guards of a steamboat, when I heard
the most awful grating, rasping sound, and a moment later a shad-pole
gyrated past me with force enough to brain an elephant had it struck him. It was good fun, though, in old times to go out and see them raise the
nets, for they often came up heavy with fish. Strange to say, a loon was
once pulled up with the shad. Driven by fear, it must have dived so
vigorously as to entangle itself, for there it hung with its head and one
leg fast. I suppose that the last moment of consciousness that the poor
bird had was one of strong surprise." CHAPTER XXVIII

MAY AND GIRLHOOD


May came in reality the following morning. Perhaps she thought that the
leisure of Sunday would secure her a more appreciative welcome. The wind
no longer blew from the chill and still snowy North, but from lands that
had long since responded to the sun's genial power. Therefore, the breeze
that came and went fitfully was like a warm, fragrant breath, and truly
it seemed to breathe life and beauty into all things. During the morning
hours the cluster buds of the cherry burst their varnished-looking
sheath, revealing one-third of the little green stems on which the
blossoms would soon appear. The currant-bushes were hanging out their
lengthening racemes, and the hum of many bees proved that honey may be
gathered even from gooseberry-bushes, thus suggesting a genial philosophy. The sugar-maples were beginning to unfold their leaves and to dangle their
emerald gold flowers from long, drooping pedicles. Few objects have more
exquisite and delicate beauty than this inflorescence when lighted up by
the low afternoon sun. The meadows and oat fields were passing into a vivid
green, and the hardy rye had pushed on so resolutely in all weathers, that
it was becoming billowy under the wind. All through the week the hues of
life and beauty became more and more apparent upon the face of Nature, and
by the following Saturday May had provided everything in perfection for
Johnnie's coronation ceremonies. For weeks past there had been distinguished arrivals from the South
almost daily. Some of these songsters, like the fox-sparrow, sojourned a
few weeks, favoring all listeners with their sweet and simple melodies;
but the chief musician of the American forests, the hermit thrush, passed
silently, and would not deign to utter a note of his unrivalled minstrelsy
until he had reached his remote haunts at the North. Marvin evidently
had a grudge against this shy, distant bird, and often complained, "Why
can't he give us a song or two as he lingers here in his journey? I often
see him flitting about in the mountains, and have watched him by the hour
with the curiosity that prompts one to look at a great soprano or tenor,
hoping that he might indulge me with a brief song as a sample of what he
could do, but he was always royally indifferent and reserved. I am going to
the Adirondacks on purpose to hear him some day. There's the winter wren,
too-saucy, inquisitive little imp!--he was here all winter, and has left us
without vouchsafing a note. But, then, great singers are a law unto
themselves the world over." But the doctor had small cause for complaint, for there are few regions
more richly endowed with birds than the valley of the Hudson. As has been
seen, it is the winter resort of not a few, and is, moreover, a great
highway of migration, for birds are ever prone to follow the watercourses
that run north and south. The region also affords so wide a choice of
locality and condition that the tastes of very many birds are suited. There are numerous gardens and a profusion of fruit for those that are
half domesticated; orchards abounding in old trees with knotholes,
admirably fitted for summer homes; elms on which to hang the graceful
pensile nests--"castles in air," as Burroughs calls them; meadows in
which the lark, vesper sparrow, and bobolink can disport; and forests
stretching up into the mountains, wherein the shyest birds can enjoy all
the seclusion they desire, content to sing unheard, as the flowers around
them bloom unseen, except by those who love them well enough to seek them
in their remotest haunts. The week which preceded the May party was a memorable one to Amy, for
during its sunny days she saw an American spring in its perfection. Each
morning brought rich surprises to her, Johnnie, and Alf, and to Webb an
increasing wonder that he had never before truly seen the world in which
he lived. The pent-up forces of Nature, long restrained, seemed finding
new expression every hour. Tulips opened their gaudy chalices to catch
the morning dew. Massive spikes of hyacinths distilled a rich perfume
that was none too sweet in the open air. Whenever Amy stepped from the
door it seemed that some new flower had opened and some new development
of greenery and beauty had been revealed. But the crowning glory in the
near landscape were the fruit trees. The cherry boughs grew white every
day, and were closely followed by the plum and pear and the pink-hued
peach blossoms. Even Squire Bartley's unattractive place was transformed
for a time into fairyland; but he, poor man, saw not the blossoms, and
the birds and boys stole his fruit. Amy wondered at the wealth of flowers
that made many of the trees as white as they had been on the snowiest day
of winter, and Johnnie revelled in them, often climbing up into some
low-branched tree, that she might bury herself in their beauty, and
inhale their fragrance in long breaths of delight. The bees that filled
the air about her with their busy hum never molested her, believing, no
doubt, that she had as good a right as themselves to enjoy the sweets in
her way. Clifford, perhaps, who obtained the
profoundest enjoyment from the season. Seated by her window or in a sunny
corner of the piazza, she would watch the unfolding buds as if she were
listening to some sweet old story that had grown dearer with every
repetition. Indeed, this was true, for with the blossoms of every year
were interwoven the memories of a long life, and their associations had
scarcely ever been more to her heart than the new ones now forming. She
often saw, with her children and grandchildren, the form of a tall girl
passing to and fro, and to her loving eyes Amy seemed to be the fairest
and sweetest flower of this gala period. She, and indeed they all, had
observed Burt's strongly manifested preference, but, with innate
refinement and good sense, there had been a tacit agreement to appear
blind. The orphan girl should not be annoyed by even the most delicate
raillery, but the old lady and her husband could not but feel the deepest
satisfaction that Bart was making so wise a choice. They liked Amy all
the better because she was so little disposed to sentiment, and proved
that she was not to be won easily. But they all failed to understand her, and gave her credit for a maturity
that she did not possess. In her happy, healthful country life the
girlish form that had seemed so fragile when she first came to them was
taking on the rounded lines of womanhood. Why should she not be wooed
like other girls at her age? Burt was further astray than any one else,
and was even inclined to complain mentally that her nature was cold and
unresponsive. And yet her very reserve and elusiveness increased his
passion, which daily acquired a stronger mastery. Webb alone half guessed
the truth in regard to her. As time passed, and he saw the increasing
evidences of Burt's feeling, he was careful that his manner should be
strictly fraternal toward Amy, for his impetuous brother was not always
disposed to be reasonable even in his normal condition, and now he was
afflicted with a malady that has often brought to shame the wisdom of the
wisest. The elder brother saw how easily Burt's jealousy could be
aroused, and therefore denied himself many an hour of the young girl's
society, although it caused him a strange little heartache to do so. But
he was very observant, for Amy was becoming a deeply interesting study. He saw and appreciated her delicate fence with Burt, in which tact,
kindness, and a little girlish brusqueness were almost equally blended. Was it the natural coyness of a high-spirited girl, who could be won only
by long and patient effort? or was it an instinctive self-defence from a
suit that she could not repulse decisively without giving pain to those
she loved? Their home-life, even at that busy
season, gave him opportunities to see her often, and glimmerings of the
truth began to dawn upon him. He saw that she enjoyed the society of Alf
and Johnnie almost as much as that of the other members of the family,
that her delight at every new manifestation of spring was as unforced as
that of the children, while at the same time it was an intelligent and
questioning interest. The beauty of the world without impressed her
deeply, as it did Johnnie, but to the latter it was a matter of course,
while to Amy it was becoming an inviting mystery. The little girl would
bring some new flower from the woods or garden, the first of the season,
in contented triumph, but to Amy the flower had a stronger interest. It
represented something unknown, a phase of life which it was the impulse
of her developing mind to explore. Her botany was not altogether
satisfactory, for analysis and classification do not reveal to us a
flower or plant any more than the mention of a name and family connection
makes known individual character. Her love for natural objects was too
real to be satisfied with a few scientific facts about them. If a plant,
tree, or bird, interested her she would look at it with a loving,
lingering glance until she felt that she was learning to know it somewhat
as she would recognize a friend. The rapid changes which each day brought
were like new chapters in a story, or new verses in a poem. She watched
with admiring wonder the transition of buds into blossoms; and their
changes of form and color. She shared in Alf's excitement over the
arrival of every new bird from the South, and, having a good ear for
music, found absorbing pleasure in learning and estimating the quality
and characteristics of their various songs. Their little oddities
appealed to her sense of humor. A pair of cat-birds that had begun their
nest near the house received from her more ridicule than admiration. "They seem to be regular society birds and gossips," she said, "and I can
never step out-of-doors but I feel that they are watching me, and trying
to attract my attention. They have a pretty song, but they seem to have
learned it by heart, and as soon as they are through they make that
horrid noise, as if in their own natural tone they were saying something
disagreeable about you." But on the morning of Johnnie's coronation she was wakened by songs as
entrancing as they were unfamiliar. Running to the window, she saw
darting through the trees birds of such a brilliant flame color that they
seemed direct from the tropics, and their notes were almost as varied as
their colors. She speedily ceased to heed them, however, for from the
edge of the nearest grove came a melody so ethereal and sustained that it
thrilled her with the delight that one experiences when some great singer
lifts up her voice with a power and sweetness that we feel to be divine. At the same moment she saw Alf running toward the house. Seeing her at
the window, he shouted, "Amy, the orioles and the wood-thrushes--the
finest birds of the year--have come. Hurry up and go with me to the grove
yonder." Soon after Webb, returning from a distant field to breakfast, met her
near the grove. She was almost as breathless and excited as the boy, and
passed him with a bright hurried smile, while she pressed on after her
guide with noiseless steps lest the shy songster should be frightened. He
looked after her and listened, feeling that eye and ear could ask for no
fuller enchantment. At last she came back to him with the fresh loveliness
of the morning in her face, and exclaimed, "I have seen an ideal bird, and
he wears his plumage like a quiet-toned elegant costume that simply
suggests a perfect form. He was superbly indifferent, and scarcely looked
at us until we came too near, and then, with a reserved dignity, flew away. He is the true poet of the woods, and would sing just as sweetly if there
was never a listener." Yes, he is a poet, and your true
aristocrat, who commands admiration without seeking it," Webb replied. "I am sure he justifies all your praises, past and present. Oh, isn't the
morning lovely--so fresh, dewy, and fragrant? and the world looks so
young and glad!" "You also look young and glad this morning, Amy." This May beauty makes me feel as young as Alf," she
replied, placing her hand on the boy's shoulder. Her face was flushed with exercise; her step buoyant; her eyes were
roaming over the landscape tinted with fruit blossoms and the expanding
foliage. Webb saw in what deep accord her spirit was with the season, and
he thought, "She _is_ young--in the very May of her life. She is scarcely
more ready for the words that Burt would speak than little Johnnie. I
wish he would wait till the girl becomes a woman;" and then for some
reason he sighed deeply. Amy gave him an arch look, and said:

"Then came from the depths, Webb. What secret sorrow can you have on a
day like this?" Oh, isn't it
beautiful?--almost equal to the thrush's song. He seems to sing as if
his notes were written for him in couplets." She spoke at intervals,
looking toward the grove they had just left, and when the bird paused
Webb replied:

"That is the wood-thrush's own cousin, and a distinguished member of the
thrush family, the brown-thrasher. Well, Johnnie," he added, to the
little girl who had come to meet them, "you are honored to-day. Three of
our most noted minstrels have arrived just in time to furnish music for
the May Queen." But Johnnie was not surprised, only pleased, as Webb and others
congratulated her. She would be queen that day with scarcely more
self-consciousness than one of the flowers that decked her. It was the
occasion, the carnival of spring, that occupied her thoughts, and, since
the fairest blossoms of the season were to be gathered, why should not
the finest birds be present also? Feeling that he had lost an opportunity in the improvised festival of the
maple-sugar grove, Burt resolved to make the most of this occasion, and
he had the wisdom to decide upon a course that relieved Amy of not a
little foreboding. He determined to show his devotion by thoughtful
considerateness, by making the day so charming and satisfactory as to
prove that he could be a companion after her own heart. And he succeeded
fairly well for a time, only the girl's intuition divined his motive and
guessed his sentiments. She was ever in fear that his restraint would
give way. And yet she felt that she ought to reward him for what she
mentally termed his "sensible behavior" and indicate that such should be
his course in the future. In
spite of all the accumulated beauty of the season the day was less
bright, less full of the restful, happy _abandon_ of the previous one in
March, when Webb had been her undemonstrative attendant. He, with
Leonard, at that busy period found time to look in upon the revellers in
the woods but once. Clifford spent more time with them, but the old
gentleman was governed by his habit of promptness, and the time called
for despatch. For the children, however, it was a revel that left nothing to be
desired. They had decided that it should be a congress of flowers, from
the earliest that had bloomed to those now opening in the sunniest
haunts. Alf, with one or two other adventurous boys, had climbed the
northern face of old Storm King, and brought away the last hepaticas,
fragrant clusters of arbutus, and dicentras, for "pattykers, arbuties,
and Dutcher's breeches," as Ned called them, were favorites that could
not be spared. On a sunny <DW72> dogwood, well advanced, was found. There
were banks white with the rue-anemone, and they were marked, that some of
the little tuber-like roots might be taken up in the fall for forcing in
the house. Myriads of violets gave a purple tinge to parts of a low
meadow near, and chubby hands were stained with the last of the star-like
bloodroot blossoms, many of which dropped white petals on their way to
Johnnie's throne. Some brought handfuls of columbine from rocky nooks,
and others the purple trillium, that is near of kin to Burroughs's white
"wake-robin." There were so many Jacks-in-the-pulpit that one might fear
a controversy, but the innumerable dandelions and dogtooth violets which
carpeted the ground around the throne diffused so mellow a light that all
the blossoms felt that they looked well and were amiable. But it would
require pages even to mention all the flowers that were brought from
gardens, orchards, meadows, groves, and rugged mountain <DW72>s. Each
delegation of blossoms and young tinted foliage was received by Amy, as
mistress of ceremonies, and arranged in harmonious positions; while
Johnnie, quite forgetful of her royalty, was as ready to help at anything
as the humblest maid of honor. All the flowers were treated tenderly
except the poor purple violets, and these were slaughtered by hundreds,
for the projecting spur under the curved stem at the base of the flower
enabled the boys to hook them together, and "fight roosters," as they
termed it. Now and then some tough-stemmed violet would "hook-off" a
dozen blue heads before losing its own, and it became the temporary hero. At last the little queen asserted her power by saying, with a sudden
flash in her dark blue eyes, that she "wouldn't have any more fighting
roosters. By one o'clock the queen had been crowned, the lunch had met the capacity
of even the boys, and the children, circling round the throne, were
singing: "Oats, peas, beans, and barley grows," and kindred rhymes, their
voices rising and falling with the breeze, the birds warbling an
accompaniment. Webb and Leonard, at work in a field not far away, often
paused to listen, the former never failing to catch Amy's clear notes as
she sat on a rock, the gentle power behind the throne, that had maintained
peace and good-will among all the little fractious subjects. The day had grown almost sultry, and early in the afternoon there was a
distant jar of thunder. Burt, who from a bed of dry leaves had been
watching Amy, started up and saw that there was an ominous cloud in the
west. She agreed with him that it would be prudent to return at once, for
she was growing weary and depressed. Burt, with all his effort to be
quietly and unobtrusively devoted, had never permitted her to become
unconscious of his presence and feeling. Therefore her experience had
been a divided one. She could not abandon herself to her hearty sympathy
with the children and their pleasure, for he, by manner at least, ever
insisted that she was a young lady, and the object of thoughts all too
warm. Her nature was so fine that it was wounded and annoyed by an
unwelcome admiration. She did not wish to think about it, but was not
permitted to forget it. She had been genial, merry, yet guarded toward
him all day, and now had begun to long for the rest and refuge of her own
room. He felt that he had not made progress, and was also depressed, and
he showed this so plainly on their way home that she was still more
perplexed and troubled. "If he would only be sensible, and treat me as
Webb does!" she exclaimed, as she threw herself on the lounge in her
room, exhausted rather than exhilarated by the experience of the day. CHAPTER XXIX NATURE'S WORKSHOP


During the hour she slept an ideal shower crossed the sky. In the lower
strata of air there was scarcely any wind, and the rain came down
vertically, copiously, and without beating violence. The sun-warmed earth
took in every drop like a great sponge. Beyond the first muttered warning to the little May party in the grove
there was no thunder. The patter of the rain was a gentle lullaby to Amy,
and at last she was wakened by a ray of sunlight playing upon her face,
yet she still heard the soft fall of rain. With the elasticity of youth,
she sprang up, feeling that the other cloud that had shadowed her
thoughts might soon pass also. As she went singing down the stairway,
Webb called from the front door: "Amy, look here! The cloud still hung heavily over the eastern
mountains, while against it was a magnificent arch, and so distinctly
defined that its feet appeared to rest on the two banks of the river. They watched it in silence until it faded away, and the whole scene,
crowned with flowers and opening foliage tinted like blossoms of varied
hues, was gemmed with crystals by the now unclouded sun, for the soft
rain had clung to everything, from the loftiest tree-top to the tiniest
spire of grass. Flame-like orioles were flashing through the perfumed
air. Robins, with their heads lifted heavenward, were singing as
rapturously as if they were saints rather than rollicking gormandizers. Every bird that had a voice was lifting it up in thanksgiving, but clear,
sweet, and distinct above them all came the notes of the wood-thrush,
with his Beethoven-like melody. "Have you no words for a scene like this, Webb?" My wonder
exceeds even my admiration, for the greater part of this infinite variety
of beauty is created out of so few materials and by so simple yet
mysterious a method that I can scarcely believe it, although I see it and
know it. Men have always agreed to worship the genius which could achieve
the most with the least. And yet the basis of nearly all we see is a
microscopic cell endowed with essential powers. That large apple-tree
yonder, whose buds are becoming so pink, started from one of these minute
cells, and all the growth, beauty, and fruitfulness since attained were
the result of the power of this one cell to add to itself myriads of like
cells, which form the whole structure. It is cell adding cells that is
transforming the world around us." He spoke earnestly, and almost as if
he were thinking aloud, and he looked like one in the presence of a
mystery that awed him. The hue of Amy's eyes deepened, and her face
flushed in her quickened interest. Her own mind had been turning to
kindred thoughts and questionings. She had passed beyond the period when
a mind like hers could be satisfied with the mere surface of things, and
Webb's direct approach to the very foundation principles of what she saw
sent a thrill through all her nerves as an heroic deed would have done. "Can you not show me one of those cells with your microscope?" "Yes, easily, and some of its contents through the cell's transparent
walls, as, for instance, the minute grains of _chlorophyll_, that is, the
green of leaves. All the hues of foliage and flowers are caused by what
the cells contain, and these, to a certain extent, can be seen and
analyzed. But there is one thing within the cell which I cannot show you,
and which has never been seen, and yet it accounts for everything, and is
the architect of all--life. When we reach the cell we are at the
threshold of this mysterious presence. We can
see its work, for its workshop is under our eye, and in this minute shop
it is building all the vegetation of the world, but the artisan itself
ever remains invisible." "Ah, Webb, do not say artisan, but rather artist. Does not the beauty all
around us prove it? Surely there is but one explanation, the one papa
taught me: it is the power of God. He is in the little as well as in the
great. "Well, Amy," he replied, smilingly, "the faith taught you by your father
is, to my mind, more rational than any of the explanations that I have
read, and I have studied several. But then I know little, indeed,
compared with multitudes of others. I am sure, however, that the life of
God is in some way the source of all the life we see. But perplexing
questions arise on every side. Much of life is so repulsive and noxious--
But there! what a fog-bank I am leading you into this crystal May
evening! Most young girls would vote me an insufferable bore should I
talk to them in this style." "So much the worse for the young girls then. I should think they would
feel that no compliment could exceed that of being talked to as if they
had brains. But I do not wish to put on learned airs. You know how
ignorant I am of even the beginnings of this knowledge. All that I can
say is that I am not content to be ignorant. The curiosity of Mother Eve
is growing stronger every day; and is it strange that it should turn
toward the objects, so beautiful and yet so mysterious, that meet my eyes
on every side?" "No," said he, musingly, "the strange thing is that people have so little
curiosity in regard to their surroundings. Why, multitudes of intelligent
persons are almost as indifferent as the cattle that browse around among
the trees and flowers. I once used to
investigate things, but did not see them. I have thought about it very
much this spring. It is said that great painters and sculptors study
anatomy as well as outward form. Perhaps here is a good hint for those
who are trying to appreciate nature. I am not so shallow as to imagine
that I can ever understand nature any more than I can you with your
direct, honest gaze. So to the thoughtful mystery is ever close at hand,
but it seems no little thing to trace back what one sees as far as one
can, and you have made me feel that it is a great thing to see the Divine
Artist's finished work." They were now joined by others, and the perfect beauty of the evening as
it slowly faded into night attracted much attention from all the family. The new moon hung in the afterglow of the western sky, and as the dusk
deepened the weird notes of the whip-poor-will were heard for the first
time from the mountain-sides. At the supper-table Leonard beamed on every one. "A rain like this, after
a week of sunshine has warmed the earth" he exclaimed, "is worth millions
to the country. "Yes," added his father, "the old Indian sign, the unfolding of the oak
leaves, indicates that it is now safe to plant. After long years of observation I am satisfied that the true secret
of success in farming is the doing of everything at just the right time. Crops put in too early or too late often partially fail; but if the right
conditions are complied with from the beginning, they start with a vigor
which is not lost until maturity." Burt indulged in a gayety that was phenomenal even for him, but after
supper he disappeared. Amy retired to her room early, but she sat a long
time at her window and looked out into the warm, fragrant night. She had
forgotten poor Burt, who was thinking of her, as in his unrest he rode
mile after mile, holding his spirited horse down to a walk. She had
almost forgotten Webb, but she thought deeply of his words, of the life
that was working all around her so silently and yet so powerfully. Unseen
it had created the beauty she had enjoyed that day. From the very
contrast of ideas it made her think of death, of her father, who once had
been so strong and full of life. The mystery of one seemed as great as
that of the other, and a loneliness such as she had not felt before for
months depressed her. "I wish I could talk to Webb again," she thought. "He says he does not
understand me. It would seem
that when one began to think nothing that appeared simple before is
understood; but his words are strong and assured. He leads one to the
boundaries of the known, and then says, quietly, we can go no further;
but he makes you feel that what is beyond is all right. Oh, I wish Burt
was like him!" CHAPTER XXX

SPRING-TIME PASSION


But little chance had Amy to talk with Webb for the next few days. He had
seen the cloud on Burt's brow, and had observed that he was suspicious,
unhappy, and irritable; that reason and good sense were not in the
ascendant; and he understood his brother sufficiently well to believe
that his attack must run its natural course, as like fevers had done
before. From what he had seen he also thought that Amy could deal with
Burt better than any one else, for although high-strung, he was also
manly and generous when once he got his bearings. In his present mood he
would bitterly resent interference from any one, but would be bound to
obey Amy and to respect her wishes. Therefore he took especial pains to
be most kindly, but also to appear busy and pre-occupied. It must not be thought that Burt was offensive or even openly obtrusive
in his attentions. He was far too well-bred for that. There was nothing
for which even his mother could reprove him, or of which Amy herself
could complain. It was the suit itself from which she shrank, or rather
which she would put off indefinitely. But Burt was not disposed to put
anything that he craved into the distance. Spring-tide impulses were in
his veins, and his heart was so overcharged that it must find expression. A long, exquisite day had merged into
a moonlight evening. The apple-blossoms were in all their white-and-pink
glory, and filled the summer-like air with a fragrance as delicate as
that of the arbutus. The petals of the cherry were floating down like
snow in every passing breeze, glimmering momentarily in the pale
radiance. The night was growing so beautiful that Amy was tempted to
stroll out in the grounds, and soon she yielded to a fancy to see the
effect of moonlight through an apple-tree that towered like a mound of
snow at some little distance from the house. She would not have been
human had the witchery of the May evening been without its influence. If
Burt could have understood her, this was his opportunity. If he had come
with step and tone that accorded with the quiet evening, and simply said,
"Amy, you know--you have seen that I love you; what hope can you give
me?" she in her present mood would have answered him as gently and
frankly as a child. She might have laughingly pointed him to the tree,
and said: "See, it is in blossom now. It will be a long time before you
pick the apples. If you will be sensible, and treat me as
you would Johnnie, were she older, I will ride and walk with you, and be
as nice to you as I can." But this Burt could not do and still remain Burt. He was like an
overcharged cloud, and when he spoke at last his words seemed to the
sensitive girl to have the vividness and abruptness of the lightning. It
was her custom to make a special toilet for the evening, and when she had
come down to supper with a rose in her hair, and dressed in some light
clinging fabric, she had proved so attractive to the young fellow that he
felt that the limit of his restraint was reached. He would appeal to her
so earnestly, so passionately, as to kindle her cold nature. In his lack
of appreciation of Amy he had come to deem this his true course, and she
unconsciously enabled him to carry out the rash plan. He had seen her
stroll away, and had followed her until she should be so far from the
house that she must listen. As she emerged from under the apple-tree,
through which as a white cloud she had been looking at the moon, he
appeared so suddenly as to startle her, and without any gentle reassurance
he seized her hand, and poured out his feelings in a way that at first
wounded and frightened her. "Burt," she cried, "why do you speak to me so? Can't you see that I do
not feel as you do? I've given you no reason to say such words to me." Are you as cold and elusive as this moonlight? I
have waited patiently, and now I must and will speak. Every man has a
right to speak and a right to an answer." "Well then," she replied, her spirit rising; "if you will insist on my
being a woman instead of a young girl just coming from the shadow of a
great sorrow, I also have my rights. I've tried to show you gently and
with all the tact I possessed that I did not want to think about such
things. I'm just at the beginning of my girlhood and I want to be a young
girl as long as I can and not an engaged young woman. No matter who spoke
the words you have said, they would pain me. Why couldn't you see this
from my manner and save both yourself and me from this scene? I'll gladly
be your loving sister, but you must not speak to me in this way again." "You refuse me then," he said, throwing back his head haughtily. I simply tell you that I won't listen to such words from
any one. Why can't you be sensible and understand me? I no more wish to
talk about such things than do Alf and Johnnie." "I do understand you," he exclaimed, passionately, "and better perhaps
than you understand yourself. You are a woman, but
you seem to lack a woman's heart, as far as I am concerned;" and with a
gesture that was very tragic and despairing he strode away. She was deeply troubled and incensed also, and she returned to the house
with drooping head and fast-falling tears. "Why, Amy, what is the matter?" Looking up, she saw Webb coming down the
piazza steps. Yielding to her impulse, she sprang forward and took his
arm, as she said:

"Webb, you have always acted toward me like a brother. is it unnatural in me that I do not wish to hear
such words as Burt would speak to-night? All I ask is that he will let me
stay a happy young girl till I am ready for something else. This is no
way for a flower to bloom"--she snatched the rose from her hair, and
pushed open the red petals--"and yet Burt expects me to respond at once
to feelings that I do not even understand. If it's best in the future--but
surely I've a right to my freedom for a long time yet. Tell me, do you
think I'm unnatural?" "No, Amy," he answered, gently. "It is because you are so perfectly
natural, so true to your girlhood, that you feel as you do. In that
little parable of the rose you explain yourself fully. You have no cause
for self-reproach, nor has Burt for complaint. You say you do not understand me, and yet always prove that
you do. If Burt would only treat me as you do, I should be perfectly
happy." "Well, Burt's good-hearted, but sometimes he mislays his judgment," said
Webb, laughing. There is no occasion for any high
tragedy on his part or for grieving on yours. You go and tell mother all
about it, and just how you feel. She is the right one to manage this
affair, and her influence over Burt is almost unbounded. Do this, and,
take my word for it, all will soon be serene." Amy felt that night what it is to have a mother's
boundless love and sympathy, and she went to her rest comforted, soothed,
and more assured as to the future than she had been for a long time. "How
quiet and sensible Webb was about it all!" was her last smiling thought
before she slept. His thought as he strolled away in the moonlight after
she left him was, "It is just as if I half believed. She has the mind of
a woman, but the heart of a child. Burt did not stroll; he strode mile after mile, and the uncomfortable
feeling that he had been very unwise, to say the least, and perhaps very
unjust, was growing upon him. When at last he returned, his mother called
to him through the open door. Clifford always
obtained the confidence of her children, and they ever found that it was
sacred. All that can be said, therefore, was, that he came from her
presence penitent, ashamed, and hopeful. His mood may best be explained,
perhaps, by a note written before he retired. "My dear sister Amy," it
ran, "I wish to ask your pardon. I was
so blinded and engrossed by my own feelings that I did not understand
you. I have proved myself unworthy of even a sister's love; but I will
try to make amends. Do not judge me harshly because I was so headlong. There is no use in trying to disguise the truth. What I have said so
unwisely and prematurely I cannot unsay, and I shall always be true to my
words. But I will wait patiently as long as you please; and if you find,
in future years, that you cannot feel as I do, I will not complain or
blame you, however sad the truth may be to me. In the meantime, let there
be no constraint between us. Let me become once more your trusted brother
Burt." This note he pushed under her door, and then slept too soundly for
the blighted youth he had a few hours before deemed himself. He felt a little embarrassed at the prospect of meeting her the next
morning, but she broke the ice at once by coming to him on the piazza and
extending her hand in smiling frankness as she said: "You are neither
unjust nor ungenerous, Burt, or you would not have written me such a
note. As you said the first evening I came, we
shall have jolly times together." The young fellow was immensely relieved and grateful, and he showed it. Soon afterward he went about the affairs of the day happier than he had
been for a long time. Indeed, it soon became evident that his explosion
on the previous evening had cleared the air generally. Amy felt that the
one threatening cloud had sunk below the horizon. As the days passed, and
Burt proved that he could keep his promise, her thoughts grew as serene
as those of Johnnie. Her household duties were not very many, and yet she
did certain things regularly. The old people found that she rarely forgot
them, and she had the grace to see when she could help and cheer. Attentions that must be constantly asked for have little charm. A day
rarely passed that did she not give one or more of its best hours to her
music and drawing; for, while she never expected to excel in these arts,
she had already learned that they would enable her to give much pleasure
to others. Her pencil, also, was of great assistance in her study of
out-door life, for the fixed attention which it required to draw a plant,
tree, or bit of scenery revealed its characteristics. She had been even
more interested in the unfolding of the leaf-buds than in the flowering
of the trees, and the gradual advance of the foliage, like a tinted
cloud, up the mountain-<DW72>s, was something she never tired of watching. When she spoke of this one day to Webb, he replied:

"I have often wondered that more is not said and written about our spring
foliage, before it passes into its general hue of green. To me it has a
more delicate beauty and charm than anything seen in October. Different
trees have their distinct coloring now as then, but it is evanescent, and
the shades usually are less clearly marked. This very fact, however,
teaches the eye to have a nicety of distinction that is pleasing." The blossoms faded from the trees, and
the miniature fruit was soon apparent. The strawberry rows, that had been
like lines of snow, were now full of little promising cones. The grass
grew so lusty and strong that the dandelions were hidden except as the
breeze caught up the winged seeds that the tuneful yellow-birds often
seized in the air. The rye had almost reached its height, and Johnnie
said it was "as good as going to the ocean to see it wave." At last the
swelling buds on the rose-bushes proclaimed the advent of June. CHAPTER XXXI

JUNE AND HONEY-BEES


It is said that there is no heaven anywhere for those incapable of
recognizing and enjoying it. Be this as it may, the month of June is a
segment of heaven annually bestowed on those whose eyes and ears have been
opened to beauty in sight and sound. Indeed, what sense in man is not
gratified to the point of imaginary perfection during this early fruition
of the varied promise of spring? Even to the sense of touch, how exquisite
is the "feel" of the fragrant rose-petals, the soft young foliage that has
transformed the world, and the queer downy fledglings in innumerable nests! To the eye informed by a heart in love with nature the longest days of the
year are all too short to note half that exists and takes place. Who sees
and distinguishes the varied blossoming of the many kinds of grain and
grasses that are waving in every field? And yet here is a beauty as
distinct and delicate as can be found in some of Mendelssohn's "Songs
without Words"--blossomings so odd, delicate, and evanescent as to suggest
a child's dream of a flower. Place them under a strong glass, and who can
fail to wonder at the miracles of form and color that are revealed? From
these tiny flowerets the scale runs upward until it touches the hybrid
rose. During this period, also, many of the forest trees emulate the wild
flowers at their feet until their inflorescence culminates in the white
cord-like fringe that foretells the spiny chestnut burrs. So much has been written comparing this exquisite season when spring
passes insensibly into summer with the fulfilled prophecy of girlhood,
that no attempt shall be made to repeat the simile. Amy's birthday should
have been in May, but it came early in June. May was still in her heart,
and might linger there indefinitely; but her mind, her thoughts, kept
pace with nature as unconsciously as the flowers that bloomed in their
season. There were little remembrances from all the family, but Webb's
gift promised the most pleasure. It was a powerful opera-glass; and as he
handed it to her on the piazza in the early morning he said:

"Our troupe are all here now, Amy, and I thought that you would like to
see the singers, and observe their costumes and expressions. Some birds
have a good deal of expression and a very charming manner while singing--a
manner much more to my taste than that of many a _prima donna_ whom I
have heard, although my taste may be uncultivated. Focus your glass on that
indigo-bird in yonder tree-top. Don't you see him?--the one that is
favoring us with such a lively strain, beginning with a repetition of
short, sprightly notes. The glass may enable you to see his markings
accurately." and it grows so deep and rich about
the head, throat, and breast! How plain I can see him, even to the black
velvet under his eyes! Why, I can look
right into his little throat, and almost imagine I see the notes he is
flinging abroad so vivaciously. I can even make out his claws closed on a
twig, and the dew on the leaves around him is like gems. Truly, Webb, you
were inspired when you thought of this gift." "Yes," he replied, quietly, looking much pleased, however, "with a very
honest wish to add to your enjoyment of the summer. I must confess, too,
that I had one thought at least for myself. You have described the
indigo-bird far more accurately than I could have done, although I have
seen it every summer as long as I can remember. You have taught me to
see; why should I not help you to see more when I can do it so easily? My
thought was that you would lend me the glass occasionally, so that I
might try to keep pace with you. I've been using the microscope too
much--prying into nature, as Burt would say, with the spirit of an
anatomist." "I shall value the glass a great deal more if you share it with me," she
said, simply, with a sincere, direct gaze into his eyes; "and be assured,
Webb," she added, earnestly, "you are helping me more than I can help
you. I'm not an artist, and never can be, but if I were I should want
something more than mere surface, however beautiful it might be. Think of
it, Webb, I'm eighteen to-day, and I know so little! You always make me
feel that there is so much to learn, and, what is more, that it is worth
knowing. You should have been a teacher, for you would make the children
feel, when learning their lessons, as Alf does when after game. she added, sweeping the scene with her
glass. "I can go every day now on an exploring expedition. Clifford came in a little late, rubbing his hands felicitously, as he
said:

"I have just come from the apiary, and think we shall have another swarm
to-day. Did you ever hear the old saying, Amy,

  'A swarm of bees in June
   Is worth a silver spoon'? If one comes out to-day, and we hive it safely, we shall call it yours, and
you shall have the honey." "How much you are all doing to sweeten my life!" she said, laughing; "but I
never expected the present of a swarm of bees. I assure you it is a gift
that you will have to keep for me, and yet I should like to see how the
bees swarm, and how you hive them. I've heard that bees
are so wise, and know when people are afraid of them." "You can fix yourself up with a thick veil and a pair of gloves so that
there will be no danger, and your swarm of bees, when once in hive, will
take care of themselves, and help take care of you. That's the beauty of
bee-culture." "Our bees are literally in clover this year," Leonard remarked. "That heavy
coating of wood-ashes that I gave to a half-acre near the apiary proved
most effective, and the plot now looks as if a flurry of snow had passed
over it, the white clover blossoms are so thick. That is something I could
never understand, Webb. Wood-ashes will always bring white clover. It's
hard to believe that it all comes from seed dormant in the ground." "Well, it does," was the reply. "A great many think that the ashes simply produce conditions in the soil
which generate the clover." That would not be simple at all, and if any one could
prove it he would make a sensation in the scientific world." "Now, Len, here's your chance," laughed Burt. "Just imagine what a halo of
glory you would get by setting the scientific world agape with wonder!" "I could make the scientific world gape in a much easier way," Leonard
replied, dryly. "Well, Amy, if you are as fond of honey as I am, you will
think a swarm of bees a very nice present. Fancy buckwheat cakes eaten with
honey made from buckwheat blossoms! There's a conjunction that gives to
winter an unflagging charm. If the old Hebrews felt as I do, a land flowing
with milk and honey must have been very alluring. Such a land the valley of
the Hudson certainly is. It's one of the finest grass regions of the world,
and grass means milk; and the extensive raspberry fields along its banks
mean honey. White clover is all very well, but I've noticed that when the
raspberry-bushes are in bloom they are alive with bees. I believe even the
locust-trees would be deserted for these insignificant little blossoms
that, like many plain people, are well worth close acquaintance." "The linden-tree, which also blooms this month," added Webb, "furnishes the
richest harvest for the honeybees, and I don't believe they would leave its
blossoms for any others. I wish there were more lindens in this region, for
they are as ornamental as they are useful. I've read that they are largely
cultivated in Russia for the sake of the bees. The honey made from the
linden or bass-wood blossoms is said to be crystal in its transparency, and
unsurpassed in delicacy of flavor." Clifford, "I shall look after the apiary to-day. That's
good lazy work for an old man. You can help me watch at a safe distance,
Amy, and protected, as I said, if they swarm. It wouldn't be well for you
to go too near the hives at first, you know," he added, in laughing
gallantry, "for they might mistake you for a flower. They are so well
acquainted with me that I raise neither expectations nor fears. You needn't
come out before ten o'clock, for they don't swarm until toward midday." With shy steps, and well protected, Amy approached the apiary, near which
the old gentleman was sitting in placid fearlessness under the shade of a
maple, the honey of whose spring blossoms was already in the hive. For a
time she kept at a most respectful distance, but, as the bees did not
notice her, she at last drew nearer, and removed her veil, and with the aid
of her glass saw the indefatigable workers coming in and going out with
such celerity that they seemed to be assuring each other that there were
tons of honey now to be had for the gathering. The bees grew into large
insects under her powerful lenses, and their forms and movements were very
distinct. Suddenly from the entrance of one hive near Mr. Clifford, which
she happened to be covering with her glass, she saw pouring out a perfect
torrent of bees. She started back in affright, but Mr. Clifford told her to
stand still, and she noted that he quietly kept his seat, while following
through his gold-rimmed spectacles the swirling, swaying stream that rushed
into the upper air. The combined hum smote the ear with its intensity. Each
bee was describing circles with almost the swiftness of light, and there
were such numbers that they formed a nebulous living mass. Involuntarily
she crouched down in the grass. In a few moments, however, she saw the
swarm draw together and cluster like a great black ball on a bough of a
small pear-tree. The queen had alighted, and all her subjects gathered
around her. "Ah," chuckled the old gentleman, rising quietly, "they couldn't have been
more sensible if they had been human--not half so sensible in that case,
perhaps. I think you will have your swarm now without doubt. That's the
beauty of these Italian bees when they are kept pure: they are so quiet and
sensible. Come away now, until I return prepared to hive them." The young girl obeyed with alacrity, and was almost trembling with
excitement, to which fear as well as the novelty of the scene contributed
not a little. Clifford soon returned, well protected and prepared for
his work. Taking an empty hive, he placed it on the ground in a secluded
spot, and laid before its entrances a broad, smooth board. Then he mounted
a step-ladder, holding in his left hand a large tin pan, and gently brushed
the bees into it as if they had been inanimate things. A sheet had first
been spread beneath the pear-tree to catch those that did not fall into the
pan. Touched thus gently and carefully, the immense vitality of the swarm
remained dormant; but a rough, sudden movement would have transformed it
instantly into a vengeful cloud of insects, each animated by the one
impulse to use its stiletto. Corning down from the ladder he turned the pan
toward Amy, and with her glass she saw that it was nearly half full of a
crawling, seething mass that fairly made her shudder. But much experience
rendered the old gentleman confident, and he only smiled as he carried the
pan of bees to the empty hive, and poured them out on the board before it. The sheet was next gathered up and placed near the hive also, and then the
old gentleman backed slowly and quietly away until he had joined Amy, to
whom he said, "My part of the work is now done, and I think we shall soon
see them enter the hive." He was right, for within twenty minutes every bee
had disappeared within the new domicile. "To-night I will place the hive on
the platform with the others, and to-morrow your bees will be at work for
you, Amy. I don't wonder you are so interested, for of all insects I think
bees take the palm. It is possible that the swarm will not fancy their new
quarters, and will come out again, but it is not probable. Screened by this
bush, you can watch in perfect safety;" and he left her well content, with
her glass fixed on the apiary. Having satisfied herself for the time with observing the workers coming and
going, she went around to the white clover-field to see the process of
gathering the honey. She had long since learned that bees while at work are
harmless, unless so cornered that they sting in self-defence. Sitting on a
rock at the edge of the clover-field, she listened to the drowsy monotone
of innumerable wings. Then she bent her glass on a clover head, and it grew
at once into a collection of little white tubes or jars in which from
earth, air, and dew nature distilled the nectar that the bees were
gathering. The intent workers stood on their heads and emptied these
fragrant honey-jars with marvellous quickness. They knew when they were
loaded, and in straight lines as geometrically true as the hexagon cells in
which the honey would be stored they darted to their hives. When the day
grew warm she returned to the house and read, with a wonder and delight
which no fairy tale had ever produced, John Burroughs's paper, "The
Pastoral Bees," which Webb had found for her before going to his work. To
her childish credulity fairy lore had been more interesting than wonderful,
but the instincts and habits of these children of nature touched on
mysteries that can never be solved. At dinner the experiences of the apiary were discussed, and Leonard asked,
"Do you think the old-fashioned custom of beating tin pans and blowing
horns influences a swarm to alight? The custom is still maintained by some
people in the vicinity." "It is no longer practiced by scientific
bee-keepers, and yet it is founded on the principle that anything which
disconcerts the bees may change their plans. It is said that water or dry
earth thrown into a whirling swarm will sometimes cause it to alight or
return to the hive." "Your speaking of blowing horns," said Mr. Clifford, laughing, "recalls a
hiving experience that occurred seventy years ago. I was a boy then, but
was so punctured with stings on a June day like this that a vivid
impression was made on my memory. A
neighbor, a quaint old man who lived very near, had gained the reputation
of an expert at this business. I can see him now, with his high stove-pipe
hat, and his gnarled, wrinkled visage, which he shrouded in a green veil
when hiving a swarm. He was a good-hearted old fellow, but very rough in
his talk. He had been to sea in early life, and profanity had become the
characteristic of his vernacular. Well, word came one morning that the bees
were swarming, and a minute later I aroused the old man, who was smoking
and dozing on his porch. I don't believe you ever ran faster, Alf, than I
did then. Hiving bees was the old fellow's hobby and pride, and he dived
into his cottage, smashing his clay pipe on the way, with the haste of an
attacked soldier seizing his weapons. In a moment he was out with all his
paraphernalia. To me was given a fish-horn of portentous size and sound. The'skips,' which were the old fashioned straw hives that the bears so
often emptied for our forefathers, stood in a large door-yard, over which
the swarm was circling. As we arrived on the scene the women were coming
from the house with tin pans, and nearly all the family were out-of-doors. It so happened that an old white horse was grazing in the yard, and at this
critical moment was near the end of the bench on which stood the hives. Coming up behind him, I thoughtlessly let off a terrific blast from my
horn, at which he, terrified, kicked viciously. Over went a straw skip, and
in a moment we had another swarm of bees on hand that we had not bargained
for. Dropping my horn, I covered my face with my arm, and ran for life to
the house, but I must have been stung twenty times before I escaped. The
bees seemed everywhere, and as mad as hornets. Although half wild with
pain, I had to laugh as I saw the old man frantically trying to adjust his
veil, meanwhile almost dancing in his anguish. In half a minute he
succumbed, and tore into a wood-shed. Everybody went to cover instantly
except the white horse, and he had nowhere to go, but galloped around the
yard as if possessed. This only made matters worse, for innocent as he was,
the bees justly regarded him as the cause of all the trouble. At last, in
his uncontrollable agony, he floundered over a stone wall, and disappeared. For an hour or two it was almost as much as one's life was worth to venture
out. The old man, shrouded and mittened, at last crept off homeward to
nurse his wounds and his wrath, and he made the air fairly sulphurous
around him with his oaths. But that kind of sulphuric treatment did not
affect the bees, for I observed from a window that at one point nearest the
skips he began to run, and he kept up a lively pace until within his door. What became of the swarm we expected to hive I do not know. That night we destroyed the irate swarm whose skip had
been kicked over, and peace was restored." "If you had told that story at the breakfast-table," said Amy, as soon as
the laugh caused by the old gentleman's account had subsided, "you could
never have induced me to be present this morning, even at such a respectful
distance." "An old man who lives not far from us has wonderful success with bees,"
Leonard remarked. "He has over fifty hives in a space not more than twenty
feet square, and I do not think there is a tenth of an acre in his whole
lot, which is in the centre of a village. To this bare little plot his bees
bring honey from every side, so that for his purpose he practically owns
this entire region. He potters around them so much that, as far as he is
concerned, they are as docile as barn-door fowls, and he says he minds a
sting no more than a mosquito bite. There are half a dozen small trees and
bushes in his little yard, and his bees are so accommodating that they
rarely swarm elsewhere than on these low trees within a lew feet of the
skips. He also places mullein stalks on a pole, and the swarms often
cluster on them. He told me that on one day last summer he had ten swarms
to look after, and that he hived them all; and he says that his wife is as
good at the work as he is. On a pole which forms the corner of a little
poultry-coop he keeps the record of the swarms of each season, and for last
summer there are sixty-one notches. A year ago this month four swarms went
into a barrel that stood in a corner of his yard, and he left them there. By fall they had filled the barrel with honey, and then, in his vernacular,
he 'tuck it up'; that is, he killed the bees, and removed all the honey." "That is the regular bee-phrase in this region. If a hive is to be emptied
and the bees destroyed, or a bee tree to be cut down, the act is described
as 'taking up' the hive or tree," Burt explained. "By the way, Amy," he
added, "we must give you a little bee-hunting experience in the mountains
next October. We can leave you with a
guard at some high point, when we strike a bee-line, and we might not be
long in finding the tree." "We'll put the expedition right down on the fall programme," she said,
smilingly. Clifford, she continued: "You spoke in
praise of Italian bees. "Really only two distinct kinds--our native brownish-black bees, and the
Italians imported by Mr. S. B. Parsons and others about fifteen years ago. There is a cross or hybrid between these two kinds that are said to be so
ill-natured that it is unsafe to go anywhere near their hives." "Burt," said Webb, "you must remember reading in Virgil of the 'golden
bees.'" "Yes, indistinctly; but none of them ever got in my bonnet or made much
impression. I don't like bees, nor do they like me. They respect only the
deliberation of profound gravity and wisdom. Father has these qualities by
the right of years, and Webb by nature, and their very presence soothes the
irascible insects; but when I go among them they fairly bristle with
stings. Give me a horse, and the more spirited the better." "Oh, no, Burt; can't give you any," said Leonard, with his humorous
twinkle. "I'll sell you one, though, cheap." "Yes, that vicious, uncouth brute that you bought because so cheap. I told
you that you were'sold' at the same time with the horse." "I admit it," was the rueful reply. "If he ever balks again as he did
to-day, I shall be tempted to shoot him." said Amy, a little petulantly, "I'd rather hear about Italian
bees than balky horses. Has my swarm of bees any connection with those that
Virgil wrote about, Webb?" "They may be direct descendants," he replied. "Then call them May-bees," laughed Burt. "The kind of bees that Virgil wrote about were undoubtedly their
ancestors," resumed Webb, smiling at Burt's sally, "for bees seem to change
but little, if any, in their traits and habits. Centuries of domestication
do not make them domestic, and your swarm, if not hived, would have gone to
the mountains and lived in a hollow tree. I have a book that will give you
the history and characteristics of the Italians, if you would like to read
about them." My mind is on bees now, and I intend to follow them up
until I get stung probably. Well, I've enjoyed more honey this morning,
although I've not tasted any, than in all my life. You see how useful I
make the opera-glass, Webb. With it I can even gather honey that does not
cloy." CHAPTER XXXII

BURT BECOMES RATIONAL


Burt had expended more on his present for Amy than had any of the family,
and, while it had been acknowledged most cordially, he was a little
disappointed that his choice had not been so happy as Webb's. Therefore
after dinner he said: "I feel almost envious. I wish I could give you a
great deal of pleasure also to-day. How would you like to go in a row-boat
to Constitution Island, and make that visit to Miss Warner of which we
spoke last winter? It's warm, but not sultry, and we would keep in the
shadow of the mountains most of the way down." "Don't be afraid, Amy," he said, in a low tone. "I'll go with you," she assented, cordially, "and I cannot think of
anything that would make my birthday more complete." "I'll be ready in an hour," he said, flushing with pleasure, and he went up
to his room two steps at a time. Burt's mental processes during the past few weeks had been characteristic,
and would have amused Amy had she been fully aware of them. As Webb
surmised, his fever had to run its course, but after its crisis had passed
he rapidly grew rational. Moreover, in his mother, and indeed in Amy
herself, he had the best of physicians. At first he was very penitent, and
not a little chagrined at his course. As days went by, however, and it was
not referred to by word or sign on the part of the family, his nervous
apprehension passed away. He thought he detected a peculiar twinkle in
Leonard's eyes occasionally, but it might have resulted from other causes. Still Amy did the most to reassure him both consciously and unconsciously. As she said, she took him at his word, and being unembarrassed by any
feeling of her own, found it easy to act like a sister toward him. This
naturally put him at his ease. In her floral expeditions with Johnnie,
however, and her bird-nestings with Alf, wherein no birds were robbed, she
unconsciously did more to reconcile him to the necessity of waiting than
could hours of argument from even his mother. She thus proved to him that
he had spoken much too soon--that she was not ready for his ill-chosen,
passionate words, which had wounded instead of firing her heart as he
intended they should. He now berated his stupidity, but consoled himself
with the thought that love is always a little blind. He saw that she liked
Webb exceedingly, and enjoyed talking with him, but he now was no longer
disposed to be jealous. She ever seemed to be asking questions like an
intelligent child. "He is one of
the best fellows in the world, and she has found out that he's a walking
encyclopedia of out-door lore." Burt was not one to be depressed or to remain in the valley of humiliation
very long. After a week or two a slight feeling of superiority began to
assert itself. Amy was not only too young to understand him, but also,
perhaps, to appreciate him. He believed that he knew more than one pretty
girl to whom he would not have spoken in vain. Some day the scales would
fall from Amy's eyes. He could well afford to wait until they did, and he
threw back his handsome head at the thought, and an exultant flash came
into his blue eyes. Oh, he would be faithful, he would be magnanimous, and
he also admitted to himself that he would be very glad and grateful; but he
would be very patient, perhaps a little too much so to suit her. Since he
had been told to "wait," he would wait until her awakening heart
constrained her to give unequivocal signs of readiness to surrender. Thus his thoughts ran on while he was busy about the farm, or galloping
over the country on business or pleasure. After the corn-planting and the
rush of work in May was over, he had given himself a week's outing among
the trout streams of Ulster County, and had returned with his equanimity
quite restored. To assure Amy of this, and that she had nothing more to
fear, but everything to gain, was one of his motives in asking her to take
the long sail that afternoon. He succeeded so well that a smile of very
genuine satisfaction hovered about her lips more than once. She was grateful for the kind reception given her
by the authors who had done much to sweeten and purify the world's thought. She was charmed with the superb scenery as on their return they glided
along in the shadows of Cro' Nest, whose sides seemed lined with a choir of
wood and veery thrushes and other wild songsters. At last they evoked the
spirit of music in her. She took an oar with Burt, and they pulled, sang,
and laughed together like careless, happy children. Yet more than once she
shyly glanced at him, and queried, Could his flushed and mirthful face be
that of the passionate lover and blighted youth of scarce a month since? Burt said something droll, and her laugh raised a musical echo against the
steep rocks near. His wit was not its cause, but her own thought: "My plea
was that I was too young; he's very young, too." As they neared the point of Storm King the evening boat, the "Mary Powell,"
swept toward them with scarcely more apparent effort than that of a swan. A
few moments later their skiff was dancing over the swells, Amy waving her
handkerchief, and the good-natured pilot awakening a hundred echoes by his
steam-whistle of responsive courtesy. They were at home in time for supper, and here another delicious surprise
awaited Amy. Johnnie and Alf felt that they should do something in honor of
the day. From a sunny hillside they had gleaned a gill of wild
strawberries, and Webb had found that the heat of the day had so far
developed half a dozen Jacqueminot rosebuds that they were ready for
gathering. These with their fragrance and beauty were beside her plate in
dainty arrangement. They seemed to give the complete and final touch to the
day already replete with joy and kindness, and happy, grateful tears rushed
into the young girl's eyes. Dashing them brusquely away, she said: "I can't
tell you all what I feel, and I won't try. I want you to know, however,"
she added, smilingly, while her lips quivered, "that I am very much at
home." Burt was in exuberant spirits, for Amy had told him that she had enjoyed
every moment of the afternoon. This had been most evident, and the young
fellow congratulated himself. He could keep his word, he could be so jolly
a companion as to leave nothing to be desired, and waiting, after all,
would not be a martyrdom. His mood unloosed his tongue and made him
eloquent as he described his experiences in trout-fishing. His words were
so simple and vivid that he made his listeners hear the cool splash and see
the foam of the mountain brooks. They saw the shimmer of the speckled
beauties as they leaped for the fly, and felt the tingle of the rod as the
line suddenly tightened, and hear the hum of the reel as the fish darted
away in imagined safety. Burt saw his vantage--was not Amy listening with
intent eyes and glowing cheeks?--and he kept the little group in suspense
almost as long as it had taken him to play, land, and kill a three-pound
trout, the chief trophy of his excursion. Webb was unusually silent, and was conscious of a depression for which he
could not account. All was turning out better than he had predicted. The
relations between Burt and Amy were not only "serene," but were apparently
becoming decidedly blissful. The young girl was enthusiastic over her
enjoyment of the afternoon; there were no more delicately veiled defensive
tactics against Burt, and now her face was full of frank admiration of his
skill as an angler and of interest in the wild scenes described. Burt had
spent more time in society than over his books while at college, and was a
fluent, easy talker. Webb felt that he suffered in contrast, that he was
grave, heavy, dull, and old--no fit companion for the girl whose laughing
eyes so often rested on his brother's face and responded to his mirth. Perhaps Burt would not have long to wait; perhaps his rash, passionate
words had already given to Amy's girlish unconsciousness the shock that had
destroyed it, and she was learning that she was a woman who could return
love for love. Well, granting this, was it not just what they were all
expecting? "But the change is coming too soon," he complained to himself. "I wish she could keep her gentle, lovable, yet unapproachable May-day
grace a little longer. Then she was like the wind-flower, which the eyes
can linger upon, but which fades almost the moment it is grasped. It made
her so different from other girls of her age. It identified her with the
elusive spirit of nature, whose beauty entrances one, but search and wander
where we will, nothing can be found that is distinctly and tangibly ours or
any one's. Amy, belonging definitely to any one, would lose half her
charm." Webb saw and heard all that passed, but in a minor key thoughts like these
were forming themselves with little volition on his part, and were symptoms
which as yet he did not understand. In an interval of mirth, Johnnie heard
footsteps on the piazza, and darting out, caught a glimpse of Mr. He had come on some errand, and, seeing the group at the
supper-table, had yielded to the impulse to depart unrecognized. This the
little girl would by no means permit. Since Easter an odd friendship had
sprung up between her and the lonely man, and she had become almost his
sole visitor. She now called after him, and in a moment was at his side. "You must not go till I show you my
garden." Maggie joined them, for he deeply enlisted her sympathy, and she wished to
make it clear by her manner that the tie between him and the child had her
approval. Alvord," she said, "you must let Johnnie show
you her garden, and especially her <DW29>s." "Heart's-ease is another name for the flower, I believe," he replied, with
the glimmer of a smile. "In that case Johnnie should be called <DW29>. Clifford, that you are willing to trust your child to a
stranger. We had a lovely ramble the other day, and she said that you told
her she might go with me." "I'm only too glad that you find Johnnie an agreeable little neighbor,"
Maggie began. "Indeed, we all feel so neighborly that we hope you will soon
cease to think of yourself as a stranger." But here impatient Johnnie
dragged him off to see her garden, and his close and appreciative attention
to all she said and showed to him won the child's heart anew. Amy soon
joined them, and said:

"Mr. Alvord, I wish your congratulations, also. He turned, and looked at her so wistfully for a moment that her eyes fell. "I do congratulate you," he said, in a low, deep voice. "If I had my choice
between all the world and your age, I'd rather be eighteen again. May your
brow always be as serene as it is to-night, Miss Amy." His eyes passed
swiftly from the elder to the younger girl, the one almost as young at
heart and fully as innocent as the other, and then he spoke abruptly:
"Good-by, Johnnie. I wish to see your father a moment on some business;"
and he walked rapidly away. By the time they reached the house he had gone. Amy felt that with the night a darker shadow had fallen upon her happy day. The deep sadness of a wounded spirit touched her own, she scarcely knew
why. It was but the law of her unwarped, unselfish nature. Even as a happy
girl she could not pass by uncaring, on the other side. She felt that she
would like to talk with Webb, as she always did when anything troubled her;
but he, touched with something of Burt's old restlessness, had rambled away
in the moonlight, notwithstanding the fatigues of the day. Therefore she
went to the piano and sang for the old people some of the quaint songs of
which she knew they were fond. Burt sat smoking and listening on the piazza
in immeasurable content. CHAPTER XXXIII

WEBB'S ROSES AND ROMANCE


To Mrs. Clifford the month of June brought the halcyon days of the year. The warm sunshine revived her, the sub-acid of the strawberry seemed to
furnish the very tonic she needed, and the beauty that abounded on every
side, and that was daily brought to her couch, conferred a happiness that
few could understand. Long years of weakness, in which only her mind could
be active, had developed in the invalid a refinement scarcely possible to
those who must daily meet the practical questions of life, and whose more
robust natures could enjoy the material side of existence. It was not
strange, therefore, that country life had matured her native love of
flowers into almost a passion, which culminated in her intense enjoyment of
the rose in all its varieties. The family, aware of this marked preference,
rarely left her without these flowers at any season; but in June her eyes
feasted on their varied forms and colors, and she distinguished between her
favorites with all the zest and accuracy which a connoisseur of wines ever
brought to bear upon their delicate bouquet. With eyes shut she could name
from its perfume almost any rose with which she was familiar. Therefore, in
all the flower-beds and borders roses abounded, especially the
old-fashioned kinds, which are again finding a place in florists'
catalogues. Originally led by love for his mother, Webb, years since, had
begun to give attention to the queen of flowers. He soon found, however,
that the words of an English writer are true, "He who would have beautiful
roses in his garden must have them first in his heart," and there, with
queenly power, they soon enthroned themselves. In one corner of the garden,
which was protected on the north and west by a high stone wall, where the
soil was warm, loamy, and well drained, he made a little rose garden. He
bought treatises on the flower, and when he heard of or saw a variety that
was particularly fine he added it to his collection. "Webb is marked with
my love of roses," his mother often said, with her low, pleased laugh. Amy
had observed that even in busiest times he often visited his rose garden as
if it contained pets that were never forgotten. He once laughingly remarked
that he "gave receptions there only by special invitation," and so she had
never seen the spot except from a distance. On the third morning after her birthday Amy came down very early. The bird
symphony had penetrated her open windows with such a jubilant resonance
that she had been awakened almost with the dawn. The air was so cool and
exhilarating, and there was such a wealth of dewy beauty on every side,
that she yielded to the impulse to go out and enjoy the most delightful
hour of the day. To her surprise, she saw Webb going down the path leading
to the garden. "What's on your conscience," she cried, "that you can't
sleep?" "The shame of leaving so many mornings like this unseen and not enjoyed. I
mean to repent and mend my ways from this time forth; that is, if I wake
up. "Well, I did not know," she said, joining him, "but that you were going to
visit that _sanctum sanctorum_ of yours." Your virtue of early rising is about to be rewarded. You know when
some great personage is to be specially honored, he is given the freedom of
a city or library, etc. I shall now give you the freedom of my rose garden
for the rest of the summer, and from this time till frost you can always
find roses for your belt. I meant to do this on your birthday, but the buds
were not sufficiently forward this backward season." Oh, Webb, what miracles have you been working here?" she
exclaimed, as she passed through some screening shrubbery, and looked upon
a plot given up wholly to roses, many of which were open, more in the phase
of exquisite buds, while the majority were still closely wrapped in their
green calyxes. At the same time,
let me assure you that this small place is like a picture-gallery, and that
there is a chance here for as nice discrimination as there would be in a
cabinet full of works of art. There are few duplicate roses in this place,
and I have been years in selecting and winnowing this collection. They are
all named varieties, labelled in my mind. I love them too well, and am too
familiar with them, to hang disfiguring bits of wood upon them. Each one has been chosen and kept because of
some individual point of excellence, and you can gradually learn to
recognize these characteristics just as mother does. This plot here is
filled with hardy hybrid perpetuals, and that with tender tea-roses,
requiring very different treatment. Here is a moss that will bloom again in
the autumn. It has a sounding name--_Soupert-et-notting_--but it is
worthy of any name. Though not so mossy as some others, look at its fine
form and beautiful rose-color. Only one or two are out yet, but in a week
this bush will be a thing of beauty that one would certainly wish might
last forever. Nothing surpasses it unless it is _La
France_, over there." She inhaled the exquisite perfume in long breaths, and then looked around
at the budding beauty on every side, even to the stone walls that were
covered with climbing varieties. At last she turned to him with eyes that
were dilated as much with wonder as with pleasure, and said: "Well, this
_is_ a surprise. How in the world have you found time to bring all this
about? I never saw anything to equal it even in England. Of course I saw
rose gardens there on a larger scale in the parks and greenhouses, but I
have reference to the bushes and flowers. Why, Amy, an old gentleman who lives but a few
miles away has had seventy distinct kinds of hybrid perpetuals in bloom at
one time, and many of them the finest in existence; and yet he has but a
little mite of a garden, and has been a poor, hard-working man all his
life. Speaking of England, when I read of what the poor working people of
Nottingham accomplished in their little bits of glass-houses and their
Liliputian gardens, I know that all this is very ordinary, and within the
reach of almost any one who loves the flower. After one learns how to grow
roses, they do not cost much more care and trouble than a crop of onions or
cabbages. The soil and location here just suit the rose. You see that the
place is sheltered, and yet there are no trees near to shade them and drain
the ground of its richness." "Oh, you are sure to make it all seem simple and natural. It's a way you
have," she said, "But to me it's a miracle. I don't believe there are many
who have your feeling for this flower or your skill." The love for roses is very common, as it should
be, for millions of plants are sold annually, and the trade in them is
steadily increasing. Come, let me give you a lesson in the distinguishing
marks of the different kinds. A rose will smell as sweet by its own name as
by another, and you will find no scentless flowers here. There are some
fine odorless ones, like the Beauty of Stapleford, but I give them no
place." The moments flew by unheeded until an hour had passed, and then Webb,
looking at the sun, exclaimed: "I must go. This will answer for the first
lesson. You can bring mother here now in her garden chair whenever she
wishes to come, and I will give you other lessons, until you are a true
connoisseur in roses;" and he looked at those in her cheeks as if they were
more lovely than any to which he had been devoted for years. "Well, Webb," she said, laughing, "I cannot think of anything lacking in my
morning's experience. I was wakened by the song of birds. You have revealed
to me the mystery of your sanctum, and that alone, you know, would be
happiness to the feminine soul. You have also introduced me to dozens of
your sweethearts, for you look at each rose as Burt does at the pretty
girls he meets. You have shown me your budding rose garden in the dewy
morning, and that was appropriate, too. Every one of your pets was gemmed
and jewelled for the occasion, and unrivalled musicians, cleverly concealed
in the trees near, have filled every moment with melody. Why should we not have them for
breakfast, also?" "Why not, indeed, since it would seem that there are to be thousands here
and elsewhere in the garden? Fresh roses and strawberries for
breakfast--that's country life to perfection. He went away as if in a dream, and his heart almost ached with a tension of
feeling that he could not define. It seemed to him the culmination of all
that he had loved and enjoyed. His rose garden had been complete at this
season the year before, but now that Amy had entered it, the roses that she
had touched, admired, and kissed with lips that vied with their petals grew
tenfold more beautiful, and the spot seemed sacred to her alone. He could
never enter it again without thinking of her and seeing her lithe form
bending to favorites which hitherto he had only associated with his mother. His life seemed so full and his happiness so deep that he did not want to
think, and would not analyze according to his habit. He brought the strawberries to Amy in the breakfast-room, and stood near
while she and Johnnie hulled them. He saw the roses arranged by his
mother's plate in such nice harmony that one color did not destroy another. He replied to her mirthful words and rallyings, scarcely knowing what he
said, so deep was the feeling that oppressed him, so strong was his love
for that sweet sister who had come into his life and made it ideally
perfect. She appreciated what he had loved so fully, her very presence had
ever kindled his spirit, and while eager to learn and easily taught, how
truly she was teaching him a philosophy of life that seemed divine! The day passed in a confused maze of thought and
happiness, so strange and absorbing that he dared not speak lest he should
waken as from a dream. The girl had grown so beautiful to him that he
scarcely wished to look at her, and hastened through his meals that he
might be alone with his thoughts. The sun had sunk, and the moon was well
over the eastern mountains, before he visited the rose garden. Amy was
there, and she greeted him with a pretty petulance because he had not come
before. Then, in sudden compunction, she asked:

"Don't you feel well, Webb? You have been so quiet since we were here this
morning! Perhaps you are sorry you let me into this charmed seclusion." "No, Amy, I am not," he said, with an impetuosity very unusual in him. "You
should know me better than even to imagine such a thing." Before he could say anything more, Burt's mellow voice rang out, "Amy!" "Oh, I half forgot; I promised to take a drive with Burt this evening. Forgive me, Webb," she added, gently, "I only spoke in sport. I do know you
too well to imagine I am unwelcome here. No one ever had a kinder or more
patient brother than you have been to me;" and she clasped her hands upon
his arm, and looked up into his face with frank affection. His arm trembled under her touch, and he felt that he must be alone. In his
usual quiet tones, however, he was able to say: "You, rather, must forgive
me that I spoke so hastily. No; I'm not ill, but very tired. A good night's
rest will bring me around. "Webb, you work too hard," she said, earnestly. "But Burt is calling--"

"Yes; do not keep him waiting; and think of me," he added, laughing, "as
too weary for moonlight, roses, or anything but prosaic sleep. June is all
very well, but it brings a pile of work to a fellow like me." "Oh, Webb, what a clodhopper you're trying to make yourself out to be! Well, 'Sleep, sleep'--I can't think of the rest of the quotation. rang out her clear voice; and, with a smiling glance
backward, she hastened away. From the shrubbery he watched her pass up the wide garden path, the
moonlight giving an ethereal beauty to her slight form with its white,
close drapery. Then, deeply troubled, he threw himself on a rustic seat
near the wall, and buried his face in his hands. It was all growing too
clear to him now, and he found himself face to face with the conviction
that Amy was no longer his sister, but the woman he loved. The deep-hidden
current of feeling that had been gathering volume for months at last
flashed out into the light, and there could be no more disguise. The
explanation of her power over him was now given to his deepest
consciousness. By some law of his nature, when she spoke he had ever
listened; whatever she said and did had been invested with a nameless
charm. Day after day they had been together, and their lives had harmonized
like two chords that blend in one sweet sound. He had never had a sister,
and his growing interest in Amy had seemed the most natural thing in the
world; that Burt should love her, equally natural--to fall in love was
almost a habit with the mercurial young fellow when thrown into the society
of a pretty girl--and he had felt that he should be only too glad that his
brother had at last fixed his thoughts on one who would not be a stranger
to them. He now remembered that, while all this had been satisfactory to
reason, his heart for a long time had been uttering its low, half-conscious
protest. The events of this long day had revealed him unto
himself, because he was ripe for the knowledge. His nature had its hard, practical business side, but he had never been
content with questions of mere profit and loss. He not only had wanted the
corn, but the secret of the corn's growth and existence. To search into
Nature's hidden life, so that he could see through her outward forms the
mechanism back of all, and trace endless diversity to simple inexorable
laws, had been his pride and the promised solace of his life. His love of
the rose had been to him what it is to many another hard-working man and
woman--recreation, a habit, something for which he had developed the taste
and feeling of a connoisseur. It had had no appreciable influence on the
current of his thoughts. Amy's coming, however, had awakened the poetic
side of his temperament, and, while this had taken nothing from the old, it
had changed everything. Before, his life had been like nature in winter,
when all things are in hard, definite outline. The feeling which she had
inspired brought the transforming flowers and foliage. It was an immense
addition to that which already existed, and which formed the foundation for
it. For a long time he had exulted in this inflorescence of his life, as it
were, and was more than content. He did not know that the spirit gifted
even unconsciously with the power thus to develop his own nature must soon
become to him more than a cause of an effect, more than a sister upon whom
he could look with as tranquil eyes and even pulse in youth as in frosty
age. But now he knew it with the absolute certainty that was characteristic
of his mind when once it grasped a truth. The voice of Burt calling
"Amy," after the experiences of the day, had been like a shaft of light,
instantly revealing everything. For her sake more than his own he had
exerted himself to the utmost to conceal the truth of that moment of bitter
consciousness. He trembled as he thought of his blind, impetuous words and
her look of surprise; he grew cold with dread as he remembered how easily
he might have betrayed himself. what could he do but hide the truth with
sleepless vigilance? In the eyes
of Amy and all the family Burt was her acknowledged suitor, who, having
been brought to reason, was acting most rationally and honorably. Whether
Amy was learning to love him or not made no difference. If she, growing
conscious of her womanhood, was turning her thoughts to Burt as the one who
had first sought her, and who was now cheerfully waiting until the look of
shy choice and appeal came into her eyes, he could not seek to thrust his
younger brother aside. If the illustration of the rose which she had forced
into unnatural bloom was still true of her heart, he would be false to her
and himself, as well as to Burt, should he seek her in the guise of a
lover. He had felt that it was almost sacrilege to disturb her May-like
girlhood; that this child of nature should be left wholly to nature's
impulses and to nature's hour for awakening. "If it only could have been, how rich and full life would be!" "We were in sympathy at almost every point When shall I forget the hour
we spent here this morning! The exquisite purity and beauty of the dawn,
the roses with the dew upon them, seemed emblems of herself. Hereafter
they will ever speak to me of her. That perfume that comes on the breeze
to me now from the wild grapevine--the most delicate and delightful of
all the odors of June--is instantly associated with her in my mind, as
all things lovely in nature ever will be hereafter. How can I hide all
this from her, and seem merely her quiet elder brother? How can I meet
her here to-morrow morning, and in the witchery of summer evenings, and
still speak in measured tones, and look at her as I would at Johnnie? The
thing is impossible until I have gained a stronger self-control. I must
go away for a day or two, and I will. When I return neither Burt nor Amy
shall have cause to complain;" and he strode away. A firm to whom the Cliffords had been
sending part of their produce had not given full satisfaction, and Webb
announced his intention of going to the city in the morning to investigate
matters. His father and Leonard approved of his purpose, and when he added
that he might stay in town for two or three days, that he felt the need of
a little change and rest before haying and harvest began, they all
expressed their approval still more heartily. The night was so beautiful that Burt prolonged his drive. The witchery of
the romantic scenery through which he and Amy passed, and the loveliness of
her profile in the pale light, almost broke down his resolution, and once,
in accents much too tender, he said, "Oh, Amy, I am so happy when with
you!" "I'm happy with you also," she replied, in brusque tones, "now that you
have become so sensible." He took the hint, and said, emphatically: "Don't you ever be apprehensive
or nervous when with me. I'll wait, and be'sensible,' as you express it,
till I'm gray." Her laugh rang out merrily, but she made no other reply. He was a little
nettled, and mentally vowed a constancy that would one day make her regret
that laugh. Webb had retired when Amy returned, and she learned of his plans from
Maggie. "It's just the best thing he can do," she said, earnestly. "Webb's
been overworking, and he needs and deserves a little rest." In the morning he seemed so busy with his preparations that he had scarcely
time to give her more than a genial off-hand greeting. "Oh, Webb, I shall miss you so much!" she said, in parting, and her look
was very kind and wistful. He did not trust himself to speak, but gave her
a humorous and what seemed to her a half-incredulous smile. He puzzled her,
and she thought about him and his manner of the previous day and evening
not a little. With her sensitive nature, she could not approach so near the
mystery that he was striving to conceal without being vaguely impressed
that there was something unusual about him. The following day, however,
brought a cheerful, business-like letter to his father, which was read at
the dinner-table. He had straightened out matters in town and seemed to be
enjoying himself. She more than once admitted that she did miss him as she
would not any other member of the household. But her out-door life was very
full. By the aid of her glass she made the intimate acquaintance of her
favorite songsters. Clifford in her garden chair to
the rosary, and proposed through her instruction to give Webb a surprise
when he returned. She would prove to him that she could name his pets from
their fragrance, form, and color as well as he himself. CHAPTER XXXIV

A SHAM BATTLE AT WEST POINT


Burt did his best to keep things lively, and a few days after Webb's
departure said: "I've heard that there is to be a sham battle at West Point
this afternoon. The heavy guns from the river batteries had been awakening deep echoes
among the mountains every afternoon for some time past, reminding the
Cliffords that the June examinations were taking place at the Military
Academy, and that there was much of interest occurring near them. Not only
did Amy assent to Burt's proposition, but Leonard also resolved to go and
take Maggie and the children. In the afternoon a steam-yacht bore them and
many other excursionists to their destination, and they were soon skirting
the grassy plain on which the military evolutions were to take place. The scene was full of novelty and interest for Amy. Thousands of people
were there, representing every walk and condition of life. Plain farmers
with their wives and children, awkward country fellows with their
sweethearts, dapper clerks with bleached hands and faces, were passing to
and fro among ladies in Parisian toilets and with the unmistakable air of
the metropolis. There were officers with stars upon their shoulders, and
others, quite as important in their bearing, decorated with the insignia of
a second lieutenant. Plain-looking men were pointed out as senators, and
elegantly dressed men were, at a glance, seen to be nobodies. Scarcely a
type was wanting among those who came to see how the nation's wards were
drilled and prepared to defend the nation's honor and maintain peace at the
point of the bayonet. On the piazzas of the officers' quarters were groups
of favored people whose relations or distinguished claims were such as to
give them this advantage over those who must stand where they could to see
the pageant. The cadets in their gray uniforms were conspicuously absent,
but the band was upon the plain discoursing lively music. From the
inclosure within the barracks came the long roll of a drum, and all eyes
turned thitherward expectantly. Soon from under the arched sally-port two
companies of cadets were seen issuing on the double-quick. They crossed the
plain with the perfect time and precision of a single mechanism, and passed
down into a depression of the ground toward the river. After an interval
the other two companies came out in like manner, and halted on the plain
within a few hundred yards of this depression, their bayonets scintillating
in the unclouded afternoon sun. Both parties were accompanied by mounted
cadet officers. The body on the plain threw out pickets, stacked arms, and
lounged at their ease. Suddenly a shot was fired to the eastward, then
another, and in that direction the pickets were seen running in. With
marvellous celerity the loungers on the plain seized their muskets, formed
ranks, and faced toward the point from which the attack was threatened. A
skirmish line was thrown out, and this soon met a similar line advancing
from the depression, sloping eastward. Behind the skirmishers came a
compact line of battle, and it advanced steadily until within fair musket
range, when the firing became general. While the attacking party appeared
to fight resolutely, it was soon observed that they made no further effort
to advance, but sought only to occupy the attention of the party to which
they were opposed. The Cliffords stood on the northwestern edge of the plain near the statue
of General Sedgwick, and from this point they could also see what was
occurring in the depression toward the river. "Turn, Amy, quick, and see
what's coming," cried Burt. Stealing up the hillside in solid column was
another body of cadets. A moment later they passed near on the
double-quick, went into battle formation on the run, and with loud shouts
charged the flank and rear of the cadets on the plain, who from the first
had sustained the attack. These seemed thrown into confusion, for they were
now between two fires. After a moment of apparent indecision they gave way
rapidly in seeming defeat and rout, and the two attacking parties drew
together in pursuit. When they had united, the pursued, who a moment before
had seemed a crowd of fugitives, became almost instantly a steady line of
battle. rang out, and, with fixed bayonets, they
rushed upon their assailants, and steadily drove them back over the plain,
and down into their original position. It was all carried out with a far
degree of life-like reality. The "sing" of minie bullets was wanting, but
abundance of noise and sulphurous smoke can be made with blank cartridges;
and as the party attacked plucked victory from seeming defeat, the people's
acclamations were loud and long. At this point the horse of one of the cadet officers became unmanageable. They had all observed this rider during the battle, admiring the manner in
which he restrained the vicious brute, but at last the animal's excitement
or fear became so great that he rushed toward the crowded sidewalk and road
in front of the officers' quarters. Burt had scarcely time to do more than encircle Amy with his arm and sweep
her out of the path of the terrified beast. The cadet made heroic efforts,
until it was evident that the horse would dash into the iron fence beyond
the road, and then the young fellow was off and on his feet with the
agility of a cat, but he still maintained his hold upon the bridle. A
second later there was a heavy thud heard above the screams of women and
children and the shouts of those vociferating advice. The horse fell
heavily in his recoil from the fence, and in a moment or two was led
limping and crestfallen away, while the cadet quietly returned to his
comrades on the plain. Johnnie and little Ned were crying from fright, and
both Amy and Maggie were pale and nervous; therefore Leonard led the way
out of the crowd. From a more distant point they saw the party beneath the
hill rally for a final and united charge, which this time proved
successful, and the companies on the plain, after a stubborn resistance,
were driven back to the barracks, and through the sally-port, followed by
their opponents. The clouds of smoke rolled away, the band struck up a
lively air, and the lines of people broke up into groups and streamed in
all directions. Leonard decided that it would be best for them to return by
the evening boat, and not wait for parade, since the little yacht would
certainly be overcrowded at a later hour. CHAPTER XXXV

CHASED BY A THUNDER-SHOWER


The first one on the "Powell" to greet them was Webb, returning from the
city. Amy thought he looked so thin as to appear almost haggard, but he
seemed in the best of spirits, and professed to feel well and rested. She
half imagined that she missed a certain gentleness in his words and manner
toward her, but when he heard how nearly she had been trampled upon, she
was abundantly satisfied by his look of deep affection and solicitude as he
said: "Heaven bless your strong, ready arm, Burt!" "Oh, that it had been
mine!" He masked his feelings so well, however,
that all perplexity passed from her mind. She was eager to visit the rose
garden with him, and when there he praised her quickly acquired skill so
sincerely that her face flushed with pleasure. No one seemed to enjoy the
late but ample supper more than he, or to make greater havoc in the
well-heaped dish of strawberries. "I tasted none like these in New York,"
he said. "After all, give me the old-fashioned kind. We've tried many
varieties, but the Triomphe de Gand proves the most satisfactory, if one
will give it the attention it deserves. The fruit ripens early and lasts
till late. It is firm and good even in cool, wet weather, and positively
delicious after a sunny day like this." "I agree with you, Webb," said his mother, smiling. "It's the best of all
the kinds we've had, except, perhaps, the President Wilder, but that
doesn't bear well in our garden." "Well, mother," he replied, with a laugh, "the best is not too good for
you. I have a row of Wilders, however, for your especial benefit, but
they're late, you know." The next morning he went into the haying with as much apparent zest as
Leonard. The growth had been so heavy that
in many places it had "lodged," or fallen, and it had to be cut with
scythes. Later on, the mowing-machine would be used in the timothy fields
and meadows. Amy, from her open window, watched him as he steadily bent to
the work, and she inhaled with pleasure the odors from the bleeding clover,
for it was the custom of the Cliffords to cut their grasses early, while
full of the native juices. Rakes followed the scythes speedily, and the
clover was piled up into compact little heaps, or "cocks," to sweat out its
moisture rather than yield it to the direct rays of the sun. said Amy, at the dinner-table, "my bees won't fare so well, now
that you are cutting down so much of their pasture." "Red clover affords no pasturage for honey-bees," said Webb, laughing. "How
easily he seems to laugh of late!" "They can't reach the honey
in the long, tube-like blossoms. Here the bumble-bees have everything their
way, and get it all except what is sipped by the humming-birds, with their
long beaks, as they feed on the minute insects within the flowers. I've
heard the question, Of what use are bumble-bees?--I like to say _bumble_
best, as I did when a boy. Well, I've been told that red clover cannot be
raised without this insect, which, passing from flower to flower, carries
the fertilizing pollen. In Australia the rats and the field mice were so
abundant that they destroyed these bees, which, as you know, make their
nests on the ground, and so cats had to be imported in order to give the
bumble-bees and red clover a chance for life. There is always trouble in
nature unless an equilibrium is kept up. Much as I dislike cats, I must
admit that they have contributed largely toward the prosperity of an
incipient empire." "When I was a boy," remarked Leonard, "I was cruel enough to catch
bumble-bees and pull them apart for the sake of the sac of honey they
carry." Alf hung his head, and looked very conscious. "Well, I ain't any worse than papa," said the boy. All through the afternoon the musical sound of whetting the scythes with
the rifle rang out from time to time, and in the evening Leonard said, "If
this warm, dry weather holds till to-morrow night, we shall get in our
clover in perfect condition." On the afternoon of the following day the two-horse wagon, surmounted by
the hay-rack, went into the barn again and again with its fragrant burden;
but at last Amy was aroused from her book by a heavy vibration of thunder. Going to a window facing the west, she saw a threatening cloud that every
moment loomed vaster and darker. The great vapory heads, tipped with light,
towered rapidly, until at last the sun passed into a sudden eclipse that
was so deep as to create almost a twilight. As the cloud approached, there
was a low, distant, continuous sound, quite distinct from nearer and
heavier peals, which after brief and briefer intervals followed the
lightning gleams athwart the gloom. She saw that the hay-makers were
gathering the last of the clover, and raking, pitching, and loading with
eager haste, their forms looking almost shadowy in the distance and the dim
light. Their task was nearly completed, and the horses' heads were turned
barnward, when a flash of blinding intensity came, with an instantaneous
crash, that roared away to the eastward with deep reverberations. Amy
shuddered, and covered her face with her hands. When she looked again, the
clover-field and all that it contained seemed annihilated. The air was
thick with dust, straws, twigs, and foliage torn away, and the gust passed
over the house with a howl of fury scarcely less appalling than the
thunder-peal had been. Trembling, and almost faint with fear, sho strained
her eyes toward the point where she had last seen Webb loading the
hay-rack. The murky obscurity lightened up a little, and in a moment or two
she saw him whipping the horses into a gallop. The doors of the barn stood
open, and the rest of the workers had taken a cross-cut toward it, while
Mr. Clifford was on the piazza, shouting for them to hurry. Great drops
splashed against the window-panes, and the heavy, monotonous sound of the
coming torrent seemed to approach like the rush of a locomotive. Webb, with
the last load, is wheeling to the entrance of the barn. A second later, and
the horses' feet resound on the planks of the floor. Then all is hidden,
and the rain pours against the window like a cataract. In swift alternation
of feeling she clapped her hands in applause, and ran down to meet Mr. Clifford, who, with much effort, was shutting the door against the gale. When he turned he rubbed his hands and laughed as he said, "Well, I never
saw Webb chased so sharply by a thunder-shower before; but he won the race,
and the clover's safe." The storm soon thundered away to parts unknown, the setting sun spanning
its retreating murkiness with a magnificent bow; long before the rain
ceased the birds were exulting in jubilant chorus, and the air grew still
and deliciously cool and fragrant. When at last the full moon rose over the
Beacon Mountains there was not a cloud above the horizon, and Nature, in
all her shower-gemmed and June-clad loveliness, was like a radiant beauty
lost in revery. CHAPTER XXXVI

THE RESCUE OF A HOME


Who remembers when his childhood ceased? Who can name the hour when
buoyant, thoughtless, half-reckless youth felt the first sobering touch of
manhood, or recall the day when he passed over the summit of his life, and
faced the long decline of age? As imperceptibly do the seasons blend when
one passes and merges into another. There were traces of summer in May,
lingering evidences of spring far into June, and even in sultry July came
days in which the wind in the groves and the chirp of insects at night
foretold the autumn. The morning that followed the thunder-shower was one of warm, serene
beauty. The artillery of heaven had done no apparent injury. A rock may
have been riven in the mountains, a lonely tree splintered, but homes were
safe, the warm earth was watered, and the air purified. With the dawn Amy's
bees were out at work, gleaning the last sweets from the white clover, that
was on the wane, from the flowers of the garden, field, and forest. The
rose garden yielded no honey: the queen of flowers is visited by no bees. The sweetbrier, or eglantine, belonging to this family is an exception,
however, and if the sweets of these wild roses could be harvested, an Ariel
would not ask for daintier sustenance. White and delicate pink hues characterize the flowers of early spring. In
June the wild blossoms emulate the skies, and blue predominates. In July
and August many of the more sensitive in Flora's train blush crimson under
the direct gaze of the sun. Yellow hues hold their own throughout the year,
from the dandelions that first star the fields to the golden-rod that
flames until quenched by frost and late autumn storms. During the latter part of June the annual roses of the garden were in all
stages and conditions. Beautiful buds could be gleaned among the developing
seed receptacles and matured flowers that were casting their petals on
every breeze. The thrips and the disgusting rose-bug were also making havoc
here and there. But an untiring vigilance watched over the rose garden. Morning, noon, and evening Webb cut away the fading roses, and Amy soon
learned to aid him, for she saw that his mind was bent on maintaining the
roses in this little nook at the highest attainable point of perfection. It
is astonishing how greatly nature can be assisted and directed by a little
skilled labor at the right time. Left to themselves, the superb varieties
in the rose garden would have spent the remainder of the summer and autumn
chiefly in the development of seed-vessels, and in resting after their
first bloom. But the pruning-knife had been too busy among them, and the
thoroughly fertilized soil sent up supplies that must be disposed of. As
soon as the bushes had given what may be termed their first annual bloom
they were cut back halfway to the ground, and dormant buds were thus forced
into immediate growth. Meanwhile the new shoots that in spring had started
from the roots were already loaded with buds, and so, by a little
management and attention, the bloom would be maintained until frosty nights
should bring the sleep of winter. No rose-bug escaped Webb's vigilant
search, and the foliage was so often sprayed by a garden syringe with an
infusion of white hellebore that thrips and slugs met their deserved fate
before they had done any injury. Clifford and Amy was
maintained a supply of these exquisite flowers, which in a measure became a
part of their daily food. On every side was the fulfilment of its innumerable
promises. The bluebird, with the softness of June in his notes, had told
his love amid the snows and gales of March, and now, with unabated
constancy, and with all a father's solicitude, he was caring for his third
nestful of fledglings. Young orioles were essaying flight from their
wind-rocked cradles on the outer boughs of the elms. Phoebe-birds, with
nests beneath bridges over running streams, had, nevertheless, the skill to
land their young on the banks. Nature was like a vast nursery, and from
gardens, lawns, fields, and forest the cries and calls of feathered infancy
were heard all day, and sometimes in the darkness, as owls, hawks, and
other night prowlers added to the fearful sum of the world's tragedies. The
cat-birds, that had built in some shrubbery near the house, had by the last
of June done much to gain Amy's good-will and respect. As their domestic
character and operations could easily be observed, she had visited them
almost daily from the time they had laid the dry-twig and leafy foundation
of their nest until its lining of fine dry grasses was completed. She bad
found that, although inclined to mock and gibe at outsiders, they were
loyal and affectionate to each other. In their home-building, in the
incubation of the deep bluish-green eggs, and in the care of the young, now
almost ready to fly, they had been mutually helpful and considerate,
fearless and even fierce in attacking all who approached too near their
domicile. To Amy and her daily visits they had become quite reconciled,
even as she had grown interested in them, in spite of a certain lack of the
high breeding which characterized the thrushes and other favorites. "My better acquaintance with them," she said one evening to Dr. Marvin,
who, with his wife, had stopped at the Cliffords' in passing, "has taught
me a lesson. I think I'm too much inclined to sweeping censure on the
exhibition of a few disagreeable traits. I've learned that the gossips in
yonder bushes have some excellent qualities, and I suppose you find that
this is true of the gossips among your patients." "Yes," replied the doctor, "but the human gossips draw the more largely on
one's charity; and if you knew how many pestiferous slugs and insects your
neighbors in the shrubbery have already destroyed, the human genus of
gossip would suffer still more in comparison." That Amy had become so interested in these out-door neighbors turned out to
their infinite advantage, for one morning their excited cries of alarm
secured her attention. Hastening to the locality of their nest, she looked
upon a scene that chilled the blood in her own veins. A huge black-snake
suspended his weight along the branches of the shrubbery with entire
confidence and ease, and was in the act of swallowing a fledgling that,
even as Amy looked, sent out its last despairing peep. The parent birds
were frantic with terror, and their anguish and fearless efforts to save
their young redeemed them forever in Amy's eyes. she cried, since, for some reason, he ever came first to her mind
in an emergency. It so happened that he had just come from the hay field to
rest awhile and prepare for dinner. In a moment he was at her side, and
followed with hasty glance her pointing finger. "Come away, Amy," he said, as he looked at her pale face and dilated eyes. "I do not wish you to witness a scene like that;" and almost by force he
drew her to the piazza. In a moment he was out with a breech-loading gun,
and as the smoke of the discharge lifted, she saw a writhing, sinuous form
fall heavily to the earth. After a brief inspection Webb came toward her in
smiling assurance, saying: "The wretch got only one of the little family. You have saved a home
from utter desolation. That, surely, will be a pleasant thing to remember." "What could I have done if you had not come?" "I don't like to think of what you might have done--emulated the
mother-bird, perhaps, and flown at the enemy." "I did not know you were near when I called your name," she said. "It was
entirely instinctive on my part; and I believe," she added, musingly,
looking with a child's directness into his eyes, "that one's instincts are
usually right; don't you?" He turned away to hide the feeling of intense pleasure caused by her words,
but only said, in a low voice, "I hope I may never fail you, Amy, when you
turn to me for help." Then he added, quickly, as if hastening away from
delicate ground: "While those large black-snakes are not poisonous, they
are ugly customers sometimes. I have read of an instance in which a boy put
his hand into the hole of a tree where there had been a bluebird's nest,
and touched the cold scales of one of these snakes. The boy took to his
heels, with the snake after him, and it is hard to say what would have
happened had not a man plowing near come to the rescue with a heavy
ox-whip. What I should fear most in your case would be a nervous shock had
the snake even approached you, for you looked as if you had inherited from
Mother Eve an unusual degree of hate for the reptile." The report of the gun had attracted Alf and others to the scene. Amy, with
a look of smiling confidence, said: "Perhaps you have rescued me as well as
the birds. I can't believe, though, that such a looking creature could have
tempted Eve to either good or evil;" and she entered the house, leaving him
in almost a friendly mood toward the cause of the cat-bird's woe. Alf exulted over the slain destroyer, and even Johnnie felt no compunction
at the violent termination of its life. The former, with much sportsmanlike
importance, measured it, and at the dinner-table announced its length to be
a little over four feet. "By the way," said Webb, "your adventure, Amy, reminds me of one of the
finest descriptions I ever read;" and jumping up, he obtained from the
library Burroughs's account of a like scene and rescue. "I will just give
you some glimpses of the picture," he said, reading the following
sentences: "'Three or four yards from me was the nest, beneath which, in
long festoons, rested a huge black-snake. I can conceive of nothing more
overpoweringly terrible to an unsuspecting family of birds than the sudden
appearance above their domicile of the head and neck of this arch enemy. One thinks of the great myth of the tempter and the cause of all our woe,
and wonders if the Arch-One is not playing off some of his pranks before
him. Whether we call it snake or devil matters little. I could but admire
his terrible beauty, however; his black, shining folds; his easy, gliding
movement--head erect, eyes glistening, tongue playing like subtile flame,
and the invisible means of his almost winged locomotion. Presently, as he
came gliding down the slender body of a leaning alder, his attention was
attracted by a slight movement of my arm; eying me an instant with that
crouching, utter, motionless gaze which I believe only snakes and devils
can assume, he turned quickly,'" etc. Clifford looked a little troubled that the scene in
Eden should be spoken of as merely a "myth." When she was a child "Paradise
Lost" had been her story-book, and the stories had become real to her. Burt, however, not to be outdone, recalled his classics. "By the way," he said, "I can almost parallel your description from the
'Iliad' of Homer. I won't pretend that I can give you the Greek, and no
doubt it would be Greek to you. I'll get even with you, Webb, however, and
read an extract from Pope's translation," and he also made an excursion to
the library. Returning, he said, "Don't ask me for the connection," and
read:

  "'Straight to the tree his sanguine spires he rolled,
    And curled around in many a winding fold. The topmost branch a mother-bird possessed;
    Eight callow infants filled the mossy nest;
    Herself the ninth: the serpent as he hung
    Stretched his black jaws, and crashed the crying young:
    While hovering near, with miserable moan,
    The drooping mother wailed her children gone. The mother last, as round the nest she flew,
    Seized by the beating wing, the monster slew.'" "I am now quite reconciled to your four years at
college. Heretofore I had thought you had passed through it as Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego passed through the fiery furnace, without even the
smell of fire upon their garments, but I now at last detect a genuine
Greek aroma." "I think Burt's quotation very pat," said Amy, "and I could not have
believed that anything written so long ago would apply so marvellously to
what I have seen to-day." "Marvellously pat, indeed," said Leonard. "And since your quotation has
led to such a nice little pat on your classical back, Burt, you must feel
repaid for your long burning of the midnight oil." Burt flushed slightly, but he turned Leonard's shafts with smiling
assurance, and said: "Amply repaid. I have ever had an abiding confidence
that my education would be of use to me at some time." The long days grew hot, and often sultry, but the season brought
unremitting toil. The click of the mowing-machine, softened by distance,
came from field after field. As the grain in the rye grew plump and
heavy, the heads drooped more and more, and changed from a pale yellow to
the golden hue that announced the hour of harvest. In smooth and level
fields the reaping-machine also lightened and expedited labor, but there
was one upland <DW72> that was too rough for anything except the
old-fashioned cradle. On a breezy afternoon Amy went out to sketch the
harvesters, and from the shade of an adjacent tree to listen to the
rhythmical rush and rustle as the blade passed through the hollow stocks,
and the cradle dropped the gathered wealth in uniform lines. Almost
immediately the prostrate grain was transformed into tightly girthed
sheaves. How black Abram's great paw looked as he twisted a wisp of
straw, bound together the yellow stalks, and tucked under the end of his
improvised rope! Webb was leading the reapers, and they had to step quickly to keep pace
with him. As Amy appeared upon the scene he had done no more than take
off his hat and wave it to her, but as the men circled round the field
near her again, she saw that her acquaintance of the mountain cabin was
manfully bringing up the rear. Every time, before Lumley stooped to the
sweep of his cradle, she saw that he stole a glance toward her, and she
recognized him with cordial good-will. He, too, doffed his hat in
grateful homage, and as he paused a moment in his honest toil, and stood
erect, he unconsciously asserted the manhood that she had restored to
him. She caught his attitude, and he became the subject of her sketch. Rude and simple though it was, it would ever recall to her a pleasant
picture--the diminishing area of standing rye, golden in the afternoon
sunshine, with light billows running over it before the breeze, Webb
leading, with the strong, assured progress that would ever characterize
his steps through life, and poor Lumley, who had been wronged by
generations that had passed away, as well as by his own evil, following
in an honest emulation which she had evoked. CHAPTER XXXVII

A MIDNIGHT TEMPEST


As far as possible, the prudent Leonard, who was commander-in-chief of
the harvest campaign, had made everything snug before the Fourth of July,
which Alf ushered in with untimely patriotic fervor. Almost before the
first bird had taken its head from under its wing to look for the dawn,
he had fired a salute from a little brass cannon. Not very long afterward
the mountains up and down the river were echoing with the thunder of the
guns at West Point and Newburgh. The day bade fair to justify its
proverbial character for sultriness. Even in the early morning the air
was languid and the heat oppressive. The sun was but a few hours high
before the song of the birds almost ceased, with the exception of the
somewhat sleepy whistling of the orioles. They are half tropical in
nature as well as plumage, and their manner during the heat of the day is
like that of languid Southern beauties. They kept flitting here and there
through their leafy retirement in a mild form of restlessness, exchanging
soft notes--pretty nonsense, no doubt--which often terminated abruptly,
as if they had not energy enough to complete the brief strain attempted. Alf, with his Chinese crackers and his cannon, and Johnnie and Ned, with
their torpedoes, kept things lively during the forenoon, but their elders
were disposed to lounge and rest. The cherry-trees, laden with black and
white ox-hearts, were visited. One of the former variety was fairly
sombre with the abundance of its dark-hued fruit, and Amy's red lips grew
purple as Burt threw her down the largest and ripest from the topmost
boughs. Webb, carrying a little basket lined with grapevine leaves,
gleaned the long row of Antwerp raspberries. The first that ripen of this
kind are the finest and most delicious, and their strong aroma announced
his approach long before he reached the house. His favorite Triomphe de
Grand strawberries, that had supplied the table three weeks before, were
still yielding a fair amount of fruit, and his mother was never without
her dainty dish of pale red berries, to which the sun had been adding
sweetness with the advancing season until nature's combination left
nothing to be desired. By noon the heat was oppressive, and Alf and Ned were rolling on the
grass under a tree, quite satiated for a time with two elements of a
boy's elysium, fire-crackers and cherries. The family gathered in the
wide hall, through the open doors of which was a slight draught of air. All had donned their coolest costumes, and their talk was quite as
languid as the occasional notes and chirpings of the birds without. Amy
was reading a magazine in a very desultory way, her eyelids drooping over
every page before it was finished, Webb and Burt furtively admiring the
exquisite hues that the heat brought into her face, and the soft lustre
of her eyes. Clifford nodded over his newspaper until his
spectacles clattered to the floor, at which they all laughed, and asked
for the news. His invalid wife lay upon the sofa in dreamy, painless
repose. To her the time was like a long, quiet nooning by the wayside of
life, with all her loved band around her, and her large, dark eyes rested
on one and another in loving, lingering glances--each so different, yet
each so dear! Sensible Leonard was losing no time, but was audibly
resting in a great wooden rocking-chair at the further end of the hall. Maggie only, the presiding genius of the household, was not wilted by the
heat. She flitted in and out occasionally, looking almost girlish in her
white wrapper. She had the art of keeping house, of banishing dust and
disorder without becoming an embodiment of dishevelled disorder herself. No matter what she was doing, she always appeared trim and neat, and in
the lover-like expression of her husband's eyes, as they often followed
her, she had her reward. She was not deceived by the semi-torpid
condition of the household, and knew well what would be expected in a
Fourth-of-July dinner. The tinkle of the bell
at two o'clock awakened unusual animation, and then she had her triumph. Leonard beamed upon a hind-quarter of lamb roasted to the nicest turn of
brownness. A great dish of Champion-of-England pease, that supreme
product of the kitchen-garden, was one of the time-honored adjuncts,
while new potatoes, the first of which had been dug that day, had half
thrown off their mottled jackets in readiness for the feast. Nature had
been Maggie's handmaid in spreading that table, and art, with its
culinary mysteries and combinations, was conspicuously absent. If Eve had
had a kitchen range and the Garden of Eden to draw upon, Adam could
scarcely have fared better than did the Clifford household that day. The
dishes heaped with strawberries, raspberries, cherries, and white
grape-currants that had been gathered with the dew upon them might well
tempt the most _blase_ resident of a town to man's primal calling. Before they reached their iced tea, which on this hot day took the place
of coffee, there was a distant peal of thunder. "I knew it would come," said old Mr. "We shall have a cool
night, after all." "A Fourth rarely passes without showers," Leonard remarked. "That's why I
was so strenuous about getting all our grass and grain that was down
under cover yesterday." "You are not the only prudent one," Maggie added, complacently. "I've
made my currant jelly, and it jellied beautifully: it always does if I
make it before the Fourth and the showers that come about this time. It's
queer, but a rain on the currants after they are fairly ripe almost
spoils them for jelly." The anticipations raised by the extreme sultriness were fulfilled at
first only in part. Instead of a heavy shower accompanied by violent
gusts, there was a succession of tropical and vertical down-pourings,
with now and then a sharp flash and a rattling peal, but usually a heavy
monotone of thunder from bolts flying in the distance. One great cloud
did not sweep across the sky like a concentrated charge, leaving all
clear behind it, as is so often the case, but, as if from an immense
reserve, Nature appeared to send out her vapory forces by battalions. Instead of enjoying the long siesta which she had promised herself, Amy
spent the afternoon in watching the cloud scenery. A few miles southwest
of the house was a prominent highland that happened to be in the direct
line of the successive showers. This formed a sort of gauge of their
advance. A cloud would loom up behind it, darken it, obscure it until it
faded out even as a shadow; then the nearer spurs of the mountains would
be blotted out, and in eight or ten minutes even the barn and the
adjacent groves would be but dim outlines through the myriad rain-drops. Daniel went back to the bathroom. The cloud would soon be well to the eastward, the dim landscape take form
and distinctness, and the distant highland appear again, only to be
obscured in like manner within the next half-hour. It was as if invisible
and Titanic gardeners were stepping across the country with their
watering-pots. Burt and Webb sat near Amy at the open window, the former chatting
easily, and often gayly. Webb, with his deep-set eyes fixed on the
clouds, was comparatively silent. At last he rose somewhat abruptly, and
was not seen again until evening, when he seemed to be in unusually good
spirits. As the dusk deepened he aided Alf and Johnnie in making the
finest possible display of their fireworks, and for half an hour the
excitement was intense. Leonard and
his father, remembering the hay and grain already stored in the barn,
congratulated each other that the recent showers had prevented all danger
from sparks. After the last rocket had run its brief, fiery course, Alf and Johnnie
were well content to go with Webb, Burt, and Amy to an upper room whose
windows looked out on Newburgh Bay and to the westward. Near and far,
from their own and the opposite side of the river, rockets were flaming
into the sky, and Roman candles sending up their globes of fire. But
Nature was having a celebration of her own, which so far surpassed
anything terrestrial that it soon won their entire attention. A great
black cloud that hung darkly in the west was the background for the
electric pyrotechnics. Against this obscurity the lightning played almost
every freak imaginable. At one moment there would be an immense
illumination, and the opaque cloud would become vivid gold. Again, across
its blackness a dozen fiery rills of light would burn their way in zigzag
channels, and not infrequently a forked bolt would blaze earthward. Accompanying these vivid and central effects were constant illuminations
of sheet lightning all round the horizon, and the night promised to be a
carnival of thunder-showers throughout the land. The extreme heat
continued, and was rendered far more oppressive by the humidity of the
atmosphere. The awful grandeur of the cloud scenery at last so oppressed Amy that she
sought relief in Maggie's lighted room. As we have already seen, her
sensitive organization was peculiarly affected by an atmosphere highly
charged with electricity. She was not re-assured, for Leonard inadvertently
remarked that it would take "a rousing old-fashioned storm to cool and
clear the air." "Why, Amy," exclaimed Maggie, "how pale you are! and your eyes shine as
if some of the lightning had got into them." "I wish it was morning," said the girl. "Such a sight oppresses me like a
great foreboding of evil;" and, with a restlessness she could not
control, she went down to Mrs. Clifford
fanning the invalid, who was almost faint from the heat. Amy took his
place, and soon had the pleasure of seeing her charge drop off into quiet
slumber. Clifford was very weary also, Amy left them to their
rest, and went to the sitting-room, where Webb was reading. Burt had
fallen asleep on the lounge in the hall. The thunder muttered nearer and nearer, but it was a sullen,
slow, remorseless approach through the absolute silence and darkness
without, and therefore was tenfold more trying to one nervously
apprehensive than a swift, gusty storm would have been in broad day. Webb looked up and greeted her with a smile. His lamp was shaded, and the
room shadowy, so that he did not note that Amy was troubled and
depressed. "I am running over
Hawthorne's 'English Note-Books' again." "Yes," she said, in a low voice; and she sat down with her back to the
windows, through which shone momentarily the glare of the coming tempest. He had not read a page before a long, sullen peal rolled across the
entire arc of the sky. "Webb," faltered Amy, and she rose and took an
irresolute step toward him. Never had he heard sweeter music
than that low appeal, to which the deep echoes in the mountains formed a
strange accompaniment. He stepped to her side, took her hand, and found
it cold and trembling. Drawing her within the radiance of the lamp, he
saw how pale she was, and that her eyes were dilated with nervous dread. "Webb," she began again, "do you--do you think there is danger?" "No, Amy," he said, gently; "there is no danger for you in God's
universe." "Webb," she whispered, "won't you stay up till the storm is over? And you
won't think me weak or silly either, will you? I
wish I had a little of your courage and strength." "I like you best as you are," he said; "and all my strength is yours when
you need it. I understand you, Amy, and well know you cannot help this
nervous dread. I saw how these electrical storms affected you last
February, and such experiences are not rare with finely organized
natures. See, I can explain it all with my matter-of-fact philosophy. But, believe me, there is no danger. She looked at him affectionately as she said, with a child's unconscious
frankness: "I don't know why it is, but I always feel safe when with you. I often used to wish that I had a brother, and imagine what he would be
to me; but I never dreamed that a brother could be so much to me as you
are.--Oh, Webb!" and she almost clung to him, as the heavy thunder pealed
nearer than before. Involuntarily he encircled her with his arm, and drew her closer to him
in the impulse of protection. She felt his arm tremble, and wholly
misinterpreted the cause. Springing aloof, she clasped her hands, and
looked around almost wildly. "Oh, Webb," she cried, "there is danger. Webb was human, and had nerves also, but all the thunder that ever roared
could not affect them so powerfully as Amy's head bowed upon his
shoulder, and the appealing words of her absolute trust. He mastered
himself instantly, however, for he saw that he must be strong and calm in
order to sustain the trembling girl through one of Nature's most awful
moods. She was equally sensitive to the smiling beauty and the wrath of
the great mother. The latter phase was much the same to her as if a loved
face had suddenly become black with reckless passion. He took both her
hands in a firm grasp, and said: "Amy, I am not afraid, and you must not
be. Come," he added, in tones almost
authoritative, "sit here by me, and give me your hand. I shall read to
you in a voice as quiet and steady as you ever heard me use." She obeyed, and he kept his word. His strong, even grasp reassured her in
a way that excited her wonder, and the nervous paroxysm of fear began to
pass away. While she did not comprehend what he read, his tones and
expression had their influence. His voice, however, was soon drowned by
the howling of the tempest as it rushed upon them. He felt her hand
tremble again, and saw her look apprehensively toward the windows. "Amy," he said, and in smiling confidence he fixed his eyes on hers and
held them. The house rocked in the
furious blasts. The uproar without was frightful, suggesting that the
Evil One was in very truth the "prince of the power of the air," and that
he was abroad with all his legions. Amy trembled violently, but Webb's
hand and eyes held hers. he said, cheerily; "the storm is
passing." A wan, grateful smile glimmered for a moment on her pale face, and then
her expression passed into one of horror. With a cry that was lost in a
deafening crash, she sprang into his arms. Even Webb was almost stunned
and blinded for a moment. Burt at last had
been aroused from the slumber of youth, and, fortunately for his peace,
rushed first into his mother's room. Webb thought Amy had fainted, and he
laid her gently on the lounge. "Don't leave me," she gasped, faintly. "Amy," he said, earnestly, "I assure you that all danger is now over. As
I told you once before, the centre of the storm has passed. Maggie and Burt now came running in, and Webb said, "Amy has had a faint
turn. This revived her speedily, but the truth of Webb's words proved more
efficacious. The gale was sweeping the storm from the sky. The swish of
the torrents mattered little, for the thunder-peals died away steadily to
the eastward. Amy made a great effort to rally, for she felt ashamed of
her weakness, and feared that the others would not interpret her as
charitably as Webb had done. In a few minutes he smilingly withdrew, and
went out on the rear porch with Leonard, whence they anxiously scanned
the barn and out-buildings. These were evidently safe, wherever the bolt
had fallen, and it must have struck near. In half an hour there was a
line of stars along the western horizon, and soon the repose within the
old house was as deep as that of nature without. He sat at his open window, and saw the clouds
roll away. But he felt that a cloud deeper and murkier than any that had
ever blackened the sky hung over his life. He knew too well why his arm
had trembled when for a moment it encircled Amy. The deepest and
strongest impulse of his soul was to protect her, and her instinctive
appeal to him had raised a tempest in his heart as wild as that which had
raged without. He felt that he could not yield her to another, not even
to his brother. It was to him she
turned and clung in her fears. And yet she had not even dreamed of his
untold wealth of love, and probably never would suspect it. He could not
reveal it--indeed, it must be the struggle of his life to hide it--and
she, while loving him as a brother, might easily drift into an engagement
and marriage with Burt. Could he be patient, and wear a smiling mask
through it all? That tropical night and its experiences taught him anew
that he had a human heart, with all its passionate cravings. When he came
down from his long vigil on the following morning his brow was as serene
as the scene without. Amy gave him a grateful and significant smile, and
he smiled back so naturally that observant Burt, who had been a little
uneasy over the events of the previous night, was wholly relieved of
anxiety. They had scarcely seated themselves at the breakfast-table
before Alf came running in, and said that an elm not a hundred yards from
the house had been splintered from the topmost branch to the roots. Clifford went out to look at the smitten tree, and they gazed
with awe at the deep furrow plowed in the blackened wood. "It will live," said Webb, quietly, as he turned away; "it will probably
live out its natural life." Amy, in her deep sympathy, looked after him curiously. There was
something in his tone and manner which suggested a meaning beyond his
words. Not infrequently he had puzzled her of late, and this added to her
interest in him. Clifford saw in the shattered tree only reasons for profound
thankfulness, and words of Christian gratitude rose to his lips. CHAPTER XXXVIII

THE TWO LOVERS


The July sun speedily drank up the superabundant moisture, and the farm
operations went on with expedition. The corn grew green and strong, and
its leaves stretched up to Abram's shoulder as he ran the cultivator
through it for the last time. The moist sultriness of the Fourth finished
the ox-heart cherries. They decayed at once, to Alf's great regret. "That
is the trouble with certain varieties of cherries," Webb remarked. "One
shower will often spoil the entire crop even before it is ripe." But it
so happened that there were several trees of native or ungrafted fruit on
the place, and these supplied the children and the birds for many days
thereafter. The robins never ceased gorging themselves. Indeed, they were
degenerating into shameless _gourmands_, and losing the grace of
song, as were also the bobolinks in the meadows. Already there was a perceptible decline in the morning and evening
minstrelsy of all the birds, and, with the exception of calls and
twitterings, they grew more and more silent through the midday heat. With
the white bloom of the chestnut-trees the last trace of spring passed
away. Summer reached its supreme culmination, and days that would not be
amiss at the equator were often followed by nights of breathless
sultriness. Early in the month haying and harvest were over, and the last
load that came down the lane to the barn was ornamented with green
boughs, and hailed with acclamations by the farm hands, to whom a
generous supper was given, and something substantial also to take home to
their families. As the necessity for prompt action and severe labor passed, the Cliffords
proved that their rural life was not one of plodding, unredeemed toil. For the next few weeks Nature would give them a partial respite. She
would finish much of the work which they had begun. The corn would
mature, the oats ripen, without further intervention on their part. By
slow but sure alchemy the fierce suns would change the acid and bitter
juices in the apples, peaches, plums, and pears into nectar. Already Alf
was revelling in the harvest apples, which, under Maggie's culinary
magic, might tempt an ascetic to surfeit. While Burt had manfully done his part in the harvest-field, he had not
made as long hours as the others, and now was quite inclined to enjoy to
the utmost a season of comparative leisure. He was much with Amy, and she
took pleasure in his society, for, as she characterized his manner in her
thoughts, he had grown very sensible. He had accepted the situation, and
he gave himself not a little credit for his philosophical patience. He
regarded himself as committed to a deep and politic plan, in which,
however, there was no unworthy guile. He would make himself essential to
Amy's happiness. He would be so quietly and naturally devoted to her that
she would gradually come to look forward to a closer union as a matter of
course. He also made it clear to her that she had no rivals in his
thoughts, or even admiration, and, as far as courtesy permitted, withdrew
from the society of a few favorites who once had welcomed him gladly and
often. He had even pretended indifference to the advent of a dark-eyed
beauty to the neighborhood, and had made no efforts to form her
acquaintance. This stranger from the city was so charming, however, that
he had felt more than once that he was giving no slight proof of
constancy. His fleet horse Thunder was his great ally, and in the long
twilight evenings, he, with Amy, explored the country roads far and near. When the early mornings were not too warm they rowed upon the river, or
went up the Moodna Creek for water-lilies, which at that hour floated
upon the surface with their white petals all expanded--beautiful emblems
of natures essentially good. From mud and slime they developed purity and
fragrance. He was also teaching Amy to be an expert horsewoman, and they
promised themselves many a long ride when autumn coolness should make
such exercise more agreeable. Burt was a little surprised at his tranquil enjoyment of all this
companionship, but nevertheless prided himself upon it. He was not so
mercurial and impetuous as the others had believed him to be, but was
capable of a steady and undemonstrative devotion. Amy was worth winning
at any cost, and he proposed to lay such a patient siege that she could
not fail to become his. Indeed, with a disposition toward a little
retaliation, he designed to carry his patience so far as to wait until he
had seen more than once an expression in her eyes that invited warmer
words and manner. But he had to admit that time was passing, and that no
such expression appeared. This piqued him a little, and he felt that he
was not appreciated. The impression grew upon him that she was very
young--unaccountably young for one of her years. She enjoyed his bright
talk and merry ways with much the same spirit that Alf's boyish
exuberance called forth. She had the natural love of all young, healthful
natures for pleasure and change, and she unconsciously acted toward him
as if he were a kind, jolly brother who was doing much to give the spice
of variety to her life. At the same time her unawakened heart was
disposed to take his view of the future. Why should she not marry him,
after her girlhood had passed? All the family wished and expected it, and
surely she liked him exceedingly. But it would be time enough for such
thoughts years hence. He had the leisure and self-control for
good-comradeship, and without questioning she enjoyed it. Her life was
almost as free from care as that of the young birds that had begun their
existence in June. Only Webb perplexed and troubled her a little. At this season, when even
Leonard indulged in not a little leisure and rest, he was busy and
preoccupied. She could not say that he avoided her, and yet it seemed to
happen that they were not much together. "I fear I'm too young and
girlish to be a companion for him," she sighed. "His manner is just as
kind and gentle, but he treats me as if I were his very little sister. I
don't seem to have the power to interest him that I once had. I wish I
knew enough to talk to him as he would like;" and she stealthily tried to
read some of the scientific books that she saw him poring over. He, poor fellow, was engaged in the most difficult task ever given to
man--the ruling of his own spirit. He saw her sisterly solicitude and
goodwill, but could not respond in a manner as natural as her own. His best resource was the comparative
solitude of constant occupation. He was growing doubtful, however, as to
the result of his struggle, while Amy was daily becoming more lovely in
his eyes. Her English life had not destroyed the native talent of an
American girl to make herself attractive. She knew instinctively how to
dress, how to enhance the charms of which nature had not been chary, and
Webb's philosophy and science were no defence against her winsomeness. In
her changeful eyes lurked spells too mighty for him. Men of his caste
rarely succumb to a learned and aggressive woman. They require
intelligence, but it is a feminine intelligence, which supplements their
own, and is not akin to it. Webb saw in Amy all that his heart craved,
and he believed that he also saw her fulfilling Burt's hopes. She seemed
to be gradually learning that the light-hearted brother might bring into
her life all the sunshine and happiness she could desire. Webb
depreciated himself, and believed that he was too grave and dull to win
in any event more than the affection which she would naturally feel for
an elder brother, and this she already bestowed upon him frankly and
unstintedly. Burt took the same view, and was usually complacency itself,
although a week seemed a long time to him, and he sometimes felt that he
ought to be making more progress. He would be
faithful for years, and Amy could not fail to reward such constancy. CHAPTER XXXIX

BURT'S ADVENTURE


Not only had the little rustic cottages which had been placed on poles
here and there about the Clifford dwelling, and the empty tomato-cans
which Alf, at Dr. Marvin's suggestion, had fastened in the trees, been
occupied by wrens and bluebirds, but larger homes had been taken for the
summer by migrants from the city. Hargrove, a
wealthy gentleman, who had rented a pretty villa on the banks of the
Hudson, a mile or two away. Burt, with all his proposed lifelong
constancy, had speedily discovered that Mr. Hargrove had a very pretty
daughter. Of course, he was quite indifferent to the fact, but he could
no more meet a girl like Gertrude Hargrove and be unobservant than could
Amy pass a new and rare wildflower with unregarding eyes. Miss Hargrove
was not a wildflower, however. She was a product of city life, and was
perfectly aware of her unusual and exotic beauty. Admiring eyes had
followed her even from childhood, and no one better than she knew her
power. Her head had been quite turned by flattery, but there was a saving
clause in her nature--her heart. She was a belle, but not a cold-blooded
coquette. Admiration was like sunshine--a matter of course. She had
always been accustomed to it, as she had been to wealth, and neither had
spoiled her. Beneath all that was artificial, all that fashion prescribed
and society had taught, was the essential womanhood which alone can win
and retain a true man's homage. For reasons just the reverse of those
which explained Amy's indisposition to sentiment, she also had been kept
fancy-free. Seclusion and the companionship of her father, who had been
an invalid in his later years, had kept the former a child in many
respects, at a time when Miss Hargrove had her train of admirers. Miss
Gertrude enjoyed the train very much, but showed no disposition to permit
any one of its constituents to monopolize her. Indeed, their very numbers
had been her safety. Her attention had been divided and distracted by a
score of aspirants, and while in her girlish eyes some found more favor
than others, she was inclined to laughing criticism of them all. They
amused her immensely, and she puzzled them. Her almost velvety black
eyes, and the rich, varying tints of her clear brunette complexion,
suggested a nature that was not cold and unresponsive, yet many who would
gladly have won the heiress for her own sake found her as elusive as only
a woman of perfect tact and self-possession can be. She had no vulgar
ambition to count her victims who had committed themselves in words. With
her keen intuition and abundant experience she recognized the first
glance that was warmer than mere friendliness, and this was all the
committal she wished for. She loved the admiration of men, but was too
good-hearted a girl to wish to make them cynics in regard to women. She
also had the sense to know that it is a miserable triumph to lure a man
to the declaration of a supreme regard, and then in one moment change it
into contempt. While, therefore, she had refused many an offer, no one
had been humiliated, no one had been made to feel that he had been
unworthily trifled with. Thus she retained the respect and goodwill of
those to whom she might easily have become the embodiment of all that was
false and heartless. She had welcomed the comparative seclusion of the
villa on the Hudson, for, although not yet twenty, she was growing rather
weary of society and its exactions. Its pleasures had been tasted too
often, its burdens were beginning to be felt. She was a good horsewoman,
and was learning, under the instruction of a younger brother, to row as
easily and gracefully on the river as she danced in the ballroom, and she
found the former recreation more satisfactory, from its very novelty. Burt was well aware of these outdoor accomplishments. Any one inclined to
rural pleasures won his attention at once; and Miss Hargrove, as she
occasionally trotted smartly by him, or skimmed near on the waters of the
Hudson, was a figure sure to win from his eyes more than a careless
glance. Thus far, as has been intimated, he had kept aloof, but he had
observed her critically, and he found little to disapprove. She also was
observing him, and was quite as well endowed as he with the power of
forming a correct judgment. Men of almost every description had sought
her smiles, but he did not suffer by comparison. His tall, lithe figure
was instinct with manly grace. There was a fascinating trace of reckless
boldness in his blue eyes. He rode like a centaur, and at will made his
light boat, in which Amy was usually seated, cut through the water with
spray flying from its prow. In Miss Hargrove's present mood for rural
life she wished for his acquaintance, and was a little piqued that he had
not sought hers, since her father had opened the way. Hargrove, soon after his arrival in the neighborhood, had had
business transactions with the Cliffords, and had learned enough about
them to awaken a desire for social relations, and he had courteously
expressed his wishes. Maggie and Amy had fully intended compliance, but
the harvest had come, time had passed, and the initial call had not been
made. Leonard was averse to such formalities, and, for reasons already
explained, Burt and Webb were in no mood for them. They would not have
failed in neighborliness much longer, however, and a call was proposed
for the first comparatively cool day. A little incident now occurred
which quite broke the ice, and also somewhat disturbed Burt's serenity. Amy was not feeling very well, and he had gone out alone for a ride on
his superb black horse Thunder. In a shady road some miles away, where
the willows interlaced their branches overhead in a long, Gothic-like
arch, he saw Miss Hargrove, mounted also, coming slowly toward him. He
never forgot the picture she made under the rustic archway. Her fine
horse was pacing along with a stately tread, his neck curved under the
restraining bit, while she was evidently amusing herself by talking, for
the want of a better companion, to an immense Newfoundland dog that was
trotting at her side, and looking up to her in intelligent appreciation. Thus, in her preoccupation, Burt was permitted to draw comparatively
near, but as soon as she observed him it was evidently her intention to
pass rapidly. As she gave her horse the rein and he leaped forward, she
clutched his mane, and by a word brought him to a standstill. Burt saw
the trouble at once, for the girth of her saddle had broken, and hung
loosely down. Only by prompt action and good horsemanship had she kept
her seat. Now she was quite helpless, for an attempt to dismount would
cause the heavy saddle to turn, with unknown and awkward results. She had
recognized Burt, and knew that he was a gentleman; therefore she patted
her horse and quieted him, while the young man came promptly to her
assistance. He, secretly exulting over the promise of an adventure, said,
suavely, as he lifted his hat:

"Miss Hargrove, will you permit me to aid you?" "Certainly," she replied, smiling so pleasantly that the words did not
seem ungracious; "I have no other resource." He bowed, leaped lightly to the ground, and fastened his horse by the
roadside; then came forward without the least embarrassment. "Your
saddle-girth has broken," he said. You maintained your seat admirably, but a very slight
movement on your part will cause the saddle to turn." "I know that," she replied, laughing. I
am only anxious to reach ground in safety;" and she dropped the reins,
and held out her hands. "Your horse is too high for you to dismount in that way," he said,
quietly, "and the saddle might fall after you and hurt you. Pardon me;"
and he encircled her with his right arm, and lifted her gently off. She blushed like the western sky, but he was so grave and apparently
solicitous, and his words had made his course seem so essential, that she
could not take offence. Indeed, he was now giving his whole attention to
the broken girth, and she could only await the result of his examination. "I think I can mend it with a strap from my bridle so that it will hold
until you reach home," he said; "but I am sorry to say that I cannot make
it very secure. Clifford, I think," she began, hesitatingly. Clifford, and, believe me, I am wholly at your service. If you
had not been so good a horsewoman you might have met with a very serious
accident." "More thanks are due to you, I imagine," she replied; "though I suppose I
could have got off in some way." "There would have been no trouble in your getting off," he said, with one
of his frank, contagious smiles; "but then your horse might have run
away, or you would have had to lead him some distance, at least. Perhaps
it was well that the girth gave way when it did, for it would have broken
in a few moments more, in any event. Therefore I hope you will tolerate
one not wholly unknown to you, and permit me to be of service." "Indeed, I have only cause for thanks. I have interfered with your ride,
and am putting you to trouble." "I was only riding for pleasure, and as yet you have had all the
trouble." She did not look excessively annoyed, and in truth was enjoying the
adventure quite as much as he was, but she only said: "You have the
finest horse there I ever saw. "I fear he would be ungallant. "I should not be afraid so long as the saddle remained firm. At the sound of his name the beautiful animal arched his neck
and whinnied. "There, be quiet, old fellow, and speak when you are spoken
to," Burt said. "He is comparatively gentle with me, but uncontrollable
by others. I have now done my best, Miss Hargrove, and I think you may
mount in safety, if you are willing to walk your horse quietly home. But
I truly think I ought to accompany you, and I will do so gladly, with
your permission." "But it seems asking a great deal of-"

"Of a stranger? I wish I knew how to bring about a formal introduction. Will you not in the emergency defer the introduction
until we arrive at your home?" "I think we may as well dispense with it altogether," she said, laughing. "It would be too hollow a formality after the hour we must spend
together, since you think so slow a pace is essential to safety. Events,
not we, are to blame for all failures in etiquette." "I was coming to call upon you this very week with the ladies of our
house," he began. "I assure you of the truth of what I say," he continued, earnestly,
turning his handsome eyes to hers. Then throwing his head back a little
proudly, he added, "Miss Hargrove, you must know that we are farmers, and
midsummer brings the harvest and unwonted labors." With a slight, piquant imitation of his manner, she said: "My father, you
must know, Mr. Clifford, is a merchant Is not that an equally respectable
calling?" "Some people regard it as far more so." There is no higher rank than that of a
gentleman, Mr. He took off his hat, and said, laughingly: "I hope it is not presumption
to imagine a slight personal bearing in your remark. At least, let me
prove that I have some claim to the title by seeing you safely home. Put your foot in my hand, and bear your whole weight upon it,
and none upon the saddle." "You don't know how heavy I am." "No, but I know I can lift you. Without the least effort she found herself in the saddle. "Yes," he replied, laughing; "I developed my muscle, if not my brains, at
college." In a moment he vaulted lightly upon his horse, that reared proudly, but,
at a word from his master, arched his neck and paced as quietly as Miss
Hargrove's better-trained animal. Burt's laugh would have thawed Mrs. He was so vital with youth and vigor, and his flow of
spirits so irresistible, that Miss Hargrove found her own nerves tingling
with pleasure. The episode was novel, unexpected, and promised so much
for the future, that in her delightful excitement she cast conventionality
to the winds, and yielded to his sportive mood. They had not gone a mile
together before one would have thought they had been acquainted for years. Burt's frank face was like the open page of a book, and the experienced
society girl saw nothing in it but abounding good-nature, and an enjoyment
as genuine as her own. She was on the alert for traces of provincialism and
rusticity, but was agreeably disappointed at their absence. He certainly
was unmarked, and, to her taste, unmarred, by the artificial mode of the
day, but there was nothing under-bred in his manner or language. He rather
fulfilled her ideal of the light-hearted student who had brought away the
air of the university without being oppressed by its learning. She saw,
with a curious little blending of pique and pleasure, that he was not in
the least afraid of her, and that, while claiming to be simply a farmer, he
unconsciously asserted by every word and glance that he was her equal. She
had the penetration to recognize from the start that she could not
patronize him in the slightest degree, that he was as high-spirited as he
was frank and easy in manner, and she could well imagine that his mirthful
eyes would flash with anger on slight provocation. She had never met just
such a type before, and every moment found her more and more interested and
amused. It must be admitted that his sensations kept pace with hers. Many had
found Miss Hargrove's eyes singularly effective under ordinary
circumstances, but now her mood gave them an unwonted lustre and power. Her color was high, her talk animated and piquant. Even an enemy, had she
had one, would have been forced to admit that she was dazzlingly
beautiful, and inflammable Burt could not be indifferent to her charms. He knew that he was not, but complacently assured himself that he was a
good judge in such matters. Hargrove met them at the door, and his daughter laughingly told him
of her mishap. She evidently reposed in him the utmost confidence. He
justified it by meeting her in like spirit with her own, and he
interpreted her unspoken wishes by so cordially pressing Burt to remain
to dinner that he was almost constrained to yield. "You will be too late
for your own evening meal," he said, "and your kindness to my daughter
would be ill-requited, and our reputation for hospitality would suffer,
should we let you depart without taking salt with us. Burt was the last one to have any scruples on such grounds, and he
resolved to have his "lark" out, as he mentally characterized it. Hargrove had been something of a sportsman in his earlier days, and the
young fellow's talk was as interesting to him as it had been to Miss
Gertrude. Fred, her younger brother, was quite captivated, and elegant
Mrs. Hargrove, like her daughter, watched in vain for mannerisms to
criticise in the breezy youth. The evening was half gone before Burt
galloped homeward, smiling broadly to himself at the adventure. His absence had caused little remark in the family. It had been taken for
granted that he was at Dr. Marvin's or the parsonage, for the young
fellow was a great favorite with their pastor. When he entered the
sitting-room, however, there was a suppressed excitement in his manner
which suggested an unusual experience. He was not slow in relating all
that had happened, for the thought had occurred to him that it might be
good policy to awaken a little jealousy in Amy. In this effort he was
obliged to admit to himself that he failed signally. Even Webb's
searching eyes could not detect a trace of chagrin. She only seemed very
much amused, and was laughingly profuse in her congratulations to Burt. Moreover, she was genuinely interested in Miss Hargrove, and eager to
make her acquaintance. "If she is as nice as you say, Burt," she
concluded, "she would make a pleasant addition to our little excursions
and pleasure parties. Perhaps she's old and bright enough to talk to
Webb, and draw him out of his learned preoccupation," she added, with a
shy glance toward the one who was growing too remote from her daily life. Even his bronzed face flushed, but he said, with a laugh: "She is evidently
much too bright for me, and would soon regard me as insufferably stupid. I
have never found much favor with city dames, or with dames of any
description, for that matter." "So much the worse for the dames, then," she replied, with a piquant nod
at him. "Little sisters are apt to be partial judges--at least, one is," he said,
smilingly, as he left the room. He walked out in the moonlight, thinking:
"There was not a trace of jealousy in her face. Burt's perfect frankness was enough to prevent anything of the kind. If there had been cause for jealousy, he would have been reticent. Besides, Amy is too high-toned to yield readily to this vice, and Burt
can never be such an idiot as to endanger his prospects." A scheme, however, was maturing in Burt's busy brain that night, which he
thought would be a master-stroke of policy. He was quite aware of the
good impression that he had made on Miss Hargrove, and he determined that
Amy's wishes should be carried out in a sufficient degree at least to
prove to her that a city belle would not be wholly indifferent to his
attentions. "I'll teach the coy little beauty that others are not so
blind as she is, and I imagine that, with Miss Hargrove's aid, I can
disturb her serenity a little before many weeks pass." CHAPTER XL

MISS HARGROVE


But a few days elapsed before Mr. Clifford, with Burt, Maggie, and Amy,
made the call which would naturally inaugurate an exchange of social
visits. Hargrove was especially interested in the old gentleman, and
they were at once deep in rural affairs. Maggie was a little reserved at
first with Mrs. Hargrove, but the latter, with all her stateliness, was a
zealous housekeeper, and so the two ladies were soon _en rapport._

The young people adjourned to the piazza, and their merry laughter and
animated talk proved that if there had been any constraint it was
vanishing rapidly. Amy was naturally a little shy at first, but Miss
Hargrove had the tact to put her guests immediately at ease. She proposed
to have a good time during the remainder of the summer, and saw in Burt a
means to that end, while she instinctively felt that she must propitiate
Amy in order to accomplish her purpose. Therefore she was disposed to pay
a little court to her on general principles. She had learned that the
young girl was a ward of Mr. What Burt was to Amy she did not
know, but was sure she could soon find out, and his manner had led to the
belief that he was not a committed and acknowledged lover. She made no
discoveries, however, for he was not one to display a real preference in
public, and indeed, in accordance with his scheme, she received his most
marked attentions. She could
not immediately accept of this genuine child of nature, whose very
simplicity was puzzling. It might be the perfection of well-bred reserve,
such complete art as to appear artless. Miss Hargrove had been in society
too long to take anything impulsively on trust. Still, she was charmed
with the young girl, and Amy was also genuinely pleased with her new
acquaintance. Before they parted a horseback ride was arranged, at Burt's
suggestion, for the next afternoon. This was followed by visits that soon
lost all formality, boating on the river, other rides, drives, and
excursions to points of interest throughout the region. Webb was
occasionally led to participate in these, but he usually had some excuse
for remaining at home. He, also, was a new type to Miss Hargrove,
"indigenous to the soil," she smilingly said to herself, "and a fine
growth too. With his grave face and ways he makes a splendid contrast to
his brother." She found him too reticent for good-fellowship, and he gave
her the impression also that he knew too much about that which was remote
from her life and interests. At the same time, with her riper experience,
she speedily divined his secret, to which Amy was blind. "He could almost
say his prayers to Amy," she thought, as she returned after an evening
spent at the Cliffords', "and she doesn't know it." With all his frankness, Burt's relations to Amy still baffled her. She
sometimes thought she saw his eyes following the young girl with
lover-like fondness, and she also thought that he was a little more
pronounced in his attentions to her in Amy's absence. Acquaintanceship
ripened into intimacy as plans matured under the waning suns of July, and
the girls often spent the night together. Amy was soon beguiled into
giving her brief, simple history, omitting, of course, all reference to
Bart's passionate declaration and his subsequent expectations. As far as
she herself was concerned, she had no experiences of this character to
relate, and her nature was much too fine to gossip about Burt. Miss
Hargrove soon accepted Amy's perfect simplicity as a charming fact, and
while the young girl had all the refinement and intelligence of her city
friend, the absence of certain phases of experience made her companionship
all the more fascinating and refreshing. It was seen that she had grown
thus far in secluded and sheltered nooks, and the ignorance that resulted
was like morning dew upon a flower. Of one thing her friend thought herself
assured--Burt had never touched Amy's heart, and she was as unconscious of
herself as of Webb's well-hidden devotion. The Clifford family interested
Miss Gertrude exceedingly, and her innate goodness of heart was proved by
the fact that she soon became a favorite with Mr. She
never came to the house without bringing flowers to the latter--not only
beautiful exotics from the florists, but wreaths of clematis, bunches of
meadow-rue from her rambles, and water-lilies and cardinal-flowers from
boating excursions up the Moodna Creek--and the secluded invalid enjoyed
her brilliant beauty and piquant ways as if she had been a rare flower
herself. Burt had entered on his scheme with the deepest interest and with
confident expectations. As time passed, however, he found that he could
not pique Amy in the slightest degree; that she rather regarded his
interest in Miss Hargrove as the most natural thing in the world, because
she was so interesting. Therefore he at last just let himself drift, and
was content with the fact that the summer was passing delightfully. That
Miss Hargrove's dark eyes sometimes quickened his pulse strangely did not
trouble him; it had often been quickened before. When they were alone,
and she sang to him in her rich contralto, and he, at her request, added
his musical tenor, it seemed perfectly natural that he should bend over
her toward the notes in a way that was not the result of near-sightedness. Burt was amenable to other attractions than that of gravitation. Webb was the only one not blind to the drift of events. While he forbore
by word or sign to interfere, he felt that new elements were entering
into the problem of the future. He drove the farm and garden work along
with a tireless energy against which even Leonard remonstrated. But Webb
knew that his most wholesome antidote for suspense and trouble was work,
and good for all would come of his remedy. He toiled long hours in the
oat harvest. He sowed seed which promised a thousand bushels of turnips. Land foul with weeds, or only half subdued, he sowed with that best of
scavenger crops, buckwheat, which was to be plowed under as soon as in
blossom. The vegetable and fruit gardens gave him much occupation, also,
and the table fairly groaned under the over-abundant supply, while Abram
was almost daily despatched to the landing or to neighboring markets with
loads of various produce. The rose garden, however, seemed to afford Webb
his chief recreation and a place of rest, and the roses in Amy's belt
were the wonder and envy of all who saw them. His mother sometimes looked
at him curiously, as he still brought to her the finest specimens, and
one day she said: "Webb, I never knew even you to be so tireless before. You are growing very thin, and you are certainly going beyond your
strength, and--forgive me--you seem restlessly active. Have you any
trouble in which mother can help you?" "You always help me, mother," he said, gently; "but I have no trouble
that requires your or any one's attention. I like to be busy, and there
is much to do. I am getting the work well along, so that I can take a
trip in August, and not leave too much for Leonard to look after." August came, and with it the promise of drought, but he and his elder
brother had provided against it. The young trees had been well mulched
while the ground was moist, and deep, thorough cultivation rendered the
crops safe unless the rainless period should be of long duration. Already in the rustling foliage there were whisperings of autumn. The
nights grew longer, and were filled with the sounds of insect life. The
robins disappeared from about the house, and were haunting distant
groves, becoming as wild as they had formerly been domestic. The season
of bird song was over for the year. The orioles whistled in a languid and
desultory way occasionally, and the smaller warblers sometimes gave
utterance to defective strains, but the leaders of the feathered chorus,
the thrushes, were silent. The flower-beds flamed with geraniums and
salvias, and were gay with gladioli, while Amy and Mrs. Clifford exulted
in the extent and variety of their finely quilled and rose-like asters
and dahlias. The foliage of the trees had gained its darkest hues, and
the days passed, one so like another that nature seemed to be taking a
summer siesta. CHAPTER XLI

A FIRE IN THE MOUNTAINS


A day in August can be as depressing as a typical one in May is
inspiring, or in June entrancing. As the season advanced Nature appeared
to be growing languid and faint. There was neither cloud by day nor dew
at night. The sun burned rather than vivified the earth, and the grass
and herbage withered and shrivelled before its unobstructed rays. The
foliage along the roadsides grew dun- from the dust, and those who
rode or drove on thoroughfares were stifled by the irritating clouds that
rose on the slightest provocation. Pleasure could be found only on the
unfrequented lanes that led to the mountains or ran along their bases. Even there trees that drew their sustenance from soil spread thinly on
the rocks were seen to be dying, their leaves not flushing with autumnal
tints, but hanging limp and bleached as if they had exhaled their vital
juices. The moss beneath them, that had been softer to the tread than a
Persian rug, crumbled into powder under the foot. Alf went to gather
huckleberries, but, except in moist and swampy places, found them
shrivelled on the bushes. Even the corn leaves began to roll on the
uplands, and Leonard shook his head despondingly. Webb's anxieties,
however, were of a far deeper character, and he was philosophical enough
to average the year's income. If the cows did come home hungry from their
pasture, there was abundance of hay and green-corn fodder to carry them
through until the skies should become more propitious. Besides, there was
an unfailing spring upon the place, and from this a large cask on wheels
was often filled, and was then drawn by one of the quiet farm-horses to
the best of the flower beds, the young trees, and to such products of the
garden as would repay for the expenditure of time and labor. The ground
was never sprinkled so that the morning sun of the following day would
drink up the moisture, but so deluged that the watering would answer for
several days. It was well known that partial watering does only harm. Nature can be greatly assisted at such times, but it must be in
accordance with her laws. The grapevine is a plant that can endure an
unusual degree of drought, and the fruit will be all the earlier and
sweeter for it. An excellent fertilizer for the grape is suds from the
laundry, and by filling a wide, shallow basin, hollowed out from the
earth around the stems, with this alkaline infusion, the vines were kept
in the best condition. The clusters of the earlier varieties were already
beginning to color, and the season insured the perfect ripening of those
fine old kinds, the Isabella and Catawba, that too often are frost-bitten
before they become fit for the table. Thus it would appear that Nature has compensations for her worst
moods--greater compensations than are thought of by many. Drought causes
the roots of plants and trees to strike deep, and so extends the range of
their feeding-ground, and anchors vegetation of all kinds more firmly in
the soil. Nevertheless, a long dry period is always depressing. The bright green
fades out of the landscape, the lawns and grass-plots become brown and
sear, the air loses its sweet, refreshing vitality, and is often so
charged with smoke from forest-fires, and impalpable dust, that
respiration is not agreeable. Apart from considerations of profit and
loss, the sympathy of the Clifford household was too deep with Nature to
permit the indifference of those whose garden is the market stall and the
florist's greenhouse, and to whom vistas in hotel parlors and piazzas are
the most attractive. "It seems to me," Leonard remarked at the dinner-table one day, "that
droughts are steadily growing more serious and frequent." "While I remember a few in early life
that were more prolonged than any we have had of late years, they must
have resulted from exceptional causes, for we usually had an abundance of
rain, and did not suffer as we do now from violent alternations of
weather. There was one year when there was scarcely a drop of rain
throughout the summer. Potatoes planted in the late spring were found in
the autumn dry and unsprouted. But such seasons were exceedingly rare,
and now droughts are the rule." "And the people are chiefly to blame for them," said Webb. "We are
suffering from the law of heredity. Our forefathers were compelled to
fell the trees to make room for the plow, and now one of the strongest
impulses of the average American is to cut down a tree. Our forests, on
which a moist climate so largely depends, are treated as if they
encumbered the ground. The smoke that we are breathing proves that fires
are ravaging to the north and west of us. They should be permitted no
more than a fire in the heart of a city. The future of the country
depends upon the people becoming sane on this subject. If we will send to
the Legislature pot-house politicans who are chiefly interested in
keeping up a supply of liquor instead of water, they should be provided
with a little primer giving the condition of lands denuded of their
forests. There is scarcely anything in their shifty ways, their blind
zeal for what the 'deestrict' wants to-day, regardless of coming days,
that so irritates me as their stupidity on this subject. A man who votes
against the protection of our forests is not fit for the office of
road-master. After all, the people are to blame, and their children will
pay dear for their ignorance and the spirit which finds expression in the
saying, 'After me the deluge'; and there will be flood and drought until
every foot of land not adapted to cultivation and pasturage is again
covered with trees. Indeed, a great deal of good land should be given up
to forests, for then what was cultivated would produce far more than
could be obtained from a treeless and therefore rainless country." cried Burt; "we must send you to the Legislature." "Primarily by instruction and the formation of public opinion. The
influence of trees on the climate should be taught in all our schools as
thoroughly as the multiplication-table. The national and state
governments would then be compelled to look beyond the next election, and
to appoint foresters who would have the same power to call out the people
to extinguish a forest fire that the sheriff has to collect his posse to
put down mob violence. In the long-run fire departments in our forest
tracts would be more useful than the same in cities, for, after all,
cities depend upon the country and its productiveness. The owners of
woodland should be taught the folly of cutting everything before them,
and of leaving the refuse brush to become like tinder. The smaller growth
should be left to mature, and the brush piled and burned in a way that
would not involve the destruction of every sprout and sapling over wide
areas. As it is, we are at the mercy of every careless boy, and such
vagrants as Lumley used to be before Amy woke him up. It is said--and
with truth at times, I fear--that the shiftless mountaineers occasionally
start the fires, for a fire means brief high-priced labor for them, and
afterward an abundance of whiskey." Events furnished a practical commentary on Webb's words. Miss Hargrove
had come over to spend the night with Amy, and to try some fine old
English glees that she had obtained from her city home. They had just
adjourned from the supper-table to the piazza when Lumley appeared, hat
in hand. He spoke to Leonard, but looked at Amy with a kind of wondering
admiration, as if he could not believe that the girl, who looked so fair
and delicate in her evening dress, so remote from him and his
surroundings, could ever have given him her hand, and spoken as if their
humanity had anything in common. The Cliffords were informed that a fire had broken out on a tract
adjoining their own. "City chaps was up there gunning out o' season,"
Lumley explained, "and wads from their guns must 'a started it." As there was much wood ranked on the Clifford tract, the matter was
serious. Abram and other farm-hands were summoned, and the brothers acted
as did the minute-men in the Revolution when the enemy appeared in their
vicinity. The young men excused themselves, and bustle and confusion
followed. Burt, with a flannel blouse belted tightly around his waist,
soon dashed up to the front piazza on his horse, and, flourishing a rake,
said, laughingly, "I don't look much like a knight sallying forth to
battle-do I?" "You look as if you could be one if the occasion arose," Miss Hargrove
replied. During the half-jesting badinage that followed Amy stole away. Behind the
house Webb was preparing to mount, when a light hand fell on his
shoulder. "You don't seem
to spare yourself in anything. I dread to have you go up into those
darkening mountains." "Why, Amy," he replied, laughing, "one would think I was going to fight
Indians, and you feared for my scalp." "I am not so young and blind but that I can see that you are quietly half
reckless with yourself," she replied; and her tone indicated that she was
a little hurt. "I pledge you my word that I will not be reckless tonight; and, after
all, this is but disagreeable, humdrum work that we often have to do. Burt will be there to watch over me, you
know," he added. "Oh, he's talking romantic nonsense to Miss Hargrove. I wish I was as sure of you, and I wish I had more influence
over you. I'm not such a very little sister, even if I don't know enough
to talk to you as you would like;" and she left him abruptly. He mastered a powerful impulse to spring from his horse and call her
back. A moment's thought taught him, however, that he could not trust
himself then to say a word, and he rode rapidly away. "That is the best chance for us
both, unless--" But he hesitated to put into words the half-formed hope
that Miss Hargrove's appearance in the little drama of their lives might
change its final scenes. "She's jealous of her friend, at last," he
concluded, and this conviction gave him little comfort. Burt soon
overtook him, and their ride was comparatively silent, for each was busy
with his own thoughts. Lumley was directed to join them at the fire, and
then was forgotten by all except Amy, who, by a gentle urgency, induced
him to go to the kitchen and get a good supper. Before he departed she
slipped a banknote into his hand with which to buy a dress for the baby. Lumley had to pass more than one groggery on his way to the mountains,
but the money was as safe in his pocket as it would have been in Amy's. he soliloquized, as he hastened
through the gathering darkness with his long, swinging stride. "I didn't
know there was sich gells. She's never lectured me once, but she jest
smiles and looks a feller into bein' a man." Miss Hargrove had noted Amy's influence over the mountaineer, and she
asked for an explanation. Amy, in a very brief, modest way, told of her
visits to the wretched cabin, and said, in conclusion: "I feel sorry for
poor Lumley. The fact that he is trying to do better, with so much
against him, proves what he might have been. That's one of the things
that trouble me most, as I begin to think and see a little of life; so
many people have no chance worth speaking of." "The thing that ought to trouble me most is, I suppose, that those who
have a chance do so little for such people. Amy," she added, sadly, after
a moment's thought, "I've had many triumphs over men, but none like
yours; and I feel to-night as if I could give them all to see a man look
at me as that poor fellow looked at you. It was the grateful homage of a
human soul to whom you had given something that in a dim way was felt to
be priceless. The best that I can remember in my pleasure-loving life is
that I have not permitted myself selfishly and recklessly to destroy
manhood, but I fear no one is the better for having known me." "You do yourself injustice," said Amy, warmly. "I'm the better and
happier for having known you. Papa had a morbid horror of fashionable
society, and this accounts for my being so unsophisticated. With all your
experience of such society, I have perfect faith in you, and could trust
you implicitly." (and Amy thought she had never seen such
depth and power in human eyes as in those of Miss Hargrove, who encircled
the young girl with her arm, and looked as if seeking to detect the
faintest doubt). "Yes," said Amy, with quiet emphasis. Miss Hargrove drew a long breath, and then said: "That little word may do
me more good than all the sermons I ever heard. Many would try to be
different if others had more faith in them. I think that is the secret of
your power over the rough man that has just gone. You recognized the good
that was in him, and made him conscious of it. Well, I must try to
deserve your trust." Then she stepped out on the dusky piazza, and
sighed, as she thought: "It may cost me dear. She seemed troubled at my
words to Burt, and stole away as if she were the awkward third person. I
may have misjudged her, and she cares for him after all." Amy went to the piano, and played softly until summoned without by an
excited exclamation from her friend. A line of fire was creeping toward
them around a lofty highland, and it grew each moment more and more
distinct. "Oh, I know from its position that it's drawing near our
tract," cried Amy. "If it is so bright to us at this distance, it must be
almost terrible to those near by. I suppose they are all up there just in
front of it, and Burt is so reckless." She was about to say Webb, but,
because of some unrecognized impulse, she did not. The utterance of
Burt's name, however, was not lost on Miss Hargrove. For a long time the girls watched the scene with awe, and each, in
imagination, saw an athletic figure begrimed with smoke, and sending out
grotesque shadows into the obscurity, as the destroying element was met
and fought in ways unknown to them, which, they felt sure, involved
danger. Miss Hargrove feared that they both had the same form in mind. She was not a girl to remain long unconscious of her heart's inclinations,
and she knew that Burt Clifford had quickened her pulses as no man had ever
done before. This very fact made her less judicial, less keen, in her
insight. If he was so attractive to her, could Amy be indifferent to him
after months of companionship? She had thought that she understood Amy
thoroughly, but was beginning to lose faith in her impression. While in
some respects Amy was still a child, there were quiet depths in her nature
of which the young girl herself was but half conscious. She often lapsed
into long reveries. Never had he been more
fraternal in his manner, but apparently she was losing her power to
interest him, to lure him away from the material side of life. "I can't
keep pace with him," she sighed; "and now that he has learned all about my
little range of thoughts and knowledge, he finds that I can be scarcely
more to him than Johnnie, whom he pets in much the same spirit that he does
me, and then goes to his work or books and forgets us both. He could help
me so much, if he only thought it worth his while! I'm sure I'm not
contented to be ignorant, and many of the things that he knows so much
about interest me most." Thus each girl was busy with her thoughts, as they sat in the warm summer
night and watched the vivid line draw nearer. Clifford and Maggie
came out from time to time, and were evidently disturbed by the unchecked
progress of the fire. Alf had gone with his father, and anything like a
conflagration so terrified Johnnie that she dared not leave her mother's
lighted room. Suddenly the approaching line grew dim, was broken, and before very long
even the last red glow disappeared utterly. Clifford,
rubbing his hands, "they have got the fire under, and I don't believe it
reached oar tract." "How did they put it out so suddenly?" "Were they
not fighting it all the time?" "The boys will soon be here, and they can give you a more graphic account
than I. Mother is a little excited and troubled, as she always is when
her great babies are away on such affairs, so I must ask you to excuse
me." In little more than half an hour a swift gallop was heard, and Burt soon
appeared, in the light of the late-rising moon. "It's all out," he
exclaimed. "Leonard and Webb propose remaining an hour or two longer, to
see that it does not break out again. There's no need of their doing so,
for Lumley promised to watch till morning. If
you'll wait till I put on a little of the aspect of a white man, I'll
join you." He had been conscious of a feverish impatience to get back to
the ladies, having carefully, even in his thoughts, employed the plural,
and he had feared that they might have retired. Miss Hargrove exclaimed: "How absurd! You wish to go and divest yourself
of all picturesqueness! I've seen well-dressed men before, and would much
prefer that you should join us as you are. We can then imagine that you
are a bandit or a frontiersman, and that your rake was a rifle, which you
had used against the Indians. We are impatient to have you tell us how
you fought the fire." He gave but scant attention to Thunder that night, and soon stepped out
on the moonlit piazza, his tall, fine figure outlined to perfection in
his close-fitting costume. "You will, indeed, need all your imagination to make anything of our task
to-night," he said. "Fighting a mountain fire is the most prosaic of hard
work. Suppose the line of fire coming down toward me from where you are
sitting." As yet unknown to him, a certain subtile flame was originating
in that direction. "We simply begin well in advance of it, so that we may
have time to rake a space, extending along the whole front of the fire,
clear of leaves and rubbish, and as far as possible to hollow out with
hoes a trench through this space. Thus, when the fire comes to this
cleared area, there is nothing to burn, and it goes out for want of fuel. Of course, it's rough work, and it must be done rapidly, but you can see
that all the heroic elements which you may have associated with our
expedition are utterly lacking." Amy and I have had our little romance, and have
imagined you charging the line of fire in imminent danger of being
strangled with smoke, if nothing worse." Amy soon heard Maggie bustling about, preparing a midnight lunch for
those who would come home hungry as well as weary, and she said that she
would go and try to help. To Burt this seemed sufficient reason for her
absence, but Miss Hargrove thought, "Perhaps she saw that his eyes were
fixed chiefly on me as he gave his description. I wish I knew just how
she feels toward him!" But the temptation to remain in the witching moonlight was too strong to
be resisted. His mellow tones were a music that she had never heard
before, and her eyes grew lustrous with suppressed feeling, and a
happiness to which she was not sure she was entitled. The spell of her
beauty was on him also, and the moments flew by unheeded, until Amy was
heard playing and singing softly to herself. was Miss Hargrove's mental comment, and with not a little
compunction she rose and went into the parlor. Burt lighted a cigar, in
the hope that the girls would again join him, but Leonard, Webb, and Alf
returned sooner than they were expected, and all speedily sat down to
their unseasonable repast. To Amy's surprise, Webb was the liveliest of
the party, but he looked gaunt from fatigue--so worn, indeed, that he
reminded her of the time when he had returned from Burt's rescue. But
there was no such episode as had then occurred before they parted for the
night, and to this she now looked back wistfully. He rose before the
others, pleaded fatigue, and went to his room. CHAPTER XLII

CAMPING OUT


They all gathered at a late breakfast, and the surface current of family
and social life sparkled as if there were no hidden depths and secret
thoughts. Amy's manner was not cold toward Webb, but her pride was
touched, and her feelings were a little hurt. While disposed to blame
herself only that she had not the power to interest him and secure his
companionship, as in the past, it was not in human nature to receive with
indifference such an apparent hint that he was far beyond her. "It would
be more generous in Webb to help than to ignore me because I know so
little," she thought. "Very well: I can have a good time with Burt and
Gertrude until Webb gets over his hurry and preoccupation;" and with a
slight spirit of retaliation she acted as if she thoroughly enjoyed
Burt's lively talk. The young fellow soon made a proposition that caused a general and breezy
excitement. "There never was a better time than this for camping out," he
said. "The ground is dry, and there is scarcely any dew. Suppose we go up and spend a few days on our mountain
tract? Maggie could chaperon the party, and I've no doubt that Dr. How could she leave the old people and her housekeeping? Clifford, however, became the strongest advocates of the scheme. They
could get along with the servants, they said, and a little outing would
do Maggie good. Leonard, who had listened in comparative silence, brought
his wife to a decision by saying: "You had better go, Maggie. You will
have all the housekeeping you want on the mountain, and I will go back
and forth every day and see that all's right. It's not as if you were
beyond the reach of home, for you could be here in an hour were there
need. Come now, make up your mind for a regular lark. The children were wild with delight at the prospect, and Miss Hargrove
and Amy scarcely less pleased. The latter had furtively watched Webb, who
at first could not disguise a little perplexity and trouble at the
prospect. But he had thought rapidly, and felt that a refusal to be one
of the party might cause embarrassing surmises. Therefore he also soon
became zealous in his advocacy of the plan. He felt that circumstances
were changing and controlling his action. He had fully resolved on an
absence of some weeks, but the prolonged drought and the danger it
involved--the Cliffords would lose at least a thousand dollars should a
fire sweep over their mountain tract--made it seem wrong for him to leave
home until rain insured safety. Moreover, he believed that he detected
symptoms in Burt which, with his knowledge of his brother, led to hopes
that he could not banish. An occasional expression in Miss Hargrove's
dark eyes, also, did not tend to lessen these hopes. "The lack of
conventionality incident to a mountain camp," he thought, "may develop
matters so rapidly as to remove my suspense. With all Amy's gentleness,
she is very sensitive and proud, and Burt cannot go much further with
Miss Hargrove without so awakening her pride as to render futile all
efforts to retrieve himself. After all, Miss Hargrove, perhaps, would
suit him far better than Amy. They are both fond of excitement and
society. At least, if the way were clear, I
would try as no man ever tried to win Amy, and I should be no worse off
than I am if I failed in the attempt." These musings were rather remote from his practical words, for he had
taken pains to give the impression that their woodland would be far safer
for the proposed expedition, and Amy had said, a little satirically, "We
are now sure of Webb, since he can combine so much business with
pleasure." He only smiled back in an inscrutable way. Musk-melons formed one of their breakfast dishes, and Miss Hargrove
remarked, "Papa has been exceedingly annoyed by having some of his finest
ones stolen." Burt began laughing, and said: "He should imitate my tactics. Ours were
stolen last year, and as they approached maturity, some time since, I put
up a notice in large black letters, 'Thieves, take warning: be careful
not to steal the poisoned melons.' Hearing a dog bark one night about a
week ago, I took a revolver and went out. The moonlight was clear, and
there, reading the notice, was a group of ragamuffin boys. Stealing up
near them, behind some shrubbery, I fired my pistol in the air, and they
fairly tumbled over each other in their haste to escape. We've had no
trouble since, I can assure you. I'll drive you home this morning, and,
with your father's permission, will put up a similar notice in your
garden. We also must make our arrangements for camping promptly. It surely will not if our mountain
experience makes us wish it would;" and, full of his projects, he
hastened to harness Thunder to his light top-wagon. He might have taken the two-seated carriage, and asked Amy to accompany
them, but it had not occurred to him to do so, especially as he intended
to drive on rapidly to Newburgh to make arrangements for the tents. She
felt a little slighted and neglected, and Miss Hargrove saw that she did,
but thought that any suggestion of a different arrangement might lead to
embarrassment. She began to think, with Webb, that the camping experience
would make everything clearer. At any rate, it promised so much
unhackneyed pleasure that she resolved to make the most of it, and then
decide upon her course. She was politic, and cautioned Burt to say
nothing until she had first seen her father, for she was not certain how
her stately and conventional mother would regard the affair. Hargrove in his library, and he knew from her preliminary
caresses that some unusual favor was to be asked. "Come," he said, "you wily little strategist, what do you want now? His answer was unexpected, for he asked, "Is Mr. "No," she replied, faintly; "he's on the piazza." Then, with unusual
animation, she began about the melons. Her father's face softened, and he
looked at her a little humorously, for her flushed, handsome face would
disarm a Puritan. "You are seeing a great deal of this young Mr. Her color deepened, and she began, hastily, "Oh, well, papa, I've seen a
good deal of a great many gentlemen." "Come, come, Trurie, no disguises with me. Your old father is not so
blind as you think, and I've not lived to my time of life in ignorance of
the truth that prevention is better than cure. Whether you are aware of
it or not, your eyes have revealed to me a growing interest in Mr. "He is a comparatively poor man, I suppose, and while I think him a fine
fellow, I've seen in him no great aptness for business. If I saw that he
was no more to you than others who have sought your favor, I would not
say a word, Trurie, for when you are indifferent you are abundantly able
to take care of yourself. I knew you would in
time meet some one who would have the power to do more than amuse you,
and my love, darling, is too deep and vigilant to be blind until it is
too late to see. You might
become more than interested during an experience like the one proposed." "If I should, papa, am I so poor that I have not even the privilege of a
village girl, who can follow her heart?" "My advice would be," he replied, gently, "that you guide yourself by
both reason and your heart. This is our secret council-chamber, and one
is speaking to you who has no thought but for your lasting happiness." She took a chair near him, and looked into his eyes, as she said,
thoughtfully and gravely: "I should be both silly and unnatural, did I
not recognize your motive and love. I know I am not a child any longer,
and should have no excuse for any school-girl or romantic folly. You have
always had my confidence; you would have had it in this case as soon as
there was anything to tell. I scarcely understand myself as yet, but must
admit that I am more interested in Mr. Clifford than in any man I ever
met, and, as you said, I also have not reached my time of life without
knowing what this may lead to. You married mamma when she was younger
than I, and you, too, papa, were 'a comparatively poor man' at the time. I know all that wealth and
fashionable society can give me, and I tell you honestly, papa, I would
rather be the happy wife that Maggie Clifford is than marry any
millionaire in New York. There is no need, however, for such serious
talk, for there is nothing yet beyond congenial companionship, and--Well,"
she added, hastily, in memory of Amy, "I don't believe anything will come
of it. There will probably be two
married ladies in the party, and so I don't see that even mamma can
object. Best assured I shall never become engaged to any one without your
consent; that is," she added, with another of her irresistible caresses,
"unless you are very unreasonable, and I become very old." "Very well, Trurie, you shall go, with your mother's consent, and I think
I can insure that. As you say, you are no longer a child." And his
thought was, "I have seen enough of life to know that it is best not to
be too arbitrary in such matters." After a moment he added, gravely, "You
say you have thought. Think a great deal more before you take any steps
which may involve all your future." Burt was growing uneasy on the piazza, and feared that Miss Hargrove
might not obtain the consent that she had counted on so confidently. He
was a little surprised, also, to find how the glamour faded out of his
anticipations at the thought of her absence, but explained his feeling by
saying to himself, "She is so bright and full of life, and has so fine a
voice, that we should miss her sadly." He was greatly relieved,
therefore, when Mr. Hargrove came out and greeted him courteously. Gertrude had been rendered too conscious, by her recent interview, to
accompany her father, but she soon appeared, and no one could have
imagined that Burt was more to her than an agreeable acquaintance. Hargrove gave a reluctant consent, and it was soon settled that they
should try to get off on the afternoon of the following day. Burt also
included in the invitation young Fred Hargrove, and then drove away
elated. At the dinner-table he announced his success in procuring the tents, and
his intention of going for them in the afternoon. At the same time he
exhorted Leonard and Maggie to prepare provisions adequate to mountain
appetites, adding, "Webb, I suppose, will be too busy to do more than
join us at the last moment." As he was at supper as
usual, no questions were asked. Before it was light the next morning Amy
thought she heard steps on the stairs, and the rear hall-door shut
softly. When finally awaking, she was not sure but that her impression
was a dream. As she came down to breakfast Burt greeted her with dismay. "The tents, that I put on the back piazza, are gone," he said. No one had seen him, and it was soon learned that a horse and a strong
wagon were also missing. "Ah, Burt," cried Amy, laughing, "rest assured Webb has stolen a march on
you, and taken his own way of retaliation for what you said at the
dinner-table yesterday. I believe he
has chosen a camping-ground, and the tents are standing on it." "He should have remembered that others might have some choice in the
matter," was the discontented reply. "If Webb has chosen the camping-ground, you will all be pleased with it,"
said his mother, quietly. "I think he is merely trying to give a pleasant
surprise." He soon appeared, and explained that, with Lumley's help, he had made
some preparations, since any suitable place, with water near, from which
there was a fine outlook, would have seemed very rough and uninviting to
the ladies unless more work was done than could be accomplished in the
afternoon of their arrival. "Now I think that is very thoughtful of you, Webb," said Amy. "The steps
I heard last night were not a dream. At what unearthly hour did you
start?" "Was I so heavy-footed as to disturb you?" "Oh, no, Webb," she said, with a look of comic distress, in which there
was also a little reproach; "it's not your feet that disturb me, but your
head. You have stuffed it so full of learning that I am depressed by the
emptiness of mine." He laughed, as he replied, "I hope all your troubles may be quite as
imaginary." Then he told Leonard to spend the morning in helping Maggie,
who would know best what was needed for even mountain housekeeping, and
said that he would see to farm matters, and join them early in the
evening. The peaches were ripening, and Amy, from her window, saw that he
was taking from the trees all fit to market; also that Abram, under his
direction, was busy with the watering-cart. "Words cannot impose upon
me," she thought, a little bitterly. "He knows how I long for his
companionship, and it's not a little thing to be made to feel that I am
scarcely better qualified for it than Johnnie." Marvin's, who promised to join them, with his
wife, on the following day. He had a tent which he had occasionally used
in his ornithological pursuits. At two in the afternoon a merry party started for the hills. All the
vehicles on the farm had been impressed into the service to bring up the
party, with chairs, cooking-utensils, provisions, bedding, etc. When they
reached the ground that Webb had selected, even Burt admitted his pleased
surprise. The outlook over the distant river, and a wide area of country
dotted with villages, was superb, while to the camp a home-like look had
already been given, and the ladies, with many mental encomiums, saw how
secluded and inviting an aspect had been imparted to their especial
abode. As they came on the scene, Lumley was finishing the construction
of a dense screen of evergreen boughs, which surrounded the canvas to the
doorway. Not far away an iron pot was slung on a cross-stick in gypsy
style, and it was flanked by rock-work fireplaces which Maggie declared
were almost equal to a kitchen range. The men's tent was pitched at easy
calling distance, and, like that of the ladies, was surrounded by a thick
growth of trees, whose shade would be grateful. A little space had been
cleared between the two tents for a leaf-canopied dining-hall, and a
table of boards improvised. The ground, as far as possible, had been
cleared of loose stones and rubbish. Around the fireplace mossy rocks
abounded, and were well adapted for picturesque groupings. What touched
Amy most was a little flowerbed made of the rich black mould of decayed
leaves, in which were some of her favorite flowers, well watered. This
did not suggest indifference on the part of Webb. About fifty feet from
the tents the mountain shelf sloped off abruptly, and gave the
magnificent view that has been mentioned. Even Burt saw how much had been
gained by Webb's forethought, and frankly acknowledged it. As it was,
they had no more than time to complete the arrangements for the night
before the sun's level rays lighted up a scene that was full of joyous
activity and bustle. The children's happy voices made the echoes ring,
and Fred Hargrove, notwithstanding his city antecedents, yielded with
delight to the love of primitive life that exists in every boy's heart. Although he was a few years older than Alf, they had become friendly
rivals as incipient sportsmen and naturalists. Amy felt that she was
coming close to nature's heart, and the novelty of it all was scarcely
less exciting to her than to Johnnie. To little Ned it was a place of
wonder and enchantment, and he kept them all in a mild state of terror by
his exploring expeditions. At last his father threatened to take him
home, and, with this awful punishment before his eyes, he put his thumb
in his mouth, perched upon a rock, and philosophically watched the
preparations for supper. Maggie was the presiding genius of the occasion,
and looked like the light-hearted girl that Leonard had wooed more than a
dozen years before. She ordered him around, jested with him, and laughed
at him in such a piquant way that Burt declared she was proving herself
unfit for the duties of chaperon by getting up a flirtation with her
husband. Meanwhile, under her supervision, order was evoked from chaos,
and appetizing odors arose from the fireplace. Miss Hargrove admitted to herself that in all the past she had never
known such hours of keen enjoyment, and she was bent on proving that,
although a city-bred girl, she could take her part in the work as well as
in the fun. Nor were her spirits dampened by the fact that Burt was often
at her side, and that Amy did not appear to care. The latter, however,
was becoming aware of his deepening interesting in her brilliant friend. As yet she was not sure whether it was more than a good-natured and
hospitable effort to make one so recently a stranger at home with them,
or a new lapse on his part into a condition of ever-enduring love and
constancy--and the smile that followed the thought was not flattering to
Burt. A little before supper was ready Maggie asked him to get a pail of water. "Come, Miss Gertrude," he said, "and I'll show you the Continental spring
at which the Revolutionary soldiers drank more than a hundred years ago;"
and she tripped away with him, nothing loth. As they reappeared, flushed
and laughing, carrying the pail between them, Amy trilled out,

"Jack and Jill came up the hill." A moment later, Webb followed them, on horseback, and was greeted with
acclamations and overwhelmed with compliments. Miss Hargrove was only too
glad of the diversion from herself, for Amy's words had made her absurdly
conscious for a society girl. Never had green corn, roasted in
its husks on the coals, tasted so delicious, and never before were
peaches and cream so ambrosial. Amy made it her care that poor Lumley
should feast also, but the smile with which she served him was the
sustenance he most craved. Then, as the evening breeze grew chilly, and
the night darkened, lanterns were hung in the trees, the fire was
replenished, and they sat down, the merriest of merry parties. Even Webb
had vowed that he would ignore the past and the future, and make the most
of that camp-fire by the wayside of life. It must be admitted, however,
that his discovery of Burt and Miss Hargrove alone at the spring had much
to do with his resolution. Stories and songs succeeded each other, until
Ned was asleep in Maggie's arms, and Johnnie nodding at her side. In
reaction from the excitements and fatigues of the day, they all early
sought the rest which is never found in such perfection as in a mountain
camp. Hemlock boughs formed the mattresses on which their blankets were
spread, and soon there were no sounds except the strident chirpings of
insects and the calls of night-birds. There was one perturbed spirit, however, and at last Burt stole out and
sat by the dying fire. When the mind is ready for impressions, a very
little thing will produce them vividly, and Amy's snatch of song about
"Jack and Jill" had awakened Burt at last to a consciousness that he
might be carrying his attention to Miss Hargrove too far, in view of his
vows and inexorable purpose of constancy. He assured himself that his
only object was to have a good time, and enjoy the charming society of
his new acquaintance. Of course, he was in love with Amy, and she was all
that he could desire. Girls
even like Amy were not so unsophisticated as they appeared to be, and he
felt that he was profoundly experienced in such questions, if in nothing
else. and would she not be led, by his
evident admiration for Miss Hargrove, to believe that he was mercurial
and not to be depended upon? He had to admit to himself that some
experiences in the past had tended to give him this reputation. "I was
only a boy then," he muttered, with a stern compression of the lips. "I'll prove that I am a man now;" and having made this sublime
resolution, he slept the sleep of the just. All who have known the freshness, the elasticity, the mental and physical
vigor, with which one springs from a bed of boughs, will envy the camping
party's awakening on the following morning. Webb resolved to remain and
watch the drift of events, for he was growing almost feverish in his
impatience for more definite proof that his hopes were not groundless. But he was doomed to disappointment and increasing doubt. Burt began to
show himself a skilful diplomatist. He felt that, perhaps, he had checked
himself barely in time to retrieve his fortunes and character with Amy,
but he was too adroit to permit any marked change to appear in his manner
and action. He said to himself that he cordially liked and admired Miss
Hargrove, but he believed that she had enjoyed not a few flirtations, and
was not averse to the addition of another to the list. Even his
self-complacency had not led him to think that she regarded him in any
other light than that of a very agreeable and useful summer friend. He
had seen enough of society to be aware that such temporary friendships
often border closely on the sentimental, and yet with no apparent trace
remaining in after-years. To Amy, however, such affairs would not appear
in the same light as they might to Miss Hargrove, and he felt that he had
gone far enough. But not for the world would he be guilty of _gaucherie,_
of neglecting Miss Hargrove for ostentatious devotion to Amy. Indeed, he
was more pronounced in his admiration than ever, but in many little
unobtrusive ways he tried to prove to Amy that she had his deeper thoughts. She, however, was not at this time disposed to dwell upon the subject. His
manner merely tended to confirm the view that he, like herself, regarded
Miss Hargrove as a charming addition to their circle, and proposed that she
should enjoy herself thoroughly while with them. Amy also reproached
herself a little that she had doubted him so easily, and felt that he was
giving renewed proof of his good sense. He could be true to her, and yet be
most agreeable to her friend, and her former acquiescence in the future of
his planning remained undisturbed. Webb was more like the brother she
wished him to be than he had been for a long time. The little flowerbed was
an abiding reassurance, and so the present contained all that she desired. This was not true of either Webb or Miss Hargrove. The former, however,
did not lose heart. He thought he knew Burt too well to give up hope yet. The latter, with all her experience, was puzzled. She speedily became
conscious of the absence of a certain warmth and genuineness in Bart's
manner and words. The thermometer is not so sensitive to heat and cold as
the intuition of a girl like Miss Hargrove to the mental attitude of an
admirer, but no one could better hide her thoughts and feelings than she
when once upon her guard. CHAPTER XLIII

AN OLD TENEMENT


The few remaining days of August passed, and September came, bringing
little suggestion of autumn rains or coolness. Marvin had
joined them, and the former's interest in every wild creature of the
woods became infectious. Alf and Fred were his ardent disciples, and he
rarely found an indifferent listener in Amy. The heat of the day was
given up to reading and the fashioning of alpenstocks, and the mornings
and late afternoons to excursions. In one of these they had sat down to
rest near an immense decaying tree that was hollow in parts, and full of
holes from the topmost shattered branches to the ground. "That," said the doctor, "might fitly be called an old tenement-house. You have no idea how many and various creatures may have found a home in
it." He was immediately urged to enumerate its possible inhabitants in the
past, present, and future. The doctor, pleased with the conceit of regarding the decaying tree in
this light, began with animation: "All three of the squirrels of this
region have undoubtedly dwelt in it. I scarcely need do more than mention
the well-known saucy red or fox squirrel, whose delight is mischief. By
the way, we have at home two tame robins that before they could fly were
tumbled out of their nest by one of these ruthless practical jokers. The
birds come in and out of the house like members of the family. The
graceful gray squirrel is scarcely less familiar than the red one. He
makes a lively pet, and we have all seen him turning the wheel attached
to his cage. The curious little flying-squirrel, however, is a stranger
even to those to whom he may be a near neighbor, for the reason that his
habits are chiefly nocturnal. He ventures out occasionally on a cloudy
day, but is shy and retiring. Thoreau relates an interesting experience
with one. He captured it in a decayed hemlock stump, wherein it had a
little nest of leaves, bits of bark, and pine needles. It bit viciously
at first, and uttered a few 'dry shrieks,' but he carried it home. After
it had been in his room a few hours it reluctantly allowed its soft fur
to be stroked. He says it had'very large, prominent black eyes, which
gave it an innocent look. In color it was a chestnut ash, inclining to
fawn, slightly browned, and white beneath. tinged yellow, the upper dark, perhaps black.' He put it into a
barrel, and fed it with an apple and shag-bark hickory-nuts. The next
morning he carried it back and placed it on the stump from which it had
been taken, and it ran up a sapling, from which it skimmed away to a
large maple nine feet distant, whose trunk it struck about four feet from
the ground. This tree it ascended thirty feet on the opposite side from
Thoreau, then, coming into view, it eyed its quondam captor for a moment
or two, as much as to say 'good-by.' Then away it went, first raising its
head as if choosing its objective point. Thoreau says its progress is
more like that of a bird than he had been led to believe from naturalists'
accounts, or than he could have imagined possible in a quadruped. Its
flight was not a regular descent on a given line. It veered to right and
left, avoiding obstructions, passed between branches of trees, and flew
horizontally part of the way, landing on the ground at last, over fifty-one
feet from the foot of the tree from which it sprang. After its leap,
however, it cannot renew its impetus in the air, but must alight and start
again. It appears to sail and steer much like a hawk when the latter does
not flap its wings. The little striped chipmunk, no doubt, has heaped up
its store of nuts in the hole there that opens from the ground into the
tree, and the pretty white-footed mouse, with its large eyes and ears, has
had its apartment in the decayed recesses that exist in the worm-eaten
roots. "Opossums and raccoons are well-known denizens of trees, and both furnish
famous country sports, especially in the South. ''Possum up de gum-tree,
cooney in de hollow,' is a line from a <DW64> ditty that touches a deep
chord in the African heart. The former is found not infrequently in this
region, but the Hudson seems to be the eastern boundary of its habitat." "I took two from a tree in one night," Burt remarked. "The raccoon's haunts, however, extend far to the northward, and it is
abundant in the regions bordering on the Adirondacks, though not common
in the dense pine woods of the interior. They are omnivorous creatures,
and often rob nests of eggs and young birds, for they are expert
climbers. They are fond of nuts and fruits, and especially of corn when
in the condition of a milky pulp. They are
also eager fishermen, although they are unable to pursue their prey under
water like the otter and mink. They like to play in shallows, and leave
no stone unturned in the hope of finding a crawfish under it. If fish have
been left in land-locked pools, they are soon devoured. '<DW53>-hunting by
the light of the harvest-moon has long been one of the most noted of rural
sports. During this month the corn kernels are in the most toothsome state
for the '<DW53> bill of fare, and there are few fields near forests where
they will not be marauding to-night, for they are essentially night
prowlers. A '<DW53> hunt usually takes place near midnight. Men, with dogs
trained to the sport, will repair to a cornfield known to be infested. The
feasters are soon tracked and treed, then shot, or else the tree is felled,
when such a snarling fight ensues as creates no little excitement. No
matter how plucky a cur may be, he finds his match in an old '<DW53>, and
often carries the scars of combat to his dying day. "If taken when young, raccoons make amusing pets, and become attached to
their masters, but they cannot be allowed at large, for they are as
mischievous as monkeys. Their curiosity is boundless, and they will pry
into everything within reach. Anything, to be beyond their reach, must be
under lock and key. They use their forepaws as hands, and will unlatch a
door with ease, and soon learn to turn a knob. Alf there could not begin
to ravage a pantry like a tame '<DW53>. They will devour honey, molasses,
sugar, pies, cake, bread, butter, milk--anything edible. They will
uncover preserve-jars as if Mrs. Leonard had given them lessons, and with
the certainty of a toper uncork a bottle and get drunk on its contents." "No pet '<DW53>s, Alf, if you please," said his mother. "Raccoons share with Reynard his reputation for cunning," the doctor
resumed, "and deserve it, but they do not use this trait for
self-preservation. They are not suspicious of unusual objects, and,
unlike a fox, are easily trapped. They hibernate during the coldest part
of the winter, reappearing in the latter part of February or March. They
are fond of little excursions, and usually travel in small family
parties, taking refuge in hollow trees about daylight. They make their
home high up, and prefer a hollow limb to the trunk of a tree. Some of
those half-decayed limbs yonder would just suit them. They have their
young in April--from four to six--and these little '<DW53>s remain with the
mother a year. While young they are fair eating, but grow tough and rank
with age. "Two other interesting animals may have lived in that tree, the least
weasel and his sanguinary cousin the ermine, or large weasel. Both are
brown, after the snow finally disappears, and both turn white with the
first snowstorm." "Now you are romancing, doctor," cried Miss Hargrove. "Yes," added Leonard, "tell us that you have caught a weasel asleep, and
we will, at least, look credulous; but this turning white with the first
snow, and brown as soon as the snow is gone, is a little off color." "It's true, nevertheless," maintained the doctor, "although I have seen
no satisfactory explanation of the changes. They not only make their
nests in hollow trees, but in the sides of banks. Were it not for its
habit of destroying the eggs and young of birds, the least weasel might
be regarded as a wholly useful creature, for it devours innumerable mice,
moles, shrews, and insects, and does not attack larger animals or
poultry. It is so exceedingly lithe and slender that its prey has no
chance to escape. Where a mouse or a mole can go it can go also, and if
outrun in the field, it follows the scent of its game like a hound, and
is as relentless as fate in its pursuit. They are not very shy, and
curiosity speedily overcomes their timidity. Sit down quietly, and they
will investigate you with intense interest, and will even approach rather
near in order to see better. Merriam describes one as standing
bolt-upright, and eying him, with its head bent at right angles to its
slender body. After a brief retreat it made many partial advances toward
him, meanwhile constantly sniffing the air in his direction. Merriam would have liked to know the weasel's opinion. They
have two or three litters a year, and the nest is made of dry leaves and
herbage. The mother weasel will defend her young at any cost, and never
hesitates to sacrifice her life in their behalf. She will fasten herself
by her sharp teeth to the nose of a dog, and teach him that weasel-hunting
has some drawbacks. "In its next of kin, the ermine, or large weasel, we have perhaps the
most cruel and bloodthirsty animal in existence. It is among mammals what
the butcher-bird is among the feathered tribes--an assassin, a beautiful
fiend. It would seem that nature reproduces among animals and plants
every phase of human character. Was it Nero or Caligula who said, 'Oh,
that Rome had but one neck, that I might sever it?' Such is the spirit
that animates the ermine. Its instinct to kill is so strong that, were it
possible, it would destroy the means of its subsistence. It would leave
none of its varied prey alive. The lion and even the man-eating tiger,
when gorged, are inert and quiet. They kill no more than they want for a
meal; but the ermine will attack a poultry-yard, satiate itself with the
brains of the fowls or by sucking their blood, and then, out of 'pure
cussedness,' will kill all the rest within reach. Fifty chickens have
been destroyed in a night by one of these remorseless little beasts. It
makes fearful ravages among grouse, rabbits, and hares. It is the
mythical vampire embodied. It is not very much larger than the least
weasel, and has the same long, lithe, slender body and neck. A gray
squirrel would look bulky beside one, but in indomitable courage and
pitiless ferocity I do not think it has an equal. Only a lack of material
or bodily fatigue suspends its bloody work, and its life is one long
career of carnage. It has a terrific set of teeth, which are worked by
most powerful muscles. Coues, an eminent naturalist, has given a
graphic account of him. His words, as I remember them, are a true
portrait of a murderer. 'His forehead is low, and nose sharp; his eyes
are small, penetrating, cunning, and glitter with an angry green light. His fierce face surmounts a body extraordinarily wiry, lithe, and
muscular, which ends in a singularly long, slender neck that can be
lifted at right angles with the body. When he is looking around, his neck
stretched up, his flat triangular head bent forward, swaying to and fro,
we have the image of a serpent.' "This is a true picture of the ermine when excited or angry; when at
rest, and in certain conditions of his fur, there are few more beautiful,
harmless, innocent-looking creatures. Let one of the animals on which he
preys approach, however, and instantly he becomes a demon. In the economy
of nature he often serves a very useful purpose. In many regions field
mice are destructive. A rat will fight
a man, if cornered, but it gives up at once in abject terror when
confronted by the large weasel. This arch-enemy has a pride in his
hunting, and when taking up his quarters in a barn will collect in one
place all the rats and mice he kills. Sometimes a hundred or more have
been found together as the result of two or three nights' work. The
ermine hunts, however, both by day and night, and climbs trees with great
facility. He is by no means shy, and one has been known to try to kill
chickens in a coop when a man was standing near him. Hunger was not his
motive, for he had destroyed dozens of fowls the night before. The ermine
has been used successfully as a ferret. Having first filed the creature's
teeth down, so that it could not kill the game, a gentleman secured
twelve live rabbits in one forenoon. "But it's getting late, and time we started tentward, and yet I'm not
through even the list of quadrupeds that may have dwelt in our old
tenement. There are four species of bats to be mentioned, besides moles
and shrews, that would burrow in its roots if they are as hollow as the
branches. There are thirteen species of birds, including several very
interesting families of woodpeckers, that would live in a tree like that,
not to speak of tree-toads, salamanders, brown tree-lizards, insects and
slugs innumerable, and black-snakes--"

"Snakes?" I once put my hand in a hole for high-holders' eggs, and a
big black-snake ran down my back, but not inside of my coat, however." "Please say nothing more about snakes," cried Amy; and she rose
decisively, adding, in a low tone: "Come, Gertrude, let us go. The
tenants of the old tree that we've heard about may be very interesting to
naturalists, but some of them are no more to my taste than the people in
the slums of London." "You have made our blood run cold with horrors--an agreeable sensation,
however, to-day," said Burt, also rising. "Your ermine out-Herods Herod. By the way, is not the fur of this pitiless beast worn by the highest
dignitaries of the legal profession?" CHAPTER XLIV

"BUT HE RISKED HIS LIFE?" The days passed, and the novelty of their mountain life began to wane a
little. There were agreeable episodes, as, for instance, visits from Mr. Barkdale, who were entertained
in royal style; but, after all, the camping experience was not,
apparently, fulfilling the hopes of two of the party. Webb's doubt and
suspense had only been increased, and Miss Hargrove was compelled to
admit to herself that her father's fears were not groundless. She was the
life of the party, and yet she was not at rest. Even in her dreams there
was a minor key of trouble and dread. The past few weeks were bringing a
revelation. She had read novels innumerable; she had received tender
confidences from friends. Love had been declared to her, and she had seen
its eloquent pleading in more than one face; but she acknowledged that
she had never known the meaning of the word until, without her volition,
her own heart revealed to her the mystery. Reason and will might control
her action, but she could no more divert her thoughts from Burt Clifford
than a flower can turn from the sun. She wondered at herself, and was
troubled. She had supposed that the training of society had brought her
perfect self-possession, and she had looked forward to a match, when she
was ready for one, in which the pros and cons should be weighed with
diplomatic nicety; but now that her heart was touched she learned that
nature is supreme, and her whole being revolted at such a union as she
had contemplated. She saw the basis of true marriage--the glad consent of
body and soul, and not a calculation. She watched Maggie closely, and saw
that her life was happy and rounded out in spite of her many cares. It
was not such a life as she would choose in its detail, and yet it was
infinitely better than that of many of her acquaintances. Burt was no
hero in her eyes, but he was immensely companionable, and it was a
companion, not a hero, or a man remote from her life and interests, that
she desired. He was refined and intelligent, if not learned; low, mean
traits were conspicuously absent; but, above and beyond all, his mirthful
blue eyes, and spirited ways and words, set all her nerves tingling with
a delicious exhilaration which she could neither analyze nor control. In
brief, the time that her father foresaw had come; the man had appeared
who could do more than amuse; her whole nature had made its choice. She
could go back to the city, and still in semblance be the beautiful and
brilliant girl that she had been; but she knew that in all the future few
waking hours would pass without her thoughts reverting to that little
mountain terrace, its gleaming canvas, its gypsy-like fire, with a tall,
lithe form often reclining at her feet beside it. Would the future bring more than regretful memories? As time passed, she
feared not. As Burt grew conscious of himself, his pride was deeply touched. He knew
that he had been greatly fascinated by Miss Hargrove, and, what was
worse, her power had not declined after he had awakened to his danger;
but he felt that Amy and all the family would despise him--indeed, that
he would despise himself--should he so speedily transfer his allegiance;
and under the spur of this dread he made especial, though very
unobtrusive, efforts to prove his loyalty to Amy. Therefore Webb had
grown despondent, and his absences from the camp were longer and more
frequent He pleaded the work of the farm, and the necessity of coping
with the fearful drought, so plausibly that Amy felt that she could not
complain, but, after all, there was a low voice of protest in her heart. "It's the old trouble," she thought. "The farm interests him far more
than I ever can, and even when here his mind is absent." Thus it may be seen that Nature, to whom they had gone, was not only busy
with the mountain and its life, but that her silent forces were also at
work in those whose unperverted hearts were not beyond her power. But there are dark mysteries in Nature, and some of her creations appear
to be visible and concentrated evil. The camping party came very near
breaking up in a horrible tragedy. The day was growing warm, and they
were returning from a rather extended excursion, straggling along a steep
wood road that was partially overgrown with bushes. Burt had been a
little more attentive to Miss Hargrove than usual, but was now at Amy's
side with his ready laugh and jest. Marvin was in the rear, peering
about, as usual, for some object of interest to a naturalist. Miss
Hargrove, so far from succumbing to the increasing heat, was reluctant to
return, and seemed possessed with what might be almost termed a nervous
activity. She had been the most indefatigable climber of the party, and
on their return had often diverged from the path to gather a fern or some
other sylvan trifle. At one point the ascending path formed an angle with
a ledge of rock that made a little platform. At the further end of this
she saw a flower, and she went to get it. A moment or two later Burt and
Amy heard her scream, and the sound of her voice seemed almost beneath
them. Grasping his alpenstock firmly, Burt sprang through the intervening
copsewood, and witnessed a scene that he never forgot, though he paused
not a second in his horror. Even as he rushed toward her a huge
rattlesnake was sending forth the "long, loud, stinging whir" which, as
Dr. Holmes says, is "the dreadful sound that nothing which breathes can
hear unmoved." Miss Hargrove was looking down upon it, stupefied,
paralyzed with terror. Already the reptile was coiling its thick body for
the deadly stroke, when Burt's stock fell upon its neck and laid it
writhing at the girl's feet. With a flying leap from the rock above he
landed on the venomous head, and crushed it with his heel. He had
scarcely time to catch Miss Hargrove, when she became apparently a
lifeless burden in his arms. Marvin now reached him, and after a glance at the scene exclaimed,
"Great God! "No; but let us get away from here. Where there's one of these devils
there is usually another not far off;" and they carried the unconscious
girl swiftly toward the camp, which fortunately was not far away, all the
others following with dread and anxiety in their faces. Marvin's and Maggie's efforts soon revived Miss Hargrove, but she had
evidently received a very severe nervous shock. When at last Burt was
permitted to see her, she gave him her hand with such a look of gratitude,
and something more, which she could not then disguise, that his heart began
to beat strangely fast. He was so confused that he could only stammer some
incoherent words of congratulation; but he half-consciously gave her hand a
pressure that left the most delicious pain the young girl had ever known. He was deeply excited, for he had taken a tremendous risk in springing upon
a creature that can strike its crooked fangs through the thick leather of a
boot, as a New York physician once learned at the cost of his life, when he
carelessly sought to rouse with his foot a caged reptile of this kind. Miss Hargrove had ceased to be a charming summer acquaintance to Burt. She was the woman at whose side he had stood in the presence of death. Before their midday repast was ready a rumble of wagons was heard coming
up the mountain, and Webb soon appeared. "The barometer is falling
rapidly," he said, "and father agrees with me that it will be safer for
you all to return at once." He found ready acquiescence, for after the event of the morning the
ladies were in haste to depart. Lumley, who had come up with Webb, was
sent to take the rattles from the snake, and the men drew apart, with Alf
and Fred, to discuss the adventure, for it was tacitly agreed that it
would be unwise to talk about snakes to those whose nerves were already
unstrung at the thought of such fearful neighbors. Marvin would have
gone with Lumley had not his wife interposed. As it was, he had much to
say concerning the habits and character of the reptiles, to which the
boys listened with awe. "By the way," he concluded, "I remember a passage
from that remarkable story, 'Elsie Venner,' by Oliver Wendell Holmes, in
which he gives the most vivid description of the rattlesnake I have ever
seen. One of his characters has two of them in a cage. 'The expression of
the creatures,' he writes, 'was watchful, still, grave, passionless,
fate-like, suggesting a cold malignity which seemed to be waiting for its
opportunity. Their awful, deep-cut mouths were sternly closed over long,
hollow fangs, which rested their roots against the swollen poison-gland
where the venom had been hoarded up ever since the last stroke had
emptied it. They never winked, for ophidians have no movable eyelids, but
kept up an awful fixed stare. Their eyes did not flash, but shone with a
cold, still light. They were of a pale golden color, horrible to look
into, with their stony calmness, their pitiless indifference, hardly
enlivened by the almost imperceptible vertical slit of the pupil, through
which Death seemed to be looking out, like the archer behind the long,
narrow loophole in a blank turret wall.' The description is superb, and
impressed itself so deeply on my mind that I can always recall it." The ladies now joined them at dinner--the last at their rustic board. Miss Hargrove was very pale, but she was a spirited girl, and was bent on
proving that there was nothing weak or hysterical in her nature. Neither
was there the flippancy that a shallow woman might have manifested. She
acted like a brave, well-bred lady, whose innate refinement and good
sense enabled her speedily to regain her poise, and take her natural
place among her friends. They all tried to be considerate, and Amy's
solicitude did not indicate the jealousy that her friend almost expected
to see. Before they had finished their repast an east wind was moaning and
sighing in the trees, and a thin scud of clouds overcasting the sky. They
were soon in the haste and bustle of departure. Miss Hargrove found an
opportunity, however, to draw Dr. Marvin aside, and asked, hesitatingly,

"If Burt--if Mr. Clifford had missed his aim when he sprang upon the
snake, what would have happened?" "You had better not dwell on that scene for the present, Miss Hargrove." "But I wish to know," she said, decisively. "I am not a child, and I
think I have a right to know." "Well," said the doctor, gravely, "you are brave about it, and may as
well know the truth. Indeed, a little thought would soon make it clear to
you that if he had struck the body of the snake and left its head free,
it would have bitten him." She drew a long breath, and said, "I thought as much"; then added, in a
low tone, "Would it have been death?" "Not necessarily; but only the most vigorous treatment could have saved
him." "Certainly; but a brave man could scarcely have acted otherwise. The
snake was at your very feet." "Thank you," she said, simply, and there was a very gentle expression in
her eyes. Much of the work of breaking up was left to Lumley, and an abundant
reward for his labor. He had returned with an exultant grin, but at a
sign from Dr. As soon as he had a chance,
however, he gave Burt two rattles, one having twelve and the other
fourteen joints, thus proving the fear, that the mate of the snake first
killed was not far off, to be well grounded. At the foot of the mountain
they met Mr. He explained that his barometer
and the indications of a storm had alarmed him also, and that he had come
for his daughter and Fred. Nothing was said of Miss Hargrove's recent
peril in the brief, cordial parting. Her eyes and Burt's met almost
involuntarily as she was driven away, and he was deeply perturbed. The face of Nature was also clouding fast, and she was sighing and
moaning as if she, too, dreaded the immediate future. CHAPTER XLV

SUMMER'S WEEPING FAREWELL


Nature was at last awakening from her long, deathlike repose with an
energy that was startling. The thin skirmish-line of vapor was followed
by cloudy squadrons, and before sunset great masses of mist were pouring
over Storm King, suggesting that the Atlantic had taken the drought in
hand, and meant to see what it could do. The wind mourned and shrieked
about the house, as if trouble, and not relief, were coming. In spite of
the young moon, the night grew intensely dark. The dash of rain was
expected every moment, but it did not come. Amy thought with a shudder of their desolate camping-ground. Time must
pass before pleasant associations could be connected with it. The intense
darkness, the rush and roar of the coming storm, the agony, the death
that might have occurred there, were now uppermost in her mind. She had
found an opportunity to ask Webb questions similar to those of Miss
Hargrove, and he had given Burt full credit for taking a fearful risk. A
woman loves courage in the abstract, and when it is shown in behalf of
herself or those whom she loves, he who has manifested it became heroic. But her homage troubled Burt, who was all at sea, uncertain of himself,
of the future, of almost everything, but not quite uncertain as to Miss
Hargrove. There was something in her look when they first met after their
common peril that went straight to his deepest consciousness. He had
before received, with not a little complacency, glances of preference,
but none like that, in which a glimpse of feeling, deep and strong, had
been revealed in a moment of weakness. The thought of it moved him far
more profoundly than the remembrance of his danger. Indeed, he scarcely
thought of that, except as it was associated with a girl who now might
have been dead or dying, and who, by a glance, had seemed to say, "What
you saved is yours." If this were true it was indeed a priceless, overwhelming gift, and he
was terrified at himself as he found how his whole nature was responding. He also knew that it was not in his frank, impetuous spirit to disguise
deep feeling. Should Miss Hargrove control his heart, he feared that all
would eventually know it, as they had speedily discovered his other
little affairs. And little, indeed, they now seemed to him, relating to
girls as immature as himself. Some had since married, others were
engaged, "and none ever lost their appetites," he concluded, with a grim
smile. But he could not thus dismiss the past so far as Amy was concerned, the
orphan girl in his own home to whom he had promised fealty. What would be
his feeling toward another man who had promised so much and had proved
fickle? What would the inmates of his own home say? What would even his
gentle mother, of whom he had made a confidante, think of him? Would not
a look of pain, or, even worse, of scorn, come into Amy's eyes? He did
love her dearly; he respected her still more as the embodiment of truth
and delicacy. From Miss Hargrove's manner he knew that Amy had never
gossiped about him, as he felt sure nine-tenths of his acquaintances
would have done. He also believed that she was taking him at his word,
like the rest of the family, and that she was looking forward to the
future that he had once so ardently desired. The past had taught him that
she was not one to fall tumultuously in love, but rather that she would
let a quiet and steady flame kindle in her heart, to last through life. She had proved herself above hasty and resentful jealousy, but she had,
nevertheless, warned him on the mountain, and had received the renewed
manifestations of his loyalty as a matter of course. Since his rescue of
her friend in the morning her eyes had often sought his with a lustre so
gentle and approving that he felt guilty, and cursed himself for a fickle
wretch. Cost him what it might, he must be true to her. She, little divining his tragic mood, which, with the whole force of his
will, he sought to disguise, gave him an affectionate good-night kiss as
she said, "Dear Burt, how happily the day has ended, after all!--and we
know the reason why." "Yes, Burt," added Webb; "no man ever did a braver thing." His father's hearty praise, and even his mother's grateful and almost
passionate embrace, only added to his deep unrest. As he went to his room
he groaned, "If they only knew!" After very little and troubled sleep he awoke on the following morning
depressed and exhausted. Mental distress was a new experience, and he
showed its effects; but he made light of it, as the result of
over-excitement and fatigue. He felt that Nature harmonized with his
mood, for he had scarcely ever looked upon a gloomier sky. Yet, strange
to say, no rain had fallen. It seemed as if the malign spell could not be
broken. The wind that had been whirling the dust in clouds all night long
grew fitful, and died utterly away, while the parched earth and withered
herbage appeared to look at the mocking clouds in mute, despairing
appeal. How could they be so near, so heavy, and yet no rain? The air was
sultry and lifeless. Fall had come, but no autumn days as yet. Clifford looked often at the black, lowering sky, and
predicted that a decided change was at hand. "My fear is," he added, "that the drought may be followed by a deluge. I
don't like the looks of the clouds in the southeast." Even as he spoke a gleam of lightning shot athwart them, and was soon
followed by a heavy rumble of thunder. It seemed that the electricity,
or, rather, the concussion of the air, precipitated the dense vapor into
water, for within a few moments down came the rain in torrents. As the
first great drops struck the roads the dust flew up as if smitten by a
blow, and then, with scarcely any interval, the gutters and every incline
were full of tawny rills, that swelled and grew with hoarser and deeper
murmurs, until they combined in one continuous roar with the downfall
from clouds that seemed scarcely able to lift themselves above the
tree-tops. The lightning was not vivid, but often illumined the obscurity
with a momentary dull red glow, and thunder muttered and growled in the
distance almost without cessation. To Amy its gloomy, portentous ending was
even more so. The arid noonday heat and glare of preceding days had given
place to a twilight so unnatural that it had almost the awe-inspiring
effect of an eclipse. The hitherto brazen sky seemed to have become an
overhanging reservoir from which poured a vertical cataract. The clouds
drooped so heavily, and were so black, that they gave an impression of
impending solid masses that might fall at any moment with crushing
weight. Within an hour the beds of streams long dry were full and
overflowing. In spite of remonstrances Webb put on a rubber suit, and went to look
after some little bridges on the place. He soon returned, and said, "If
this keeps up until morning, there will be a dozen bridges lacking in our
region. I've tried to anchor some of our little affairs by putting heavy
stones on them, so that the water will pass over instead of sweeping them
away. It makes one think that the flood was no myth." To the general relief, the rain slackened in the late afternoon, and soon
ceased. The threatening pall of clouds lifted a little, and in rocky
channels on the mountains the dull gleam of rushing water could be seen. From every side its voice was heard, the scale running up, from the
gurgle in the pipes connected with the roof, to the roar of the nearest
large stream. As the day advanced Burt had grown very restless. The long day of imprisonment had given time for thought, and a
review of the past novel and exciting experiences. She had not seen the
glances from Miss Hargrove which had suggested so much to Burt, but she
had long since perceived that her friend greatly enjoyed his society. Had
she loved him she would have seen far more. If this interest had been
shown in Webb, she would have understood herself and Miss Hargrove also
much better. Preoccupied as she was by her sense of loss and shortcoming
produced by Webb's apparent absorption in pursuits which she did not
share, the thought had repeatedly occurred to her that Miss Hargrove's
interest in Burt might be more than passing and friendly. If this were
true, she was sure the event of the preceding day must develop and deepen
it greatly. And now Burt's manner, his fits of absent-mindedness, during
which he stared at vacancy, awakened surmises also. she queried, and she resolved to find out. "Burt," she said, arousing him from one of the lapses into deep thought
which alternated with his restless pacings and rather forced gayety, "it
has stopped raining. I think you ought to ride over and see how Gertrude
is. "Do you truly think I ought to go?" "Certainly, and it would be a favor to me also," she added. He looked at her searchingly for a moment, but there was nothing in her
friendly expression to excite his fears. "Very well," he tried to say quietly. A swift gallop would do
me good, I believe." "Of course it will, and so will a walk brighten me up. I'm going out to
see the brook." "Let me go with you," he exclaimed, with an eagerness too pronounced. I'd rather hear how Gertrude is;" and she went to her room
to prepare for her walk, smiling a little bitterly as she mused: "I now
know where his thoughts were. Not only brother
Webb, but also lover Burt, has grown weary of me. I can't entertain
either of them through one rainy day." From her window she saw Burt
riding away with a promptness that brought again the smile rarely seen on
her fair features. In her light rubber suit, she started on her ramble,
her face almost as clouded as the sky. Another had been on the watch
also, and Webb soon joined her, with the question, "May I not go too?" "Oh, I fear it will take too much of your time," she said, in tones that
were a little constrained. He, too, had been interpreting Burt, and
guessed his destination as he galloped away. His love for Amy was so deep
that in a generous impulse of self-forgetfulness he was sorry for her,
and sought to cheer her, and make what poor amends he could for Burt's
absence, and all that it foreboded. "Since you don't say outright that I
can't go," he said, "I think I'll venture;" and then, in a quiet, genial
way, he began to talk about the storm and its effects. She would not have
believed that even remarkable weather could be made so interesting a
topic as it soon proved. Before long they stood upon the bank, and saw a
dark flood rushing by where but yesterday had trickled a little rill. Now
it would carry away horse and rider, should they attempt to ford it, and
the fields beyond were covered with water. "I don't like these violent changes," said Amy. "Tennyson's brook, that
'goes on forever,' is more to my taste than one like this, that almost
stops, and then breaks out into a passionate, reckless torrent." "It's the nature of this brook; you should not blame it," he answered. "But see, it's falling rapidly already." "Oh, certainly; nothing lasts," and she turned away abruptly. "You are mistaken, sister Amy," he replied, with strong, quiet emphasis. The early twilight deepened around them, and gloomy night came on apace,
but before Amy re-entered the house his unselfish efforts were rewarded. Burt's threatened disloyalty apparently had lost its depressing
influence. Some subtile reassuring power had been at work, and the clouds
passed from her face, if not from the sky. CHAPTER XLVI

FATHER AND DAUGHTER


That sombre day would ever be a memorable one to Miss Hargrove. Nature
seemed weeping passionately over the summer that had gone, with all its
wealth of beauty and life. She knew that her girlhood had gone with it. She had cautioned her brother to say nothing of her escape on the
previous day, for she was too unnerved to go over the scene again that
night, and meet her father's questioning eyes. She wanted to be alone
first and face the truth; and this she had done in no spirit of weak
self-deception. The shadow of the unknown had fallen upon her, and in its
cold gray light the glitter and tinsel of the world had faded, but
unselfish human love had grown more luminous. The imminence of death had
kindled rather than quenched it. It was seen to be something intrinsically
precious, something that might survive even the deadliest poison. Her father was disposed to regard Burt as one who looked upon life in the
light of a pleasure excursion, and who might never take it seriously. His
laugh hereafter could never be so light and careless to her but that,
like a minor key, would run the thought, "He risked his life for me; he
might have died for me." Her dark, full eyes, the warm blood that her thoughts brought into her
face even in the solitude of her chamber, did not belie her nature, which
was intense, and capable of a strong and an abiding passion when once
kindled. Hargrove had watched her with the deepest solicitude on her return,
and he felt rather than saw the change that had taken place in his idol. In the morning she was again
conscious of his half-questioning scrutiny, and when he went to his study
she followed, and told him what had occurred. He grew very pale, and drew
a long, deep breath. Then, as if mastered by a strong impulse, he clasped
her to his heart, and said, in trembling tones, "Oh, Trurie, if I had
lost you!" "I fear you would have lost me, papa, had it not been for Mr. He paced the room for a few moments in agitation, and at last stopped
before her and said: "Perhaps in a sense I am to lose you after all. "No, papa; he has only risked his life to save mine." "Do not think I underestimate his act, Trurie; but, believe me, if he
should speak now or soon, you are in no condition to answer him." "He did what any man would do for a woman in peril. He has no right to
claim such an immense reward." "Before I went to the mountains I said I was no longer a child; but I
was, compared with what I am now. It seems to me that feeling,
experience, more than years, measures our age. I am a woman to-day, one
who has been brought so near the future world that I have been taught how
to value what may be ours now. I have learned how to value you and your
unselfish love as I never did before. Clifford will not speak very
soon, if he ever does, and I have not yet decided upon my answer. Should
it be favorable, rest assured more than gratitude will prompt me; and
also be assured you would not lose me. Could I not be more to you were I
happy than if I went through life with the feeling that I had missed my
chance?" "I fear your mother would never give her consent to so unworldly a
choice," he said, with a troubled brow. "I've yet to be convinced that it would be such a choice. It's scarcely
unworldly to make the most and the best of the world one is in, and mamma
must permit me to judge for myself, as she chose for herself. I shall
never marry any one but a gentleman, and one who can give me a home. Have
I not a right to prefer a home to an establishment, papa?" He looked at her long and searchingly, and she met his scrutiny with a
grave and gentle dignity. "I suppose we must submit to the inevitable,"
he said at last. "It seems but the other day that you were a baby on my knee," he began,
sadly; "and now you are drifting far away." "No, papa, there shall be no drifting whatever. I shall marry, if ever,
one whom I have learned to love according to Nature's simple laws--one to
whom I can go without effort or calculation. I could give my heart, and
be made rich indeed by the gift. I couldn't invest it; and if I did, no
one would be more sorry than you in the end." "I should indeed be more than sorry if I ever saw you unhappy," he said,
after another thoughtful pause; then added, shaking his head, "I've seen
those who gave their hearts even more disappointed with life than those
who took counsel of prudence." "I shall take counsel of prudence, and of you too, papa." "I think it is as I feared--you have already given your heart." Before leaving him she pleaded: "Do not make much of
my danger to mamma. She is nervous, and not over-fond of the country at
best. You know that a good many people survive in the country," she
concluded, with a smile that was so winning and disarming that he shook
his head at her as he replied:

"Well, Trurie, I foresee what a lovingly obstinate little girl you are
likely to prove. I think I may as well tell you first as last that you
may count on me in all that is fairly rational. If, with my years and
experience, I can be so considerate, may I hope that you will be also?" Her answer was reassuring, and she went to tell her mother. Fred was quite as confidential with his mother as she with
her father, and the boy had been wild to horrify Mrs. Hargrove by an
account of his sister's adventure. The injunction laid upon him had been
only for the previous evening, and Gertrude found her mother almost
hysterical over the affair, and less inclined to commend Burt than to
blame him as the one who had led her daughter into such "wild,
harum-scarum experiences." "It's always the way," she exclaimed, "when one goes out of one's own
natural associations in life." "I've not been out of my natural associations," Gertrude answered, hotly. "The Cliffords are as well-bred and respectable as we are;" and she went
to her room. It was a long, dismal day for her, but, as she had said to her father,
she would not permit herself to drift. Her nature was too positive for
idle, sentimental dreaming. Feeling that she was approaching one of the
crises of her life, she faced it resolutely and intelligently. She went
over the past weeks from the time she had first met Burt under the Gothic
willow arch, and tried to analyze not only the power he had over her, but
also the man himself. "I have claimed to papa that I am a woman, and I
should act like one," she thought. Her interest
in Burt had been a purely natural growth, the unsought result of
association with one who had proved congenial. He was so handsome, so
companionable, so vital with spirit and mirthfulness, that his simple
presence was exhilarating, and he had won his influence like the sun in
spring-time. Had he the higher qualities of manhood, those that could
sustain her in the inevitable periods when life would be no laughing
matter? Could he meet the winter of life as well as the summer? She felt
that she scarcely knew him well enough to be sure of this, but she was
still sufficiently young and romantic to think, "If he should ever love
me as I can love him, I could bring out the qualities that papa fears are
lacking." His courage seemed an earnest of all that she could desire. Amy's feeling toward him, and the question whether he had ever regarded
her in another light than that of a sister, troubled her the most. Amy's
assurance of implicit trust, and her promise to deserve it, appeared to
stand directly in her path, and before that stormy day closed she had
reached the calmness of a fixed resolution. "If Amy loves him, and he has
given her reason to do so, I shall not come between them, cost me what it
may. I'll do without happiness rather than snatch it from a friend who
has not only spoken her trust, but proved it." Therefore, although her heart gave a great bound as she saw Burt riding
toward the house in the late afternoon, she went to her father and said:
"Mr. I wish you would be present during his call." The young fellow was received cordially, and Mr. Hargrove acknowledged
his indebtedness so feelingly that Burt flushed like a girl, and was
greatly embarrassed. He soon recovered himself, however, and chatted in
his usual easy and spirited way. Before he left he asked, hesitatingly,
"Would you like a souvenir of our little episode yesterday?" and took
from his pocket the rattles of the snake he had killed. "It was not a little episode," Gertrude replied, gravely. "I shall indeed
value the gift, for it will remind me that I have a friend who did not
count the cost in trying to help me." Impetuous words rose to Burt's lips, but he checked them in time. Trembling for his resolutions, he soon took his departure, and rode
homeward in deeper disquiet than he had ever known. He gave Amy her
friend's messages, and he also, in spite of himself, afforded her a
clearer glimpse of what was passing in his mind than she had received
before. "I might have learned to love him in time, I suppose," she
thought, bitterly, "but it's impossible now. I shall build my future on
no such uncertain foundation, and I shall punish him a little, too, for
it's time he had a lesson." CHAPTER XLVII

DISQUIET WITHIN AND WITHOUT


Amy would scarcely have been human had she felt otherwise, for it
appeared that Burt was in a fair way to inflict a slight that would touch
the pride of the gentlest nature. During her long residence abroad Amy
had in a general and unthinking way adopted some English ideas on the
subject of marriage. Burt had at first required what was unnatural and
repugnant, and she had resented the demand that she should pass from an
age and a state of feeling slightly removed from childhood to relations
for which she was not ready. When he had sensibly recognized his error,
and had appeared content to wait patiently and considerately, she had
tacitly assented to his hopes and those of his parents. Her love and
gratitude toward the latter influenced her powerfully, and she saw no
reason why she should disappoint them. But she was much too high-spirited
a girl to look with patience on any wavering in Burt. She had not set her
heart on him or sought to be more to him than to a brother, and if he
wished for more he must win and hold the right by undoubted loyalty. The
fact that Amy had been brought into the Clifford family as a daughter and
sister had not cheated Nature a moment, as both Burt and Webb had proved. She was not their sister, and had unconsciously evoked from each of the
young men a characteristic regard. He had to contend with a temperament not uncommon--one that renders its
possessor highly susceptible to the beauty and fascination of women. He
was as far removed from the male flirt genus as sincerity is from
falsehood; but his passion for Amy had been more like a manifestation of
a trait than a strong individual preference based on mutual fitness and
helpfulness. Miss Hargrove was more truly his counterpart. She could
supplement the weaknesses and defects of his character more successfully
than Amy, and in a vague way he felt this. With all the former's vivacity
there was much reserve strength and magnetism. She was unusually gifted
with will power, and having once gained an influence over a person, she
would have, as agents to maintain it, not only her beauty, but tact, keen
insight and a very quick intelligence. Although true herself, she was by
no means unsophisticated, and having once comprehended Burt's character,
she would have the power, possessed by few others, to make the most of
him. She would first attract unconsciously, like a
rare and beautiful flower, and the loveliness and fragrance of her life
would be undying. Burt had felt her charm, and responded most decisively;
but the tranquil regard of her unawakened heart had little power to
retain and deepen his feeling. She bloomed on at his side, sweet to him,
sweet to all. In Miss Hargrove's dark eyes lurked a stronger spell, and
he almost dared to believe that they had revealed to him a love of which
he began to think Amy was not capable. On the generous young fellow,
whose intentions were good, this fact would have very great influence,
and in preserving her supremacy Miss Hargrove would also be able to
employ not a little art and worldly wisdom. The events that are most desired do not always happen, however, and poor
Burt felt that he had involved himself in complications of which he saw
no solution; while Amy's purpose to give him "a lesson" promised anything
but relief. Her plan involved scarcely any change in her manner toward
him. She would simply act as if she believed all that he had said, and
take it for granted that his hopes for the future were unchanged. She
proposed, however, to maintain this attitude only long enough to teach
him that it is not wise, to say the least, to declare undying devotion
too often to different ladies. The weather during the night and early on the following morning was
puzzling. It might be that the storm was passing, and that the ragged
clouds which still darkened the sky were the rear-guard or the stragglers
that were following the sluggish advance of its main body; or it might be
that there was a partial break in Nature's forces, and that heavier
cloud-masses were still to come. "Old Storm King is still shrouded," he said at the breakfast-table,
"and this heavy, sultry air does not indicate clearing weather." Nature seemed bent on repeating the
programme of the preceding day, with the purpose of showing how much more
she could do on the same line of action. There was no steady wind from
any quarter. Converging or conflicting currents in the upper air may have
brought heavy clouds together in the highlands to the southwest, for
although the rain began to fall heavily, it could not account for the
unprecedented rise of the streams. In little over an hour there was a
continuous roar of rushing water. Burt, restless and almost reckless,
went out to watch the floods. He soon returned to say that every bridge
on the place had gone, and that what had been dry and stony channels
twenty-four hours before were now filled with resistless torrents. Webb also put on his rubber suit, and they went down the main street
toward the landing. This road, as it descended through a deep valley to
the river, was bordered by a stream that drained for some miles the
northwestern <DW72> of the mountains. For weeks its rocky bed had been
dry; now it was filled with a river yellow as the Tiber. One of the main
bridges across it was gone, and half of the road in one place had been
scooped out and carried away by the furious waters. People were removing
their household goods out into the vertical deluge lest they and all they
had should be swept into the river by the torrent that was above their
doorsteps. The main steamboat wharf, at which the "Powell" had touched
but a few hours before, was scarcely passable with boats, so violent was
the current that poured over it. The rise had been so sudden that people
could scarcely realize it, and strange incidents had occurred. A horse
attached to a wagon had been standing in front of a store. A vivid flash
of lightning startled the animal, and he broke away, galloped up a side
street to the spot where the bridge had been, plunged in, was swept down,
and scarcely more than a minute had elapsed before he was back within a
rod or two of his starting-point, crushed and dead. He had noticed that Amy's eyes had followed him
wistfully, and almost reproachfully, as he went out. Nature's mood was
one to inspire awe, and something akin to dread, in even his own mind. She appeared to have lost or to have relaxed her hold upon her forces. It
seemed that the gathered stores of moisture from the dry, hot weeks of
evaporation were being thrown recklessly away, regardless of consequences. There was no apparent storm-centre, passing steadily to one quarter of the
heavens, but on all sides the lightning would leap from the clouds, while
mingling with the nearer and louder peals was the heavy and continuous
monotone from flashes below the horizon. He was glad he had returned, for he found Amy pale and nervous indeed. Johnnie had been almost crying with terror, and had tremblingly asked her
mother if Noah's flood could come again. "If there was to be another flood,
grandpa would have been told to build an ark;" and this assurance had
appeared so obviously true that the child's fears were quieted. Even
Leonard's face was full of gloom and foreboding, when the children were
not present, as he looked out on flooded fields, and from much experience
estimated the possible injury to the farm and the town. They had attained a peace which was not
easily disturbed, and the old gentleman remarked: "I have seen a worse
storm even in this vicinity. "But this deluge isn't over," was the reply. "It seems a tremendous
reaction from the drought, and where it will end it is hard to tell,
unless this steady downpouring slackens soon." The unusual and tropical
manifestations of the storm at last ceased, and by night the rain fell
softly and gently, as if Nature were penitent over her wild passion. The
results of it, however, were left in all directions. Many roads were
impassable; scores of bridges were gone. The passengers from the evening
boats were landed on a wharf partially submerged, and some were taken in
boats to a point whence they could reach their carriages. In the elements' disquiet Burt had found an excuse for his own, and he
had remained out much of the day. He had not called on Miss Hargrove
again, but had ridden far enough to learn that the bridges in that
direction were safe. All the family had remonstrated with him for his
exposure, and Amy asked him, laughingly, if he had been "sitting on
bridges to keep them from floating away." "You are growing ironical," he answered for he was not in an amiable
mood, and he retired early. CHAPTER XLVIII

IDLEWILD


In the morning Nature appeared to have forgotten both her passion and her
penitence, and smiled serenely over the havoc she had made, as if it were
of no consequence. Amy said, "Let us take the strong rockaway, call for Miss Hargrove, and
visit some of the streams"; and she noted that Burt's assent was too
undemonstrative to be natural. Maggie decided to go also, and take the
children, while Leonard proposed to devote the day to repairing the
damage to the farm, his brothers promising to aid him in the afternoon. When at last the party left their carriage at one of the entrances of
Idlewild, the romantic glen made so famous by the poet Willis, a stranger
might have thought that he had never seen a group more in accord with the
open, genial sunshine. This would be true of Maggie and the children. They thought of that they saw, and uttered all their thoughts. The
solution of one of life's deep problems had come to Maggie, but not to
the others, and such is the nature of this problem that its solution can
usually be reached only by long and hidden processes. Not one of the four
young people was capable of a deliberately unfair policy; all, with the
exception of Amy, were conscious whither Nature was leading them, and she
had thoughts also of which she would not speak. There was no lack of
truth in the party, and yet circumstances had brought about a larger
degree of reticence than of frankness. To borrow an illustration from
Nature, who, after all, was to blame for what was developing in each
heart, a rapid growth of root was taking place, and the flower and fruit
would inevitably manifest themselves in time. Miss Hargrove naturally had
the best command over herself. She had taken her course, and would abide
by it, no matter what she might suffer. Burt had mentally set his teeth,
and resolved that he would be not only true to Amy, but also his old gay
self. Amy, however, was not to be
deceived, and her intuition made it clear that he was no longer her old
happy, contented comrade. But she was too proud to show that her pride
was wounded, and appeared to be her former self. Webb, as usual, was
quiet, observant, and not altogether hopeless. And so this merry party,
innocent, notwithstanding all their hidden thoughts about each other,
went down into the glen, and saw the torrent flashing where the sunlight
struck it through the overhanging foliage. Half-way down the ravine there
was a rocky, wooded plateau from which they had a view of the flood for
some distance, as it came plunging toward them with a force and volume
that appeared to threaten the solid foundations of the place on which
they stood. With a roar of baffled fury it sheered off to the left,
rushed down another deep descent, and disappeared from view. The scene
formed a strange blending of peace and beauty with wild, fierce movement
and uproar. From the foliage above and around them came a soft,
slumberous sound, evoked by the balmy wind that fanned their cheeks. The
ground and the surface of the torrent were flecked with waving, dancing
light and shade, as the sunlight filtered through innumerable leaves, on
some of which a faint tinge of red and gold was beginning to appear. Beneath and through all thundered a dark, resistless tide, fit emblem of
lawless passion that, unchanged, unrestrained by gentle influences,
pursues its downward course reckless of consequences. Although the volume
of water passing beneath their feet was still immense, it was evident
that it had been very much greater. "I stood here yesterday afternoon,"
said Burt, "and then the sight was truly grand." "Why, it was raining hard in the afternoon!" "Burt seemed even more perturbed than the weather yesterday," Amy
remarked, laughing. We were alarmed
about him, fearing lest he should be washed away, dissolved, or
something." "Do I seem utterly quenched this morning?" he asked, in a light vein, but
flushing deeply. "Oh, no, not in the least, and yet it's strange, after so much cold water
has fallen on you." "One is not quenched by such trifles," he replied, a little coldly. They were about to turn away, when a figure sprang out upon a rock, far
up the stream, in the least accessible part of the glen. Alvord, as he stood with folded arms and looked down on
the flood that rushed by on either side of him. He had not seen them, and
no greeting was possible above the sound of the waters. Webb thought as
he carried little Ned up the steep path, "Perhaps, in the mad current, he
sees the counterpart of some period in his past." The bridge across the mouth of Idlewild Brook was gone, and they next
went to the landing. The main wharf was covered with large stones and
gravel, the debris of the flood that had poured over it from the adjacent
stream, whose natural outlet had been wholly inadequate. Then they drove
to the wild and beautiful Mountainville road, that follows the Moodna
Creek for a long distance. They could not proceed very far, however, for
they soon came to a place where a tiny brook had passed under a wooden
bridge. Now there was a great yawning chasm. Not only the bridge, but
tons of earth were gone. The Moodna Creek, that had almost ceased to flow
in the drought, had become a tawny river, and rushed by them with a
sullen roar, flanging over the tide was an old dead tree, on which was
perched a fish-hawk. Even while they were looking at him, and Burt was
wishing for his rifle, the bird swooped downward, plunged into the stream
with a splash, and rose with a fish in his talons. It was an admirable
exhibition of fearlessness and power, and Burt admitted that such a
sportsman deserved to live. CHAPTER XLIX

ECHOES OF A PAST STORM


Miss Hargrove returned to dine with them, and as they were lingering over
the dessert and coffee Webb remarked, "By the way, I think the poet
Willis has given an account of a similar, or even greater, deluge in this
region." He soon returned from the library, and read the following
extracts: "'I do not see in the Tribune or other daily papers any mention
of an event which occupies a whole column on the outside page of the
highest mountain above West Point. An avalanche of earth and stone, which
has seamed from summit to base the tall bluff that abuts upon the Hudson,
forming a column of news visible for twenty miles, has reported a deluge
we have had--a report a mile long, and much broader than Broadway.'" Clifford, "that's the flood of which I spoke
yesterday. It was very local, but was much worse than the one we have
just had. Willis
wrote a good deal about the affair in his letters from Idlewild. Webb, selecting here and there, continued to read: "'We have had a deluge
in the valley immediately around us--a deluge which is shown by the
overthrown farm buildings, the mills, dams, and bridges swept away, the
well-built roads cut into chasms, the destruction of horses and cattle,
and the imminent peril to life. It occurred on the evening of August 1,
and a walk to-day down the valley which forms the thoroughfare to
Cornwall Landing (or, rather, a scramble over its gulfs in the road, its
upset barns and sheds, its broken vehicles, drift lumber, rocks, and
rubbish) would impress a stranger like a walk after the deluge of Noah. "'The flood came upon us with scarce half an hour's notice. My venerable
neighbor, of eighty years of age, who had passed his life here, and knows
well the workings of the clouds among the mountains, had dined with us,
but hastened his departure to get home before what looked like a shower,
crossing with his feeble steps the stream whose strongest bridge, an hour
after, was swept away. Another of our elderly neighbors had a much
narrower escape. The sudden rush of water alarmed him for the safety of
an old building he used for his stable, which stood upon the bank of the
small stream usually scarce noticeable as it crosses the street at the
landing. He had removed his horse, and returned to unloose a favorite
dog, but before he could accomplish it the building fell. The single jump
with which he endeavored to clear himself of the toppling rafters threw
him into the torrent, and he was swept headlong toward the gulf which it
had already torn in the wharf on the Hudson. His son and two others
plunged in, and succeeded in snatching him from destruction. Another
citizen was riding homeward, when the solid and strongly embanked road
was swept away before and behind him, and he had barely time to unhitch
his horse and escape, leaving his carriage islanded between the chasms. A
man who was driving with his wife and child along our own wall on the
river-shore had a yet more fearful escape: his horse suddenly forced to
swim, and his wagon set afloat, and carried so violently against a tree
by the swollen current of Idlewild Brook that he and his precious load
were thrown into the water, and with difficulty reached the bank beyond. A party of children who were out huckleberrying on the mountain were
separated from home by the swollen brook, and one of them was nearly
drowned in vainly attempting to cross it. Their parents and friends were
out all night in search of them. An aged farmer and his wife, who had
been to Newburgh, and were returning with their two-horse wagon well
laden with goods, attempted to drive over a bridge as it unsettled with
the current, and were precipitated headlong. The old man caught a sapling
as he went down with the flood, the old woman holding on to his
coat-skirts, and so they struggled until their cries brought assistance.' One large building was completely
disembowelled, and the stream coursed violently between the two halves of
its ruins. 'I was stopped,' he writes in another place, 'as I scrambled
along the gorge, by a curious picture for the common highway. The brick
front of the basement of a dwelling-house had been torn off, and the
mistress of the house was on her hands and knees, with her head thrust in
from a rear window, apparently getting her first look down into the
desolated kitchen from which she had fled in the night. A man stood in
the middle of the floor, up to his knees in water, looking round in
dismay, though he had begun to pick up some of the overset chairs and
utensils. The fireplace, with its interrupted supper arrangements, the
dresser, with its plates and pans, its cups and saucers, the closets and
cupboards, with their various stores and provisions, were all laid open
to the road like a sliced watermelon.'" "Well," ejaculated Leonard, "we haven't so much cause to complain, after
hearing of an affair like that. I do remember many of my impressions at
the time, now that the event is recalled so vividly, but have forgotten
how so sudden a flood was accounted for." "Willis speaks of it on another page," continued Webb, "as 'the
aggregation of extensive masses of clouds into what is sometimes called a
"waterspout," by the meeting of winds upon the converging edge of our
bowl of highlands. The storm for a whole country was thus concentrated.' I think there must have been yesterday a far heavier fall of water on the
mountains a little to the southeast than we had here. Perhaps the truer
explanation in both instances would be that the winds brought heavy
clouds together or against the mountains in such a way as to induce an
enormous precipitation of vapor into rain. Willis indicates by the
following passage the suddenness of the flood he describes: 'My first
intimation that there was anything uncommon in the brook was the sight of
a gentleman in a boat towing a cow across the meadow under our library
window--a green glade seldom or never flooded. The roar from the foaming
precipices in the glen had been heard by us all, but was thought to be
thunder.' Then he tells how he and his daughter put on their rubber suits
and hastened into the glen. 'The chasm,' he writes, 'in which the brook,
in any freshet I had heretofore seen, was still only a deep-down stream,
now seemed too small for the torrent. Those giddy precipices on which the
sky seems to lean as you stand below were the foam-lashed sides of a full
and mighty river. The spray broke through the tops of the full-grown
willows and lindens. As the waves plunged against the cliffs they parted,
and disclosed the trunks and torn branches of the large trees they had
overwhelmed and were bearing away, and the earth- flood, in the
wider places, was a struggling mass of planks, timber, rocks, and
roots--tokens of a tumultuous ruin above, to which the thunder-shower
pouring around us gave but a feeble clew. A heavy-limbed willow, which
overhung a rock on which I had often sat to watch the freshets of spring,
rose up while we looked at it, and with a surging heave, as if lifted by
an earthquake, toppled back, and was swept rushingly away.'" "How I would have liked to see it!" "I can see it," said Amy, leaning back, and closing her eyes. "I can see
it all too vividly. I don't like nature in such moods." Then she took up
the volume, and began turning the leaves, and said: "I've never seen this
book before. Why, it's all about this region, and written before I was
born. Oh dear, here is another chapter of horrors!" and she read: "Close
to our gate, at the door of one of our nearest and most valued
neighbors--a lovely girl was yesterday struck dead by lightning. A friend
who stood with her at the moment was a greater sufferer, in being
prostrated by the same flash, and paralyzed from the waist downward--her
life spared at the cost of tortures inexpressible.'" Webb reached out his hand to take the book from her, but she sprang
aloof, and with dilating eyes read further: "'Misa Gilmour had been
chatting with a handsome boy admirer, but left him to take aside a
confidential friend that she might read her a letter. It was from her
mother, a widow with this only daughter. They passed out of the gate,
crossed the road to be out of hearing, and stood under the telegraph
wire, when the letter was opened. Her lips were scarce parted to read
when the flash came--an arrow of intense light-' Oh, horrible! How can you blame me for fear in a thunderstorm?" "Amy," said Webb, now quietly taking the book, "your dread at such times
is constitutional. If there were need, you could face danger as well as
any of us. You would have all a woman's fortitude, and that surpasses
ours. Take the world over, the danger from lightning is exceedingly
slight, and it's not the danger that makes you tremble, but your nervous
organization." "You interpret me kindly," she said, "but I don't see why nature is so
full of horrible things. If Gertrude had been bitten by the snake, she
might have fared even worse than the poor girl of whom I have read." Miss Hargrove could not forbear a swift, grateful glance at Burt. "I do not think nature is _full_ of horrible things," Webb resumed. "Remember how many showers have cooled the air and made the earth
beautiful and fruitful in this region. In no other instance that I know
anything about has life been destroyed in our vicinity. There is indeed a
side to nature that is full of mystery--the old dark mystery of evil; but
I should rather say it is full of all that is beautiful and helpful. At
least this seems true of our region. I have never seen so much beauty in
all my life as during the past year, simply because I am forming the
habit of looking for it." "Why, Webb," exclaimed Amy, laughing, "I thought your mind was
concentrating on crops and subjects as deep as the ocean." "It would take all the salt of the ocean to save that remark," he
replied; but he beat a rather hasty retreat. Clifford, "you may now dismiss your fears. I
imagine that in our tropical storm summer has passed; and with it
thunder-showers and sudden floods. We may now look forward to two months
of almost ideal weather, with now and then a day that will make a book
and a wood fire all the more alluring." The days passed like bright
smiles, in which, however, lurked the pensiveness of autumn. Slowly
failing maples glowed first with the hectic flush of disease, but
gradually warmer hues stole into the face of Nature, for it is the dying
of the leaves that causes the changes of color in the foliage. CHAPTER L

IMPULSES OF THE HEART


The fall season brought increased and varied labors on the farm and in the
garden. As soon as the ground was dry after the tremendous storm, and its
ravages had been repaired as far as possible, the plows were busy preparing
for winter grain, turnips were thinned out, winter cabbages and
cauliflowers cultivated, and the succulent and now rapidly growing celery
earthed up. The fields of corn were watched, and as fast as the kernels
within the husks--now becoming golden-hued--were glazed, the stalks were
cut and tied in compact shocks. The sooner maize is cut, after it has
sufficiently matured, the better, for the leaves make more nutritious
fodder if cured or dried while still full of sap. From some fields the
shocks were wholly removed, that the land might be plowed and seeded with
grain and grass. Buckwheat, used merely as a green and scavenger crop, was
plowed under as it came into blossom, and that which was sown to mature was
cut in the early morning, while the dew was still upon it, for in the heat
of the day the grain shells easily, and is lost. After drying for a few
days in compact little heaps it was ready for the threshing-machine. Then
the black, angular kernels--promises of many winter breakfasts--were spread
to dry on the barn floor, for if thrown into heaps or bins at this early
stage, they heat badly. The Cliffords had long since learned that the large late peaches, that
mature after the Southern crop is out of the market, are the most
profitable, and almost every day Abram took to the landing a load of
baskets full of downy beauties. An orange grove, with Its deep green
foliage and golden fruit, is beautiful indeed, but an orchard laden with
Crawford's Late, in their best development, can well sustain comparison. Sharing the honors and attention given to the peaches were the Bartlett
and other early pears. These latter fruits were treated in much the same
way as the former. The trees were picked over every few days, and the
largest and ripest specimens taken, their maturity being indicated by the
readiness of the stem to part from the spray when the pear is lifted. The
greener and imperfect fruit was left to develop, and the trees, relieved
of much of their burden, were able to concentrate their forces on what
was left. The earlier red grapes, including the Delaware, Brighton, and
Agawam, not only furnished the table abundantly, but also a large surplus
for market. Indeed, there was high and dainty feasting at the Cliffords'
every day--fruit everywhere, hanging temptingly within reach, with its
delicate bloom untouched, untarnished. The storm and the seasonable rains that followed soon restored its
fulness and beauty to Nature's withered face. The drought had brought to
vegetation partial rest and extension of root growth, and now, with the
abundance of moisture, there was almost a spring-like revival. The grass
sprang up afresh, meadows and fields grew green, and annual weeds, from
seeds that had matured in August, appeared by the million. "I am glad to see them," Webb remarked. "Before they can mature any seed
the frost will put an end to their career of mischief, and there will be
so many seeds less to grow next spring." "There'll be plenty left," Leonard replied. The Cliffords, by their provident system of culture, had prepared for
droughts as mariners do for storms, and hence they had not suffered so
greatly as others; but busy as they were kept by the autumnal bounty of
Nature, and the rewards of their own industry, they found time for
recreation, and thoughts far removed from the material questions of
profit and loss. The drama of life went on, and feeling, conviction, and
love matured like the ripening fruits, although not so openly. As soon as
his duties permitted, Burt took a rather abrupt departure for a hunting
expedition in the northern woods, and a day or two later Amy received a
note from Miss Hargrove, saying that she had accepted an invitation to
join a yachting party. she exclaimed, "I wish you were not so awfully busy all the
time. Here I am, thrown wholly on your tender mercies, and I am neither a
crop nor a scientific subject." The increasing coolness and
exhilarating vitality of the air made not only labor agreeable, but
out-door sports delightful, and he found time for an occasional gallop,
drive, or ramble along roads and lanes lined with golden-rod and purple
asters; and these recreations had no other drawback than the uncertainty
and anxiety within his heart. The season left nothing to be desired, but
the outer world, even in its perfection, is only an accompaniment of
human life, which is often in sad discord with it. Nature, however, is a harmony of many and varied strains, and the unhappy
are always conscious of a deep minor key even on the brightest days. To
Alf and Johnnie the fall brought unalloyed joy and promise; to those who
were older, something akin to melancholy, which deepened with the autumn
of their life; while to Mr. Alvord every breeze was a sigh, every rising
wind a mournful requiem, and every trace of change a reminder that his
spring and summer had passed forever, leaving only a harvest of bitter
memories. Far different was the dreamy pensiveness with which Mr. Clifford looked back upon their vanished youth and maturity. At the
same time they felt within themselves the beginnings of an immortal
youth. Although it was late autumn with them, not memory, but hope, was
in the ascendant. During damp or chilly days, and on the evenings of late September, the
fire burned cheerily on the hearth of their Franklin stove. The old
gentleman had a curious fancy in regard to his fire-wood. He did not want
the straight, shapely sticks from their mountain land, but gnarled and
crooked billets, cut from trees about the place that had required pruning
and removal. "I have associations with such fuel" he said, "and can usually recall the
trees--many of which I planted--from which it came; and as I watch it
burn and turn into coals, I see pictures of what happened many years
ago." One evening he threw on the fire a worm-eaten billet, the sound part of
which was as red as mahogany; then drew Amy to him and said, "I once sat
with your father under the apple-tree of which that piece of wood was a
part, and I can see him now as he then looked." She sat down beside him, and said, softly, "Please tell me how he
looked." In simple words the old man portrayed the autumn day, the fruit as golden
as the sunshine, a strong, hopeful man, who had passed away in a
far-distant land, but who was still a living presence to both. Amy looked
at the picture in the flickering blaze until her eyes were blinded with
tears. But such drops fall on the heart like rain and dew, producing
richer and more beautiful life. The pomp and glory of October were ushered in by days of such surpassing
balminess and brightness that it was felt to be a sin to remain indoors. The grapes had attained their deepest purple, and the apples in the
orchard vied with the brilliant and varied hues of the fast-turning
foliage. The nights were soft, warm, and resonant with the unchecked
piping of insects. From every tree and shrub the katydids contradicted
one another with increasing emphasis, as if conscious that the time was
at hand when the last word must be spoken. The stars glimmered near
through a delicate haze, and in the western sky the pale crescent of the
moon was so inclined that the old Indian might have hung upon it his
powder-horn. On such an evening the young people from the Cliffords' had gathered on
Mr. Hargrove's piazza, and Amy and Gertrude were looking at the new moon
with silver in their pockets, each making her silent wish. Amy had to think before deciding what she wanted most, but
not Miss Hargrove. Her face has grown thinner and paler during the last
few weeks; there is unwonted brilliancy in her eyes to-night, but her
expression is resolute. Times of
weakness, if such they could be called, would come, but they should not
appear in Burt's or Amy's presence. The former had just returned, apparently gayer than ever. His face was
bronzed from his out-door life in the Adirondacks. Its expression was
also resolute, and his eyes turned oftenest toward Amy, with a determined
loyalty. As has been said, not long after the experiences following the
storm, he had yielded to his impulse to go away and recover his poise. He
felt that if he continued to see Miss Hargrove frequently he might reveal
a weakness which would lead not only Amy to despise him, but also Miss
Hargrove, should she become aware of the past. As he often took such
outings, the family, with the exception of Webb and Amy, thought nothing
of it. His brother and the girl he had wooed so passionately now
understood him well enough to surmise his motive, and Amy had thought,
"It will do him good to go away and think awhile, but it will make no
difference; this new affair must run its course also." And yet her heart
began to relent toward him after a sisterly fashion. She wondered if Miss
Hargrove did regard him as other than a friend to whom she owed very
much. If so, she smiled at the idea of standing in the way of their
mutual happiness. She had endured his absence with exceeding tranquillity,
for Webb had given her far more of his society, and she, Alf, and Johnnie
often went out and aided him in gathering the fruit. For some reason these
light tasks had been more replete with quiet enjoyment than deliberate
pleasure-seeking. Burt had been at pains to take, in Amy's presence, a most genial and
friendly leave of Miss Hargrove, but there was no trace of the lover in
his manner. His smiles and cordial words had chilled her heart, and had
strengthened the fear that in some way he was bound to Amy. She knew that
she had fascinated and perhaps touched him deeply, but imagined she saw
indications of an allegiance that gave little hope for the future. If he
felt as she did, and were free, he would not have gone away; and when he
had gone, time grew leaden-footed. Absence is the touchstone, and by its
test she knew that her father was right, and that she, to whom so much
love had been given unrequited, had bestowed hers apparently in like
manner. Then had come an invitation to join a yachting party to Fortress
Monroe, and she had eagerly accepted. With the half-reckless impulse of
pride, she had resolved to throw away the dream that had promised so
much, and yet had ended in such bitter and barren reality. She would
forget it all in one brief whirl of gayety; and she had been the
brilliant life of the party. But how often her laugh had ended in a
stifled sigh! How often her heart told her, "This is not happiness, and
never can be again!" Her brief experience of what is deep and genuine in
life taught her that she had outgrown certain pleasures of the past, as a
child outgrows its toys, and she had returned thoroughly convinced that
her remedy was not in the dissipations of society. The evening after her return Burt, with Webb and Amy, had come to call,
and as she looked upon him again she asked herself, in sadness, "Is there
any remedy?" She was not one to give her heart in a half-way manner. It seemed to her that he had been absent for years, and had grown
indefinitely remote. Never before had she gained the impression so
strongly that he was in some way bound to Amy, and would abide by his
choice. If this were true, she felt that the sooner she left the vicinity
the better, and even while she chatted lightly and genially she was
planning to induce her father to return to the city at an early date. Before parting, Amy spoke of her pleasure at the return of her friend,
who, she said, had been greatly missed, adding: "Now we shall make up for
lost time. The roads are in fine condition for horseback exercise,
nutting expeditions will soon be in order, and we have a bee-hunt on the
programme." "I congratulate you on your prospects," said Miss Hargrove. "I wish I
could share in all your fun, but fear I shall soon return to the city." Burt felt a sudden chill at these words, and a shadow from them fell
across his face. Webb saw their effect, and he at once entered on a
rather new role for him. "Then we must make the most of the time before
you go," he began. "I propose we take advantage of this weather and drive
over to West Point, and lunch at Fort Putnam." "Why, Webb, what a burst of genius!" Let us go to-morrow for we can't count on such weather
long." The temptation was indeed strong, but she felt
it would not be wise to yield, and began, hesitatingly, "I fear my
engagements--" At this moment she caught a glimpse of Burt's face in a
mirror, and saw the look of disappointment which he could not disguise. "If I return to the city soon," she resumed, "I ought to be at my
preparations." "Why, Gertrude," said Amy, "I almost feel as if you did not wish to go. I thought you were to remain in the country till
November. I have been planning so much that we could do together!" "Surely, Miss Hargrove," added Burt, with a slight tremor in his voice,
"you cannot nip Webb's genius in the very bud. Such an expedition as he
proposes is an inspiration." "But you can do without me," she replied, smiling on him bewilderingly. It was a light arrow, but its aim was true. Never before had he so felt
the power of her beauty, the almost irresistible spell of her fascination. While her lips were smiling, there was an expression in her dark eyes that
made her words, so simple and natural in themselves, a searching question,
and he could not forbear saying, earnestly, "We should all enjoy the
excursion far more if you went with us." "Truly, Miss Hargrove," said Webb, "I shall be quenched if you decline,
and feel that I have none of the talent for which I was beginning to gain
a little credit." "I cannot resist such an appeal as that, Mr. "I anticipate a marvellous day
to-morrow. Bring Fred also, and let us all vie with each other in
encouraging Webb." "Has that quiet Webb any scheme in his mind?" Miss Hargrove thought,
after they had gone. "I wish that tomorrow might indeed be 'a marvellous
day' for us all." An affirmative
answer was slow in coming, though he thought long and late. CHAPTER LI

WEBB'S FATEFUL EXPEDITION


Mr. Hargrove had welcomed the invitation that took his daughter among
some of her former companions, hoping that a return to brilliant
fashionable life would prove to her that she could not give it up. It was
his wish that she should marry a wealthy man of the city. His wife did
not dream of any other future for her handsome child, and she looked
forward with no little complacency to the ordering of a new and elegant
establishment. At the dinner-table Gertrude had given a vivacious account of her
yachting experience, and all had appeared to promise well; but when she
went to the library to kiss her father good-night, he looked at her
inquiringly, and said, "You enjoyed every moment, I suppose?" She shook her head sadly, and, after a moment, said: "I fear I've grown
rather tired of that kind of thing. We made much effort to enjoy
ourselves. Is there not a happiness which comes without so much effort?" "I'm sorry," he said, simply. Suppose I find more pleasure in staying with
you than in rushing around?" "I think it would be less contrary to _my_ nature than forced gayety
among people I care nothing about." He smiled at her fondly, but admitted to himself that absence had
confirmed the impressions of the summer, instead of dissipating them, and
that if Burt became her suitor he would be accepted. When she looked out on the morning of the excursion to Fort Putnam it was
so radiant with light and beauty that hope sprang up within her heart. Disappointment that might last through life could not come on a day like
this. Silvery mists ascended from the river down among the Highlands. The
lawn and many of the fields were as green as they had been in June, and
on every side were trees like immense bouquets, so rich and varied was
their coloring. There was a dewy freshness in the air, a genial warmth in
the sunshine, a spring-like blue in the sky; and in these was no
suggestion that the November of her life was near. "And yet it may be,"
she thought. "I must soon face my fate, and I must be true to Amy." Hargrove regarded with discontent the prospect of another long
mountain expedition; but Fred, her idol, was wild for it, and in a day or
two he must return to school in the city, from which, at his earnest
plea, he had been absent too long already; so she smiled her farewell at
last upon the fateful excursion. He, with his sister, was soon at the Cliffords', and found the
rockaway--the strong old carryall with which Gertrude already had tender
associations--in readiness. Maggie had agreed to chaperon the party,
little Ned having been easily bribed to remain with his father. Miss Hargrove had looked wistfully at the Clifford mansion as she drew
near to it. Never had it appeared to her more home-like, with its
embowering trees and laden orchards. The bright hues of the foliage
suggested the hopes that centred there: the ocean, as she had seen
it--cold and gray under a clouded sky--was emblematic of life with no
fulfilment of those hopes. Clifford met her at the door, and
took her in to see the invalid, who greeted her almost as affectionately
as she would have welcomed Amy after absence, Miss Hargrove knew in the
depths of her heart how easily she could be at home there. Never did a pleasure-party start under brighter auspices. Clifford came out, on her husband's arm, to wave them a farewell. The young men had their alpenstocks, for it was their intention to walk
up the steep places. Webb was about to take Alf and Johnnie on the front
seat with him, when Amy exclaimed: "I'm going to drive, Mr. Johnnie
can sit between us, and keep me company when you are walking. You needn't
think that because you are the brilliant author of this expedition you
are going to have everything your own way." Indeed, not a little guile lurked behind her laughing eyes, which ever
kept Webb in perplexity--though he looked into them so often--as to
whether they were blue or gray. Miss Hargrove demurely took her seat with
Maggie, and Burt had the two boys with him. Fred had brought his gun, and
was vigilant for game now that the "law was up." They soon reached the foot of the mountain, and there was a general
unloading, for at first every one wished to walk. Maggie good-naturedly
climbed around to the front seat and took the reins, remarking that she
would soon have plenty of company again. Burt had not recognized Amy's tactics, nor did he at once second them,
even unconsciously. His long ruminations had led to the only possible
conclusion--the words he had spoken must be made good. Pride and honor
permitted no other course. Therefore he proposed to-day to be ubiquitous,
and as gallant to Maggie as to the younger ladies. When Miss Hargrove
returned to the city he would quietly prove his loyalty. Never before had
he appeared in such spirits; never so inexorably resolute. He recalled
Amy's incredulous laugh at his protestation of constancy, and felt that
he could never look her in the face if he faltered. It was known that
Miss Hargrove had received much attention, and her interest in him would
be likely to disappear at once should she learn of his declaration of
undying devotion to another but a few months before. He anathematized
himself, but determined that his weakness should remain unknown. It was
evident that Amy had been a little jealous, but probably that she did not
yet care enough for him to be very sensitive on the subject. He had pledged himself to wait until she did care. Miss Hargrove should be made
to believe that she had added much to the pleasure of the excursion, and
there he would stop. And Burt on his mettle was no bungler. The test
would come in his staying powers. He had not watched and thought so long
in vain. He had seen Burt's expression the evening before, and knew that
a wakeful night had followed. His own feeling had taught him a
clairvoyance which enabled him to divine not a little of what was passing
in his brother's mind and that of Miss Hargrove. Her frank, sisterly affection was not love, and might never
become love. One of the objects of the expedition was to obtain an abundant supply of
autumn leaves and ferns for pressing. "I intend to make the old house
look like a bower this winter," Amy remarked. "That would be impossible with our city home," Miss Hargrove said, "and
mamma would not hear of such an attempt. But I can do as I please in my
own room, and shall gather my country _souvenirs_ to-day." The idea of decorating her apartment with feathery ferns and bright-hued
leaves took a strong hold upon her fancy, for she hoped that Burt would
aid her in making the collection. Nor was she disappointed, for Amy said:

"Burt, I have gathered and pressed nearly all the ferns I need already. You know the shady nooks where the most delicate ones grow, and you can
help Gertrude make as good a collection as mine. You'll help too, won't
you, Webb?" added the innocent little schemer, who saw that Burt was
looking at her rather keenly. So they wound up the mountain, making long stops here and there to gather
sylvan trophies and to note the fine views. Amy's manner was so cordial
and natural that Burt's suspicions had been allayed, and the young
fellow, who could do nothing by halves, was soon deeply absorbed in
making a superb collection for Miss Hargrove, and she felt that, whatever
happened, she was being enriched by everything he obtained for her. Amy
had brought a great many newspapers folded together so that leaves could
be placed between the pages, and Webb soon noted that his offerings were
kept separate from those of Burt. The latter tried to be impartial in his
labors in behalf of the two girls, bringing Amy bright-hued leaves
instead of ferns, but did not wholly succeed, and sometimes he found
himself alone with Miss Hargrove as they pursued their search a short
distance on some diverging and shaded path. On one of these occasions he
said, "I like to think how beautiful you will make your room this
winter." "I like to think of it too," she replied. "I shall feel that I have a
part of my pleasant summer always present." "Yes, the pleasantest I ever enjoyed." "I should think you would find it exceedingly dull after such brilliant
experiences as that of your yachting excursion." "Do you find to-day exceedingly dull?" "But I am used to the quiet country, and a day like this is the
exception." "I do not imagine you have ever lived a tame life." "Isn't that about the same as calling me wild?" "There's no harm in beginning a little in that way. "You are so favored that I can scarcely imagine life bringing sobering
experiences to you very soon." Have you forgotten what occurred on these very mountains, at no
great distance? I assure you I never forget it;" and her eyes were
eloquent as she turned them upon him. "One does not forget the most fortunate event of one's life. Since you
were to meet that danger, I would not have missed being near for the
world. I had even a narrower escape, as you know, on this mountain. The
spot where Webb found me is scarcely more than a mile away." She looked at him very wistfully, and her face grew pale, but she only
said, "I don't think either of us can forget the Highlands." "I shall never forget that little path," he said, in a low tone, and he
looked back at it lingeringly as they came out into the road and
approached the rest of the party. That
spot should be marked for future supplies. Miss Hargrove will share with
you, for you can't have anything so fine as this." "Yes, indeed I have, and I shall call you and Webb to account if you do
not to-day make Gertrude fare as well." Both Miss Hargrove and Burt were bewildered. There was lurking mischief
in Amy's eyes when she first spoke, and yet she used her influence to
keep Burt in her friend's society. Her spirits seemed too exuberant to be
natural, and Miss Hargrove, who was an adept at hiding her feelings under
a mask of gayety, surmised that Amy's feminine instincts had taught her
to employ the same tactics. Conscious of their secret, Miss Hargrove and
Burt both thought, "Perhaps it is her purpose to throw us together as far
as possible, and learn the truth." Amy had a kinder purpose than they imagined. She wanted no more of Burt's
forced allegiance, and was much too good-natured to permit mere pique to
cause unhappiness to others. "Let Gertrude win him if she cares for him,"
was her thought, "and if _she_ can't hold him his case is
_hopeless_." She could not resist the temptation, however, to tease
Burt a little. But he gave her slight chance for the next few hours. Her mirthful
question and the glance accompanying it had put him on his guard again,
and he at once became the gay cavalier-general he had resolved on being
throughout the day. They made a long pause to enjoy the view looking out upon Constitution
Island, West Point, the southern mountains, and the winding river, dotted
here and there with sails, and with steamers, seemingly held motionless
by their widely separated train of canal boats. "What mountain is this that we are now to descend?" "It's the first high mountain that abuts on
the river above West Point, you will remember." I have a song relating to it, and will give you a
verse;" and she sang:

  "'Where Hudson's waves o'er silvery sands
      Wind through the hills afar,
    And Cro' Nest like a monarch stands,
      Crowned with a single star.'" After a round of applause had subsided, Burt, whose eyes had been more
demonstrative than his hands, said, "That's by Morris. We can see from
Fort Putnam his old home under Mount Taurus." He is the poet who entreated the woodman to'spare that tree.'" "Which the woodman will never do," Webb remarked, "unless compelled by
law; nor even then, I fear." cried Amy, "with what a thump you drop into prose!" "I also advise an immediate descent of the mountain if we are to have any
time at Fort Putnam," he added. They were soon winding down the S's by which the road overcame the steep
declivity. On reaching a plateau, before the final descent, they came
across a wretched hovel, gray and storm-beaten, with scarcely strength to
stand. Rags took the place of broken glass in the windows. A pig was
rooting near the doorstep, on which stood a slatternly woman, regarding
the party with dull curiosity. "Talk about the elevating influence of mountain scenery," said Miss
Hargrove; "there's a commentary on the theory." "The theory's correct," persisted Burt. "Their height above tide-water
and the amount of bad whiskey they consume keep our mountaineers elevated
most of the time." "Does Lumley live in a place like that?" "He did--in a worse one, if possible," Webb replied for Amy, who
hesitated. "But you should see how it is changed. He now has a good
vegetable garden fenced in, a rustic porch covered with American ivy,
and--would you believe it?--an actual flower-bed. Within the hut there
are two pictures on the wall, and the baby creeps on a carpeted floor. Lumley says Amy is making a man of him." "You forget to mention how much you have helped me," Amy added. "Come, let us break up this mutual admiration society," said Burt. "I'm
ready for lunch already, and Fort Putnam is miles away." The road from the foot of the mountain descends gradually through wild,
beautiful scenery to West Point. Cro' Nest rises abruptly on the left,
and there is a wooded valley on the right, with mountains beyond. The
trees overhung the road with a canopy of gold, emerald, and crimson
foliage, and the sunlight came to the excursionists as through
stained-glass windows. Taking a side street at the back of the military
post, they soon reached a point over which frowned the ruins of the fort,
and here they left their horses. After a brief climb to the northward
they entered on an old road, grass-grown and leaf-carpeted, and soon
passed through the gaping sally-port, on either side of which cone-like
cedars stood as sentinels. Within the fort Nature had been busy for a
century softening and obliterating the work of man. Cedar trees--some of
which were dying from age--grew everywhere, even on the crumbling
ramparts. Except where ledges of the native rock cropped out, the ground
was covered with a thick sward. Near the centre of the inclosure is the
rocky basin. In it bubbles the spring at which the more temperate of the
ancient garrison may have softened the asperities of their New England
rum. The most extensive ruins are seen by turning sharply to the left from the
sally-port. Here, yawning like caverns, their entrances partially choked
by the debris, are six casemates, or vaults. They were built of brick,
covered with stone, and are eighteen feet deep and twelve wide, with an
arched roof twelve feet high. On the level rampart above them were long,
withered grass, the wild dwarf-rose, and waving golden-rod. The outer
walls, massy and crumbling, or half torn away by vandal hands, were built
in angles, according to the engineering science of the Revolution, except
on the west, where the high ramparts surmount a mural perpendicular
precipice fifty feet in height. Inland, across the valley, the mountains
were seen, rising like rounded billows in every direction, while from the
north, east, and south the windings of the Hudson were visible for
fifteen miles. All but Amy had visited the spot before, and Burt explored the place with
her while the rest prepared for lunch. She had asked Gertrude to
accompany them, but the latter had sought refuge with Maggie, and at her
side she proposed to remain. She scarcely dared trust herself with Burt,
and as the day advanced he certainly permitted his eyes to express an
interest that promised ill for his inexorable purpose of constancy. It had become clear to Miss Hargrove that he was restrained by something
that had occurred between him and Amy, and both her pride and her sense
of truth to her friend decided her to withdraw as far as possible from
his society, and to return to the city. She and Burt vied with each other in gayety at lunch. When it was over
they all grouped themselves in the shade of a clump of cedars, and looked
away upon the wide prospect, Webb pointing out objects of past and
present interest. Alf and Fred speedily grew restless and started off
with the gun, Johnnie's head sank into her mother's lap, Miss Hargrove
and Burt grew quiet and preoccupied, their eyes looking off into vacancy. Webb was saying, "By one who had imagination how much more could be seen
from this point than meets the eye! There, on the plain below us, would
rise the magnificent rustic colonnade two hundred and twenty feet long
and eighty feet wide, beneath which Washington gave the great banquet in
honor of the birth of the Dauphin of France, and on the evening of the
same day these hills blazed with musketry and rolled back the thunder of
cannon with which the festivities of the evening were begun. Think of the
'Father of his Country' being there in flesh and blood, just as we are
here! In the language of an old military journal, 'He carried down a
dance of twenty couple on the green grass, with a graceful and dignified
air, having Mrs. In almost a direct line across
the river you can see the Beverly Robinson house, from which Arnold
carried on his correspondence with Andre. You can look into the window of
the room to which, after hearing of the capture of Andre, he hastened
from the breakfast-table. To this upper room he immediately summoned his
wife, who had been the beautiful Margaret Shippen, you remember, and told
her of his awful peril, then rushed away, leaving the poor, terror-stricken
woman unconscious on the floor. Would you not like to look through the
glass at the house where the tragedy occurred, Miss Hargrove?" At the sound of her name the young girl started visibly, and Webb saw
that there were tears in her eyes; but she complied without a word, and
he so directed the glass that it covered the historic mansion. thought innocent Webb, taking her
quickly suppressed emotion as a tribute to his moving reminiscences. "Oh, Webb, have done with your lugubrious ancient history!" "It's time we were getting ready for a homeward move," said Maggie. "I'll
go and pack the things." "And I'll help you," added Miss Hargrove, hastily following her. "Let me look at the house, too," said Amy, taking the glass; then added,
after a moment: "Poor Margaret Arnold! It was indeed a tragedy, as you
said, Webb--a sadder one than these old military preparations can
suggest. In all his career of war and treachery Arnold never inflicted a
more cruel wound." "How much feeling Miss Hargrove showed!" "Yes," said Amy, quietly, "she was evidently feeling deeply." Her thought
was, "I don't believe she heard a word that Webb said." Then, seeing that
Burt was helping Maggie and Miss Hargrove, she added, "Please point out
to me some other interesting places." Webb, well pleased, talked on to a listener who did not give him her
whole attention. She could not forget Gertrude's paleness, and her
alternations from extreme gayety to a look of such deep sadness as to
awaken not a little sympathetic curiosity. Amy loved her friend truly,
and it did not seem strange to her that Miss Hargrove was deeply
interested in Burt, since they had been much thrown together, and since
she probably owed her life to him. Amy's resentment toward Burt had
passed away. She had found that her pride, merely, and not her heart, was
wounded by his new passion, and she already began to feel that she never
could have any such regard for him as her friend was possibly cherishing. Therefore it was, perhaps, not unnatural that her tranquil regard should
prove unsatisfying to Burt in contrast with the passion of which Miss
Hargrove was capable. She had seen his vain efforts to remain loyal, and
had smiled at them, proposing to let matters take their course, and to
give little aid in extricating him from his dilemma. But, if she had
interpreted her friend's face aright, she could no longer stand aloof, an
amused and slightly satirical spectator. If Burt deserved some
punishment, Gertrude did not, and she was inclined to guess the cause of
the latter's haste to return to the city. It may thus be seen that Amy was fast losing her unsophisticated
girlhood. While Burt's passionate words had awakened no corresponding
feeling, they had taught her that she was no longer a child, since she
could inspire such words. Her intimacy with Miss Hargrove, and the
latter's early confidences, had enlarged her ideas on some subjects. As
the bud of a flower passes slowly through long and apparently slow stages
of immaturity and at last suddenly opens to the light, so she had reached
that age when a little experience suggests a great deal, and the
influences around her tended to develop certain thoughts very rapidly. She saw that her friend had not been brought up in English seclusion. Admirers by the score had flocked around her, and, as she had often said,
she proposed to marry for love. "I have the name of being cold," she once
told Amy, "but I know I can love as can few others, and I shall know it
well when I do love, too." The truth was daily growing clearer to Amy
that under our vivid American skies the grand passion is not a fiction of
romance or a quiet arrangement between the parties concerned. Miss Hargrove had not misjudged herself. Her tropical nature, when once
kindled, burned with no feeble, wavering flame. She had passed the point
of criticism of Burt. She loved him, and to her fond eyes he seemed more
worthy of her love than any man she had ever before known. But she had
not passed beyond her sense of truth and duty, and the feeling came to
her that she must go away at once and engage in that most pathetic of all
struggles that fall to woman's lot. As the conviction grew clear on this
bright October day, she felt that her heart was bleeding internally. Tears would come into her eyes at the dreary prospect. Her former
brilliant society life now looked as does an opera-house in the morning,
when the gilding and tinsel that flashed and sparkled the evening before
are seen to be dull and tarnished. Burt had appeared to especial
advantage in his mountain home. His
tall, fine figure and unconscious, easy manner were as full of grace as
deficient in conventionality, and she thought with disgust of many of her
former admirers, who were nothing if not stylish after the arbitrary mode
of the hour. At the same time he had proved that he could be at home in a
drawing-room on the simple ground of good-breeding, and not because he
had been run through fashion's latest mold. The grand scenery around her
suggested the manhood that kindled her imagination--a manhood strong,
fearless, and not degenerated from that sturdy age which had made these
scenes historic. By the time they were ready to start homeward the southern side of Cro'
Nest was in deep blue shadow. They bowled along rapidly till they came to
the steep ascent, and then the boys and the young men sprang out. "Would
you like to walk, Gertrude?" Amy asked, for she was bent on throwing her
friend and Burt together during the witching twilight that was coming on
apace. "I fear I am too tired, unless the load is heavy," she replied. "Oh, no, indeed," said Webb. "It does not take long to reach the top of
the mountain on this side, and then it's chiefly down hill the rest of
the way." Amy, who had been sitting with Webb and Johnnie as before, said to Miss
Hargrove, "Won't you step across the seats and keep me company?" She was so utterly unhappy that she
wished to be left to herself as far as possible. In her realization of a
loss that seemed immeasurable, she was a little resentful toward Amy,
feeling that she had been more frank and confidential than her friend. If
Amy had claims on Burt, why had she not spoken of them? why had she
permitted her for whom she professed such strong friendship to drift
almost wholly unwarned upon so sad a fate? and why was she now clearly
trying to bring together Burt and the one to whom even he felt that he
had no right to speak in more than a friendly manner? While she was
making such immense sacrifices to be true, she felt that Amy was
maintaining an unfair reticence, if not actually beguiling herself and
Burt into a display of weakness for which they would be condemned--or, at
least, he would be, and love identifies itself with its object. These
thoughts, having once been admitted, grew upon her mind rapidly, for it
is hard to suffer through another and maintain a gentle charity. Therefore she was silent when she took her seat by Amy, and when the
latter gave her a look that was like a caress, she did not return it. "You are tired, Gertrude," Amy began gently. You
must stay with me to-night, and I'll watch over you like Sairy Gamp." So far from responding to Amy's playful and friendly words, Miss Hargrove
said, hastily,

"Oh, no, I had better go right on home. I don't feel very well, and shall
be better at home; and I must begin to get ready to-morrow for my return
to the city." Amy would not be repulsed, but, putting her arm around her friend, she
looked into her eyes, and asked:

"Why are you so eager to return to New York? Are you tiring of your
country friends? You certainly told me that you expected to stay till
November." "Fred must go back to school to-morrow," said Gertrude, in a constrained
voice, "and I do not think it is well to leave him alone in the city
house." "You are withdrawing your confidence from me," said Amy, sadly. If you had, I should not be the unhappy girl I am-to-night. Well,
since you wish to know the whole truth you shall. You said you could
trust me implicitly, and I promised to deserve your trust. If you had
said to me that Burt was bound to you when I told you that I was
heart-whole and fancy-free, I should have been on my guard. Is it natural
that I should be indifferent to the man who risked his life to save mine? Why have you left me so long in his society without a hint of warning? I shall not try to snatch happiness from
another." Johnnie's tuneful little voice was piping a song, and the rumble of the
wheels over a stony road prevented Maggie, on the last seat, from hearing
anything. "Now you _shall_ stay with me
to-night," she said. See, Burt has
turned, and is coming toward us. I pledge you my word he can never be to
me more than a brother. I do not love him except as a brother, and never
have, and you can snatch no happiness from me, except by treating me with
distrust and going away." "Oh, Amy," began Miss Hargrove, in tones and with a look that gave
evidence of the chaotic bewilderment of her mind. We are not very lonely, thank you, Mr. You look, as far as I
can see you through the dusk, as if you were commiserating us as poor
forlorn creatures, but we have some resources within ourselves." We are the forlorn creatures who have
no resources. I assure you we are very simple,
honest people." "In that case I shall have no fears, but clamber in at once. I feel as if
I had been on a twenty-mile tramp." "What an implied compliment to our exhilarating society!" "Indeed there is--a very strong one. I've been so immensely exhilarated
that, in the re-action, I'm almost faint." "Maggie," cried Amy, "do take care of Burt; he's going to faint." "He must wait till we come to the next brook, and then we'll put him in
it." "Webb," said Amy, looking over her shoulder at the young man, who was now
following the carriage, "is there anything the matter with you, also?" "Oh, your trouble, whatever it may be, is chronic. Well, well, to think
that we poor women may be the only survivors of this tremendous
expedition." "That would be most natural--the survival of the fittest, you know." Science is uppermost in your mind, as
ever. You ought to live a thousand years, Webb, to see the end of all
your theories." "I fear it wouldn't be the millennium for me, and that I should have more
perplexing theories at its end than now." "That's the way with men--they are never satisfied," remarked Miss
Hargrove. Clifford, this is your expedition, and it's getting so
dark that I shall feel safer if you are driving." "Oh, Gertrude, you have no confidence in me whatever. As if I would break
your neck--or heart either!" "You are a very mysterious little woman," was the reply, given in like
manner, "and need hours of explanation." Clifford,
I've much more confidence in you than in Amy. Her talk is so giddy that I
want a sober hand on the reins." "I want one to drive who can see his way, not feel it," was the laughing
response. Amy, too, was laughing silently, as she reined in the horses. "What are you
two girls giggling about?" "The
idea of two such refined creatures giggling!" "Well," exclaimed Webb, "what am I to do? I can't stand up between you
and drive." "Gertrude, you must clamber around and sustain Burt's drooping spirits." "Indeed, Amy, you must know best how to do that," was the reply. "As
guest, I claim a little of the society of the commander-in-chief. "I'll solve the vexed question," said Burt, much nettled, and leaping
out. "Now, Burt, the question isn't vexed, and don't you be," cried Amy,
springing lightly over to the next seat. "There are Fred and Alf, too,
with the gun. Let us all get home as soon as possible, for it's nearly
time for supper already. Come, I shall feel much hurt if you don't keep
me company." Burt at once realized the absurdity of showing pique, although he felt
that there was something in the air which he did not understand. He came
back laughing, with much apparent good-nature, and saying, "I thought I'd
soon bring one or the other of you to terms." said Amy, with difficulty restraining a
new burst of merriment. They soon reached the summit, and paused to give the horses a breathing. The young moon hung in the west, and its silver crescent symbolized to
Miss Hargrove the hope that was growing in her heart. "Amy," she said,
"don't you remember the song we arranged from 'The Culprit Fay'? We
certainly should sing it here on this mountain. Amy sang, in clear soprano:

  "'The moon looks down on old Cro' Nest,
  She mellows the shades on his shaggy breast,
  And seems his huge gray form to throw
  In a silver cone on the wave below.'" "Imagine the cone and wave, please," said Miss Hargrove; and then, in an
alto rich with her heart's deep feeling, she sang with Amy:

  "'Ouphe and goblin! Ye that love the moon's soft light,
    Hither--hither wend your way;
    Twine ye in a jocund ring;
    Sing and trip it merrily,
    Hand to hand and wing to wing,
    Round the wild witch-hazel tree.'" "If I were a goblin, I'd come, for music like that," cried Burt, as they
started rapidly homeward. "You are much too big to suggest a culprit fay," said Amy. "But the description of the fay's charmer is your portrait," he replied,
in a low tone:

  "'But well I know her sinless mind
    Is pure as the angel forms above,
    Gentle and meek, and chaste and kind,
    Such as a spirit well might love.'" "Oh, no; you are mistaken, I'm not meek in the least. Think of the
punishment:

  "'Tied to the hornet's shardy wings,
    Toss'd on the pricks of nettles' stings;'

you know the rest." "What witchery has got into you to-night, Amy?" "That last song was so good that I, for one, would be glad of more," cried
Webb. "You men must help us, then," said Miss Hargrove, and in a moment the wild,
dim forest was full of melody, the rocks and highlands sending back soft
and unheeded echoes. Burt, meantime, was occupied with disagreeable reflections. Perhaps both
the girls at last understood him, and had been comparing notes, to his
infinite disadvantage. His fickleness and the dilemma he was in may have
become a jest between them. Resentment, except against
himself, was impossible. If Amy understood him, in what other way could
she meet any approach to sentiment on his part than by a laughing scorn? If Miss Hargrove had divined the past, or had received a hint concerning
it, why should she not shun his society? He was half-desperate, and yet
felt that any show of embarrassment or anger would only make him appear
more ridiculous. The longer he thought the more sure he was that the
girls were beginning to guess his position, and that his only course was
a polite indifference to both. But this policy promised to lead through a
thorny path, and to what? In impotent rage at himself he ground his teeth
during the pauses between the stanzas that he was compelled to sing. Such
was the discord in his heart that he felt like uttering notes that would
make "night hideous." He was still more distraught when, on their return, they found Mr. Hargrove's carriage in waiting, and Amy, after a brief conference with
her friend in her room, came down prepared to accompany Miss Hargrove
home after supper. In spite of all his efforts at ease and gayety, his
embarrassment and trouble were evident. He had observed Miss Hargrove's
pallor and her effort to keep up at Fort Putnam, and could not banish the
hope that she sympathized with him; but now the young girl was demurely
radiant. Her color had come again, and the lustre of her beautiful eyes
was dazzling. Yet they avoided his, and she had far more to say to Webb
and the others than to him. Webb, too, was perplexed, for during the day
Amy had been as bewildering to him as to Burt. But he was in no
uncertainty as to his course, which was simply to wait. He, with Burt,
saw the girls to the carriage, and the latter said good-night rather
coldly and stiffly. Alf and Fred parted regretfully, with the promise of
a correspondence which would be as remarkable for its orthography as for
its natural history. CHAPTER LII

BURT'S SORE DILEMMA


Mr. Hargrove greeted Amy cordially, but his questioning eyes rested
oftenest on his daughter. Her expression and manner caused him to pace
his study long and late that night. Hargrove was very polite and a
little stately. She felt that she existed on a plane above Amy. The young girls soon pleaded fatigue, and retired. Once in the seclusion
of their room they forgot all about their innocent fib, and there was not
a trace of weariness in their manner. While Burt was staring at his
dismal, tangled fortune, seeing no solution of his difficulties, a
fateful conference relating to him was taking place. Amy did not look
like a scorner, as with a sister's love and a woman's tact she pleaded
his cause and palliated his course to one incapable of harsh judgment. But she felt that she must be honest with her friend, and that the whole
truth would be best and safest. Her conclusion was: "No man who loved
_you_, and whom you encouraged, would ever change. I know now that I
never had a particle of such feeling as you have for Burt, and can see
that I naturally chilled and quenched his regard for me." Miss Hargrove's dark eyes flashed ominously as she spoke of Burt or of
any man proving faithless after she had given encouragement. "But it wasn't possible for me to give him any real encouragement," Amy
persisted. "I've never felt as you do, and am not sure that I want to for
a long time." Miss Hargrove almost said, but she suppressed the
words, feeling that since he had not revealed his secret she had no right
to do so. Indeed, as she recalled how sedulously he had guarded it she
was sure he would not thank her for suggesting it to Amy before she was
ready for the knowledge. Impetuous as Miss Hargrove was at times, she had
too fine a nature to be careless of the rights and feelings of others. Moreover, she felt that Webb had been her ally, whether consciously or
not, and he should have his chance with all the help she could give him,
but she was wise enough to know that obtrusion and premature aid are
often disastrous. The decision, after this portentous conference, was: "Mr. Bart must seek
me, and seek very zealously. I know you well enough Amy, to be sure that
you will give him no hints. It's bad enough to love a man before I've
been asked to do so. What an utterly perverse and unmanageable thing
one's heart is! I shall do no angling, however, nor shall I permit any." "You may stand up straight, Gertrude," said Amy, laughing, "but don't
lean over backward." Burt entertained half a dozen wild and half-tragic projects before he
fell asleep late that night, but finally, in utter self-disgust, settled
down on the prosaic and not irrational one of helping through with the
fall work on the farm, and then of seeking some business or profession to
which he could give his whole mind. "As to ladies' society," he
concluded, savagely, "I'll shun it hereafter till I'm grown up." Burt always attained a certain kind of peace and the power to sleep after
he had reached an irrevocable decision. During the night the wind veered to the east, and a cold, dismal
rain-storm set in. Dull and dreary indeed the day proved to Burt. He
could not go out and put his resolution into force. He fumed about the
house, restless, yet reticent. He would rather have fought dragons than
keep company with his own thoughts in inaction. All the family supposed
he missed Amy, except Webb, who hoped he missed some one else. "Why don't you go over and bring Amy home, Burt?" his mother asked, at
the dinner-table. "The house seems empty without her, and everybody is
moping. Even father has fretted over his newspaper, and wished Amy was
here." "Why can't they print an edition of the paper for old men and dark days?" "Well," remarked Leonard, leaning back in his chair, and looking
humorously at Maggie, "I'm sorry for you young fellows, but I'm finding
the day serene." "Of course you are," snapped Burt. "With an armchair to doze in and a
dinner to look forward to, what more do you wish? As for Webb, he can
always get astride of some scientific hobby, no matter how bad the
weather is." "As for Burt, he can bring Amy home, and then every one will be
satisfied," added his mother, smiling. Thus a new phase of his trial presented itself to poor Burt. He must
either face those two girls after their night's conclave, with all its
possible revelations, or else awaken at once very embarrassing surmises. And in a mood of mingled
recklessness and fear he drove through the storm. When his name was
announced the girls smiled significantly, but went down looking as
unconscious as if they had not spoken of him in six months, and Burt
could not have been more suave, non-committal, and impartially polite if
these ladies had been as remote from his thoughts as one of Webb's
theories. At the same time he intimated that he would be ready to return
when Amy was. At parting the friends gave each other a little look of dismay, and he
caught it from the same telltale mirror that persisted in taking a part
in this drama. though the young fellow, "so they have been exchanging confidences,
and my manner is disconcerting--not what was expected. If I have become a
jest between them it shall be a short-lived one. Miss Hargrove, with all
her city experience, shall find that I'm not so young and verdant but that
I can take a hand in this game also. As for Amy, I now know she never cared
for me, and I don't believe she ever would;" and so he went away with
laughing repartee, and did not see the look of deep disappointment with
which he was followed. Her innocent schemes might not be so
easily accomplished if Burt would be wrong-headed. She was aware of the
dash of recklessness in his character, and feared that under the impulse
of pride he might spoil everything, or, at least, cause much needless
delay. With the fatality of blundering which usually attends upon such
occasions, he did threaten to fulfil her fears, and so successfully that
Amy was in anxiety, and Miss Hargrove grew as pale as she was resolute
not to make the least advance, while poor Webb felt that his suspense
never would end. Burt treated Amy in an easy, fraternal manner. He
engaged actively in the task of gathering and preparing for market the
large crop of apples, and he openly broached the subject of going into a
business of some kind away from home, where, he declared, with a special
meaning for Amy, he was not needed, adding: "It's time I was earning my
salt and settling down to something for life. Webb and Len can take care
of all the land, and I don't believe I was cut out for a farmer." He not only troubled Amy exceedingly, but he perplexed all the family,
for it seemed that he was decidedly taking a new departure. One evening,
a day or two after he had introduced the project of going elsewhere, his
father, to Amy's dismay, suggested that he should go to the far West and
look after a large tract of land which the old gentleman had bought some
years before. It was said that a railroad was to be built through it,
and, if so, the value of the property would be greatly enhanced, and
steps should be taken to get part of it into the market. Burt took hold
of the scheme with eagerness, and was for going as soon as possible. Looking to note the effect of his words upon Amy, he saw that her
expression was not only reproachful, but almost severe. Webb was silent, and in deep despondency, feeling
that if Bart went now nothing would be settled. He saw Amy's aversion to
the project also, and misinterpreted it. She was compelled to admit that the prospects were growing very dark. Burt might soon depart for an indefinite absence, and Miss Hargrove
return to the city. Amy, who had looked upon the mutations in her own
prospects so quietly, was almost feverishly eager to aid her friend. She
feared she had blundered on the mountain ride. Burt's pride had been
wounded, and he had received the impression that his April-like moods had
been discussed satirically. It was certain that he had been very deeply
interested in Gertrude, and that he was throwing away not only his
happiness, but also hers; and Amy felt herself in some degree to blame. Therefore she was bent upon ending the senseless misunderstanding, but
found insurmountable embarrassments on every side. Miss Hargrove was
prouder than Burt. Wild horses could not draw her to the Cliffords', With
a pale, resolute face, she declined even to put herself in the way of
receiving the least advance. Amy would gladly have taken counsel of Webb,
but could not do so without revealing her friend's secret, and also
disclosing mere surmises about Burt, which, although amounting to
conviction in her mind, could not be mentioned. Therefore, from the very
delicacy of the situation, she felt herself helpless. Nature was her
ally, however, and if all that was passing in Burt's mind had been
manifest, the ardent little schemer would not have been so despondent. The best hope of Burt had been that he had checkmated the girls in their
disposition to make jesting comparisons, He would retire with so much
nonchalance as to leave nothing to be said. They would find complete
inaction and silence hard to combat. But the more he thought of it the
less it seemed like an honorable retreat. He had openly wooed one girl,
he had since lost his heart to another, and she had given him a glimpse
of strong regard, if not more. His thoughts were busy with her every word
and glance. How much had his tones and eyes revealed to her? Might she
not think him a heartless flirt if he continued to avoid her and went
away without a word? Would it not be better to be laughed at as one who
did not know his own mind than be despised for deliberate trifling? Amy
had asked him to go and spend an evening with her friend, and he had
pleaded weariness as an excuse. Her incredulous look and rather cool
manner since had not been reassuring. She had that very morning broached
the subject of a chestnutting party for the following day, and he had
promptly said that he was going to the city to make inquiries about
routes to the West. "Why, Burt, you can put off your trip to town for a day," said his
mother. "If you are to leave us so soon you should make the most of the
days that are left." "That is just what he is doing," Amy remarked, satirically. "He has
become absorbed in large business considerations. Those of us who have
not such resources are of no consequence." The old people and Leonard believed that Amy was not pleased with the
idea of Burt's going away, but they felt that she was a little
unreasonable, since the young fellow was rather to be commended for
wishing to take life more seriously. But her words rankled in Burt's
mind. He felt that she understood him better than the others, and that he
was not winning respect from her. In the afternoon he saw her, with Alf
and Johnnie, starting for the chestnut-trees, and although she passed not
far away she gave him only a slight greeting, and did not stop for a
little merry banter, as usual. The young fellow was becoming very
unhappy, and he felt that his position was growing intolerable. That Amy
should be cold toward him, or, indeed, toward any one, was an unheard-of
thing, and he knew that she must feel that there was good reason for her
manner. "What are she and
Miss Hargrove thinking about me?" The more he thought upon the past the more awkward and serious appeared
his dilemma, and his long Western journey, which at first he had welcomed
as promising a diversion of excitement and change, now began to appear
like exile. He dreaded to think of the memories he must take with him;
still more he deprecated the thoughts he would leave behind him. His
plight made him so desperate that he suddenly left the orchard where he
was gathering apples, went to the house, put on his riding-suit, and in a
few moments was galloping furiously away on his black horse. With a
renewal of hope Webb watched his proceedings, and with many surmises,
Amy, from a distant hillside, saw him passing at a break-neck pace. CHAPTER LIII

BURT'S RESOLVE


For the first two or three miles Burt rode as if he were trying to leave
care behind him, scarcely heeding what direction he took. When at last he
reined his reeking horse he found himself near the entrance of the lane
over which willows met in a Gothic arch. He yielded to the impulse to visit
the spot which had seen the beginning of so fateful an acquaintance, and
had not gone far when a turn in the road revealed a group whose presence
almost made his heart stand still for a moment. Miss Hargrove had stopped
her horse on the very spot where he had aided her in her awkward
predicament. Her back was toward him, and her great dog was at her side,
looking up into her face, as if in mute sympathy with his fair mistress. She could not be there with bowed head if
she despised him. Her presence seemed in harmony with that glance by
which, when weak and unnerved after escaping from deadly peril, she had
revealed possibly more than gratitude to the one who had rescued her. His
love rose like an irresistible tide, and he resolved that before he left
his home Amy and Miss Hargrove should know the whole truth, whatever
might be the result. Meanwhile he was rapidly approaching the young girl,
and the dog's short bark of recognition was her first intimation of
Hurt's presence. Her impulse was to fly, but in a second she saw the
absurdity of this course, and yet she was greatly embarrassed, and would
rather have been discovered by him at almost any other point of the
globe. She was going to the city on the morrow, and as she had drawn rein
on this spot and realized the bitterness of her disappointment, tears
would come. She wiped them hastily away, but dreaded lest their traces
should be seen. Turning her horse, she met Burt with a smile that her moist eyes belied,
and said: "I'm glad you do not find me in such an awkward plight as when
we first met here. and away like the wind she started homeward. Burt easily kept at her side, but conversation was impossible. At last he
said: "My horse is very tired, Miss Hargrove. At this pace you will soon
be home, and I shall feel that you are seeking to escape from me. Have I
fallen so very low in your estimation?" "Why," she exclaimed, in well-feigned surprise, as she checked her horse,
"what have you done that you should fall in my estimation?" "I shall tell you before very long," he said, with an expression that
seemed almost tragic. Surely
this brief gallop cannot have so tried your superb beast. "Oh, no," he replied, with a grim laugh. I had been riding rapidly before I met you. My horse has been
idle for some days, and I had to run the spirit out of him. Amy wishes to
have a chestnutting party to-morrow. Clifford, but I return to the city tomorrow afternoon,
and was coming over in the morning to say good-by to Amy and your father
and mother." "I am very sorry too," he said, in tones that gave emphasis to his words. She turned upon him a swift, questioning glance, but her eyes instantly
fell before his intense gaze. "Oh, well," she said, lightly, "we've had a very pleasant summer, and all
things must come to an end, you know." Then she went on speaking, in a
matter-of-fact way, of the need of looking after Fred, who was alone in
town, and of getting the city house in order, and of her plans for the
winter, adding: "As there is a great deal of fruit on the place, papa
does not feel that he can leave just yet. You know he goes back and forth
often, and so his business does not suffer. But I can just as well go
down now, and nearly all my friends have returned to town." "All your friends, Miss Hargrove?" "Amy has promised to visit me soon," she said, hastily. "It would seem that I am not down on your list of friends," he began,
gloomily. Clifford, I'm sure papa and I would be glad to have you call
whenever you are in town." "I fear I shall have to disappoint Mr. Hargrove," he said, a little
satirically. "I'm going West the last of this month, and may be absent
much of the winter. I expect to look about in that section for some
opening in business." "Indeed," she replied, in tones which were meant to convey but little
interest, yet which had a slight tremor in spite of her efforts. "It will
be a very great change for you." "Perhaps you think that constitutes its chief charm." Clifford," she said, "what chance have I had to think about it at
all? (Amy had, however, and
Gertrude had not only thought about it, but dreamed of it, as if she had
been informed that on a certain date the world would end.) "Is it not a
rather sudden plan?" My father has a large tract of land in the West, and it's
time it was looked after. Isn't it natural that I should think of doing
something in life? I fear there is an impression in your mind that I
entertain few thoughts beyond having a good time." "To have a good time in life," she said, smiling at him, "is a very
serious matter, worthy of any one's attention. It would seem that few
accomplish it." "And I greatly fear that I shall share in the ill-success of the
majority." You will soon be
enjoying the excitement of travel and enterprise in the West." "And you the excitement of society and conquest in the city. Conquests,
however, must be almost wearisome to you, Miss Hargrove, you make them so
easily." I certainly should soon weary of conquests were I
making them. Where in
history do we read of a man who was satiated with conquest? "Are you going to the city to-morrow?" "Will you forgive me if I come alone?" I suppose Amy will be tired from nutting." He did not reply, but lifted his hat gravely, mounted his horse, and
galloped away as if he were an aid bearing a message that might avert a
battle. Miss Hargrove hastened to her room, and took off her hat with trembling
hands. Burt's pale, resolute face told her that the crisis in her life
had come. If he meant to speak,
why had he not done so? why had he not asked permission to consult her
father? Hargrove, from his library window, saw Burt's formal parting, and
concluded that his fears or hopes--he scarcely knew which were uppermost,
so deep was his love for his daughter, and so painful would it be to see
her unhappy--were not to be fulfilled. By a great effort Gertrude
appeared not very _distraite_ at dinner, nor did she mention Burt,
except in a casual manner, in reply to a question from her mother, but
her father thought he detected a strong and suppressed excitement. She excused herself early from the table, and said she must finish
packing for her departure. CHAPTER LIV

A GENTLE EXORCIST


Burt's black horse was again white before he approached his home. In the
distance he saw Amy returning, the children running on before, Alf
whooping like a small Indian to some playmate who was answering further
away. The gorgeous sunset lighted up the still more brilliant foliage,
and made the scene a fairyland. But Burt had then no more eye for nature
than a man would have who had staked his all on the next throw of the
dice. Amy was alone, and now was his chance to intercept her before she
reached the house. Imagine her surprise as she saw him make his horse
leap the intervening fences, and come galloping toward her. "Burt," she cried, as he, in a moment or two, reined up near her, "you
will break your neck!" "It wouldn't matter much," he said, grimly. "I fear a worse fate than
that." He threw the bridle over a stake in the fence, and the horse was glad to
rest, with drooping head. Then he came and stood beside her, his face
flushed, and his mouth twitching with excitement and strong feeling. "Burt," she said, "what is the matter? "I fear your scorn, Amy," he began, impetuously; "I fear I shall lose
your respect forever. But I can't go on any longer detesting myself and
feeling that you and Miss Hargrove despise me. I may seem to you and her
a fickle fool, a man of straw, but you shall both know the truth. I
shan't go away a coward. I can at least be honest, and then you may think
what you please of my weakness and vacillation. You cannot think worse
things than I think myself, but you must not imagine that I am a
cold-blooded, deliberate trifler, for that has never been true. I know
you don't care for me, and never did." "Indeed, Burt, you are mistaken. I do care for you immensely," said Amy,
eagerly clasping his arm with both her hands. "Amy, Amy," said Burt, in a low, desperate tone, "think how few short
months have passed since I told you I loved you, and protested I would
wait till I was gray. You have seen me giving my thoughts to another, and
in your mind you expect to see me carried away by a half-dozen more. You
are mistaken, but it will take a long time to prove it." "No, Burt, I understand you better than you think. Gertrude has inspired
in you a very different feeling from the one you had for me. I think you
are loving now with a man's love, and won't get over it very soon, if you
ever do. You have seen, you must have felt, that my love for you was only
that of a sister, and of course you soon began to feel toward me in the
same way. I don't believe I would have married you had you waited an age. Don't fret, I'm not going to break my heart about you." "I should think not, nor will any one else. Oh, Amy, I so despised myself
that I have been half-desperate." "Despised yourself because you love a girl like Gertrude Hargrove! I
never knew a man to do a more natural and sensible thing, whether she
gave you encouragement or not. If I were a man I would make love to her,
rest assured, and she would have to refuse me more than once to be rid of
me." Burt took a long breath of immense relief. "You are heavenly kind," he
said. "Are you sure you won't despise me? It seems
to me that I have done such an awfully mean thing in making love to you
in my own home, and then in changing." "Fate has been too strong for you, and I
think--I mean--I hope, it has been kind. Bless you, Burt, I could never
get up any such feeling as sways you. I should always be disappointing,
and you would have found out, sooner or later, that your best chance
would be to discover some one more responsive. Since you have been so
frank, I'll be so too. I was scarcely more ready for your words last
spring than Johnnie, but I was simple enough to think that in half a
dozen years or so we might be married if all thought it was best, and my
pride was a little hurt when I saw what--what--well, Gertrude's influence
over you. But I've grown much older the last few months, and know now
that my thoughts were those of a child. My feeling for you is simply that
of a sister, and I don't believe it would ever have changed. I
might eventually have an acute attack also, and then I should be in a
worse predicament than yours." "But you will be my loving sister as long as you live, Amy? You will
believe that I have a little manhood if given a chance to show it?" "I believe it now, Burt, and I can make you a hundredfold better sister
than wife. It seems but the other day I was playing with dolls. You have judged yourself too harshly;" and she
looked at him so smilingly and affectionately that he took her in his
arms and kissed her again and again, exclaiming, "You can count on one
brother to the last drop of his blood. Oh, Amy, whatever happens now, I
won't lose courage. Miss Hargrove will have to say no a dozen times
before she is through with me." At this moment Webb, from the top of a tall ladder in the orchard,
happened to glance that way, and saw the embrace. He instantly descended,
threw down his basket of apples, and with it all hope. The coolness between them had been but a misunderstanding, which
apparently had been banished most decidedly. He mechanically took down
his ladder and placed it on the ground, then went to his room to prepare
for supper. "Burt," cried Amy, when they were half-way home, "you have forgotten your
horse." "If he were Pegasus, I should have forgotten him to-day. "Oh, yes, I'll do anything for you." "Will you tell me if you think Miss
Hargrove--"

"No, I won't tell you anything. After she has refused you half
a dozen times, I may, out of pity, intercede a little. Go get your horse,
smooth your brow, and be sensible, or you'll have Webb and Leonard poking
fun at you. Suppose they have seen you galloping over fences and ditches
like one possessed." "Well, I was possessed, and never was there such a kind, gentle exorcist. I have seen Miss Hargrove to-day; I had just parted from her." How could I, until I had told you? I felt I was bound to you by
all that can bind a man." "Oh, Burt, suppose I had not released you, but played Shylock, what would
you have done?" and her laugh rang out again in intense merriment. "I had no fears of that," he replied, ruefully. "You are the last one to
practice Mrs. My fear was that you and Miss
Hargrove both would send me West as a precious good riddance." "Well, it was square of you, as Alf says, to come to me first, and I
appreciate it, but I should not have resented the omission. Will you
forgive my curiosity if I ask what is the next move in the campaign? I've
been reading about the war, you know, and I am quite military in my
ideas." "I have Miss Hargrove's permission to call to-night. It wasn't given very
cordially, and she asked me to bring you." "Oh, I told her she would have to forgive me if I came alone. I meant to
have it out to-day, if old Chaos came again." When Amy's renewed laughter
so subsided that he could speak, he resumed: "I'm going over there after
supper, to ask her father for permission to pay my addresses, and if he
won't give it, I shall tell him I will pay them all the same--that I
shall use every effort in my power to win his daughter. I don't want a
dollar of his money, but I'm bound to have the girl if she'll ever listen
to me after knowing all you know." Amy's laugh ceased, and she again clasped her hands on his arm. "Dear
Burt," she said, "your course now seems to me manly and straightforward. I saw the strait you were in, but did not think you felt it so keenly. In
going West I feared you were about to run away from it. However Gertrude
may treat you, you have won my respect by your downright truth. She may
do as she pleases, but she can't despise you now. He has learned this afternoon that you are in no state of
mind to take care of him." CHAPTER LV

BURT TELLS HIS LOVE AGAIN


Webb appeared at the supper-table the personification of quiet geniality,
but Amy thought she had never seen him look so hollow-eyed. The long
strain was beginning to tell on him, decidedly, and to-night he felt as
if he had received a mortal blow. But with indomitable courage he hid his
wound, and seemed absorbed in a conversation with Leonard and his father
about the different varieties of apples, and their relative value. Amy
saw that his mother was looking at him anxiously, and she did not wonder. He was growing thin even to gauntness. Burt also was an arrant dissembler, and on rising from the table remarked
casually that he was going over to bid Miss Hargrove good-by, as she
would return to town on the morrow. "She'll surely come and see us before she goes," Mrs. "It seems to me she hasn't been very sociable of late." She told me she
was coming to say good-by to us all, and she has asked me to visit her. Come, Webb, you look all tired out to-night. I'll
stumble through the dryest scientific treatise you have if I can see you
resting on the sofa." "That's ever so kind of you, Amy, and I appreciate it more than you
imagine, but I'm going out this evening." "Oh, of course, sisters are of no account. What girl are _you_ going
to see?" I am too old and dull to entertain the pretty
creatures." You know one you could entertain if she isn't a pretty
creature, but then she's only a sister who doesn't know much." "I'm sorry--I must go," he said, a little abruptly, for her lovely,
half-laughing, half-reproachful face, turned to his, contained such
mocking promise of happiness that he could not look upon it. His rapid steps as he walked mile after mile indicated
that the matter was pressing indeed; but, although it was late before he
returned, he had spoken to no one. The house was dark and silent except
that a light was burning in Burt's room. And his momentous fortunes the
reader must now follow. Miss Hargrove, with a fluttering heart, heard the rapid feet of his horse
as he rode up the avenue. Truly, he was coming at a lover's pace. The
door-bell rang, she heard him admitted, and expected the maid's tap at
her door to follow. Were the tumultuous throbs of
her heart so loud that she could not hear it? She opened her door slightly; there was no
sound. There below, like a shadow, stood a
saddled horse. Had the stupid girl shown him into
the drawing-room and left him there? Surely the well-trained servant had
never been guilty of such a blunder before. Could it have been some one
else who had come to see her father on business? She stole down the
stairway in a tremor of apprehension, and strolled into the parlor in the
most nonchalant manner imaginable. It was lighted, but empty, and her
expression suddenly became one of troubled perplexity. She returned to
the hall, and started as if she had seen an apparition. There on the rack
hung Burt's hat, as natural as life. Voices reached her ear from her
father's study. She took a few swift steps toward it, then fled to her
room, and stood panting before her mirror, which reflected a young lady
in a costume charmingly ill adapted to "packing." "It was honorable in
him to speak to papa first, and papa would not, could not, answer him
without consulting me. I cannot be treated as a child any longer," she
muttered, with flashing eyes. "Papa loves me," she murmured, in swift
alternation of gentle feeling. "He could not make my happiness secondary
to a paltry sum of money." Hargrove had greeted him with
no little surprise. The parting of the young people had not promised any
such interview. "Have you spoken to my daughter on this subject?" Hargrove asked,
gravely, after the young fellow had rather incoherently made known his
errand. "No, sir," replied Burt, "I have not secured your permission. At the same
time," he added, with an ominous flash in his blue eyes, "sincerity
compels me to say that I could not take a final refusal from any lips
except those of your daughter, and not readily from hers. I would not
give up effort to win her until convinced that any amount of patient
endeavor was useless. I should not persecute her, but I would ask her to
reconsider an adverse answer as often as she would permit, and I will try
with all my soul to render myself more worthy of her." Hargrove, severely, "if I should decline this
honor, I should count for nothing." "No, sir, I do not mean that, and I hope I haven't said it, even by
implication. Your consent that I should have a fair field in which to do
my best would receive from me boundless gratitude. What I mean to say is,
that I could not give her up; I should not think it right to do so. This
question is vital to me, and I know of no reason," he added, a little
haughtily, "why I should be refused a privilege which is considered the
right of every gentleman." "I have not in the slightest degree raised the question of your being a
gentleman, Mr. Your course in coming to me before revealing
your regard to my daughter proves that you are one. But you should
realize that you are asking a great deal of me. My child's happiness is
my first and only consideration. You know the condition of life to which
my daughter has been accustomed. It is right and natural that I should
also know something of your prospects, your ability to meet the
obligations into which you wish to enter." After a moment he answered,
with a dignity and an evident sincerity which won golden opinions from
Mr. Hargrove: "I shall not try to mislead you in the least on this point. For my own sake I wish that your daughter were far poorer than I am. I
can say little more than that I could give her a home now and every
comfort of life. I could not now provide for her the luxury to which she
has been accustomed. But I am willing to wait and eager to work. In youth
and health and a fair degree of education I have some capital in addition
to the start in life which my father has promised to his sons. What could
not Miss Hargrove inspire a man to do?" The man of experience smiled in spite of himself at Burt's frank
enthusiasm and naivete. The whole affair was so different from anything
that he had ever looked forward to! Instead of a few formalities between
himself and a wealthy suitor whom his wife, and therefore all the world,
would approve of, here he was listening to a farmer's son, with the
consciousness that he must yield, and not wholly unwilling to do so. Moreover, this preposterous young man, so far from showing any awe of
him, had almost defied him from the start, and had plainly stated that
the father's wealth was the only objection to the daughter. Having seen
the drift of events, Mr. Hargrove had long since informed himself
thoroughly about the Clifford family, and had been made to feel that the
one fact of his wealth, which Burt regretted, was almost his only claim
to superiority. Burt was as transparent as a mountain brook, and quite as
impetuous. The gray-haired man sighed, and felt that he would give all
his wealth in exchange for such youth. He knew his daughter's heart, and
felt that further parleying was vain, although he foresaw no easy task in
reconciling his wife to the match. He was far from being heartbroken
himself, however, for there was such a touch of nature in Burt, and in
the full, strong love waiting to reward the youth, that his own heart was
stirred, and in the depths of his soul he knew that this was better than
giving his child to a jaded millionaire. "I have money enough for both,"
he thought. "As she said, she is rich enough to follow her heart. It's a
pity if we can't afford an old-fashioned love-match." Hargrove's deep thought and
silence. At last the father arose and gave him his hand, saying: "You have been
honest with me, and that, with an old merchant, counts for a great deal. I also perceive you love my daughter for herself. If she should ever
inform me that you are essential to her happiness I shall not withhold my
consent." Burt seized his hand with a grasp that made it ache, as he said, "Every
power I have, sir, shall be exerted that you may never regret this
kindness." "If you make good that promise, Mr. Clifford, I shall become your friend
should your wooing prove successful. If you will come to the parlor I
will tell Miss Hargrove that you are here." He went up the stairs slowly, feeling that he was crossing the threshold
of a great change. How many thoughts passed through his mind as he took
those few steps! He saw his child a little black-eyed baby in his arms;
she was running before him trundling her hoop; she came to him with
contracted brow and half-tearful eyes, bringing a knotty sum in
fractions, and insisting petulantly that they were very "vulgar" indeed;
she hung on his arm, a shy girl of fifteen, blushingly conscious of the
admiring eyes that followed her; she stood before him again in her first
radiant beauty as a _debutante_, and he had dreamed of the proudest
alliance that the city could offer; she looked into his eyes, a pale,
earnest woman, and said, "Papa, he saved my life at the risk of his own." Clifford had not spoken of that, and Mr. Hargrove had not
thought of it in the interview so crowded with considerations. His heart
relented toward the youth as it had not done before. Well, well, since it
was inevitable, he was glad to be the one who should first bring the
tidings of this bold wooer's purpose. "Trurie will never forget this
moment," he mattered, as he knocked at her door, "nor my part in her
little drama." O love, how it craves even the crumbs that fall from the
table of its idol! "Trurie," he began, as he entered, "you had better dress. Bless me, I
thought you were packing!" Clifford said he would call--to bid me good-by, I suppose." "Was that all you supposed, Trurie?" "Indeed, papa, I told him I was going to town to-morrow, and he asked if
he might call." I'm sure it's quite natural he should call, and I have been
packing." "Well, I can assure you that he has a very definite object. He has asked
me if he might pay his addresses to you, and in the same breath assured
me that he would in any event." "Oh, papa," she said, hiding her face on his shoulder, "he was not so
unmannerly as that!" "Indeed, he went much further, declaring that he would take no refusal
from you, either; or, rather, that he would take it so often as to wear
out your patience, and secure you by proving that resistance was useless. He had one decided fault to find with you, also. "Oh, papa, tell me what he did say;" and he felt her heart fluttering
against his side like that of a frightened bird. "Why, Trurie, men have offered you love before." "But I never loved before, nor knew what it meant," she whispered. This is all so strange, so sacred to
me." "Well, Trurie, I hope your match may be one of those that are made in
heaven. Your mother will think it anything but worldly wise. However, I
will reconcile her to it, and I'm glad to be the one with whom you will
associate this day. Long after I am gone it may remind you how dear your
happiness was to me, and that I was willing to give up my way for yours. Clifford has been straightforward and manly, if not conventional, and
I've told him that if he could win you and would keep his promise to do
his best for you and by you, I would be his friend, and that, you know,
means much. Of course, it all depends upon whether you accept him. Here is an organ"--with her hand upon her heart--"that
knows better. "Oh, no, I can excuse you," he said, with smiling lips but moist eyes. "Dear papa, I will, indeed, associate you with this hour and every
pleasant thing in life. You will find that you have won me anew instead
of losing me;" and looking back at him with her old filial love shining
in her eyes, she went slowly away to meet the future under the sweet
constraint of Nature's highest law. If Burt had been impatient in the library, he grew almost desperate in
the parlor. Might not Miss
Hargrove's pride rise in arms against him? Might she not even now be
telling her father of his fickleness, and declaring that she would not
listen to a "twice-told tale"? Every moment of delay seemed ominous, and
many moments passed. The house grew sepulchral in its silence, and the
wind without sighed and moaned as if Nature foreboded and pitied him in
view of the overwhelming misfortune impending. At last he sprang up and
paced the room in his deep perturbation. As he turned toward the entrance
he saw framed in the doorway a picture that appeared like a radiant
vision. Miss Hargrove stood there, looking at him so intently that, for a
second or two, he stood spell-bound. She was dressed in some white,
clinging material, and, with her brilliant eyes, appeared in the
uncertain light too beautiful and wraith-like to be human. She saw her
advantage, and took the initiative instantly. Clifford," she
exclaimed, "do I seem an apparition?" "Yes, you do," he replied, coming impetuously toward her. She held out
her hand, proposing that their interview should at least begin at arm's
length. Nevertheless, the soft fire in his eyes and the flush on his
handsome face made her tremble with a delicious apprehension. Even while
at a loss to know just how to manage the preliminaries for a decorous
yielding, she exulted over the flame-like spirit of her lover. Clifford," she cried, "you ought to know that you are not
crushing a ghost's hand." What I meant was that I thought I had seen you before, but
you are a new revelation every time I see you." "Please don't say that, for I must ask you to interpret one to-night. What does Shakespeare say about those who have power? I hope you will use
yours mercifully. Oh, Miss Hargrove, you are so beautiful that I believe
I should lose my reason if you sent me away without hope." Clifford, you are talking wildly," was her faint response. I am almost desperate from fear, for I have a terribly hard
duty to perform." she said, withdrawing her hand, which he relinquished most
reluctantly, dreading that he might never receive it again. "Do not assume that attitude, Miss Hargrove, or I shall lose courage
utterly." Clifford," she said, a little satirically, seating herself on
a sofa, "I never imagined you deficient in courage. Is it a terrible duty
to entertain me for a half-hour, and say good-by?" Nothing could be worse than that, if that were all;" and he looked
at her appealingly and in such perplexed distress that she laughed
outright. "I am very much in earnest, Miss Hargrove." "You are very enigmatical, Mr. Must I be present while you
perform this terrible duty?" "I think you know what I must confess already, and have a world of scorn
in store for me. Whatever the end may be, and my
sense of ill-desert is heavy indeed, I shall begin on the basis of
absolute truth. I've asked your father for the
privilege of winning your love;" and then he hesitated, not knowing how
to go on. "No, I fear it will be the best, for he kindly gave his consent, and I
know it would be hard for him to do as much for any man, much more so for
one not wholly to his mind. Miss Hargrove, I must appear awkwardness and
incoherency personified. I shall appear to
you fickle and unmanly. How can I excuse myself to you when I have no
excuse except the downright truth that I love you better than my life,
better than my own soul, better than all the world and everything in it. I never knew what love was until you became unconscious in my arms on the
mountain. I'm only trying to explain
myself; and yet I had thought that I knew, and had spoken words of love
to your friend, Amy Winfield, who is worthy of the love of the best and
noblest man that ever breathed. She did not welcome my words--they only
wounded her--and she has never eared for me except as a true and gentle
sister cares. But I promised to wait till she did care. You fascinated me from the first hour of our meeting. I feel now
that I cherished an unworthy purpose toward you. I thought that, by
attentions to you, I could make Amy care; I thought that you were but a
brilliant society girl; but every hour I spent with you increased my
admiration, my respect; I saw that you were better and stronger than I
was. On the first day we went into camp on the mountain I saw whither my
heart was leading me, and from that hour until to-day I have tried to
conquer my love, feeling that I had no right to give it, that you would
despise it if I did. You can't have any confidence in me now. All my hope
is that you will give me a chance to prove that I am not a fickle wretch. I will accept of any probation, I will submit to any terms. I can't take
an absolute refusal now, for I feel you are seeing me at my worst, and I
know that you could do with me anything you pleased." Her head bowed lower and lower as he poured out these words like a
torrent. "Does Amy--have you told her that you cannot keep your promise
to her?" "Oh, yes, I told her so a few hours ago--since I met you this afternoon. I was going away to the West, like a coward, to escape from my dilemma,
for I felt you would never listen to me after you knew that I had broken
my word to Amy. I feared that I had already become a by-word between you
for all that was weak and fickle. But after I saw you I could not go till
I spoke. I determined to reveal the whole truth, and if you ever gave me
a chance to retrieve myself, gratitude would be no name for my deep
feeling. She told me in good plain English that she
wanted neither me nor my promise; that she didn't think that she ever
could have loved me, no matter how long I might have waited. But I could
not look into your clear eyes and say, 'I love you,' and know that you
might learn from her or any one that I had said this before. If you won't
trust me, having had the whole truth, then I must bear my hard fate as
best I can." "How long would you be willing to wait for me?" she asked, in tones so
low that he could scarcely catch the words. He bounded to her side, and took her unresisting hand. "Oh, Gertrude," he
pleaded, "prove me, give me a chance, let me show that I am not without
manhood and constancy. Believe me, I know the priceless gift I'm asking,
but what else can I do? I have tried for weeks to conquer the feeling you
have inspired, tried with all the help that pride and sense of duty and
honor could give, but it has been utterly useless. I now am free; I have
the right to speak. At last she raised her downcast eyes and averted face to his, and for a
moment he was dazed at their expression. In tones sweet, low, and deep
with her strong emotion, she said, "Burt, how glad I am that you men are
blind! I found out that I loved you before we went to our mountain camp." She sprang up and gave him her other hand as she continued: "Can love
impose such hard conditions as you suggest--months of doubtful waiting
for one who risked his life for me without a second's hesitation? That is
not my nature, Burt. If I have power over you, I shall show it in another
way." She would never forget his look as he listened to these words, nor his
humility as he lowered his head upon her shoulder, and murmured, "I am
not worthy of this." It touched the deepest and tenderest chord in her
heart. His feeling was not the exultation of success, but a gratitude too
deep for words, and a half-conscious appeal that she would use her
woman's power to evoke a better manhood. It was not mere acknowledgment
of her beauty, or the impulse of his passion; it was homage to the best
and noblest part of her nature, the expression of his absolute trust. Never had she received such a tribute, and she valued it more than if
Burt had laid untold wealth at her feet. A great joy is often as sobering as a great sorrow, and they talked long
and earnestly together. Gertrude would not become engaged until she had
told her mother, and shown her the respect that was her due. "You must
not be resentful," the young girl said, "if mamma's consent is not easily
won. She has set her heart on an establishment in town, I've set my heart
on you; so there we differ, and you must give me time to reconcile her to
a different programme." The clock on the mantel chimed eleven, and Burt started up, aghast at the
flight of time. Gertrude stole to her father's library, and found that he
was pacing the floor. "I should not have left him alone so long
to-night," she thought, with compunction. "Papa," she said, "Mr. He looked into his daughter's flushed, happy face, and needed no further
explanation, and with her hands on his arm he went to the drawing-room. Burt said but few and very simple words, and the keen judge of men liked
him beter than if he had been more exuberant. There was evidence of
downright earnestness now that seemed a revelation of a new trait. "You spoke of going to the West soon," Mr. Hargrove remarked, as they
lingered in parting. "Have you any objection to telling me of your
purpose?" Hargrove's face soon expressed unusual interest. "I
must talk with you further about this," he said. "I have land in the same
locality, and also an interest in the railroad to which you refer. Perhaps I can make your journey of mutual service." "Oh, papa," cried his daughter, "you are my good genius!" for she well
understood what that mutual service meant. Hargrove said, "Well, well, this Western-land
business puts a new aspect on the affair, and mamma may have little
ground for complaint. It's my impression that the Cliffords will realize
a very respectable fortune out of that land." "Papa," said the young girl, "Burt gave me something better than wealth
to-night--better even than love, in the usual sense of the word. He acted as if he saw in me the power to help him to be a
true man, and what higher compliment can a woman receive? He did not
express it so much by word as by an unconscious manner, that was so
sincere and unpremeditated that it thrilled my very soul. Oh, papa, you
have helped me to be so very happy!" CHAPTER LVI

WEBB'S FOUR-LEAVED CLOVER


Webb's silent entrance had not been so quiet but that Burt heard him. Scarcely had he gained his room before the younger brother knocked, and
followed him in without waiting. "Where have you been at this time of
night?" "You are infringing on ghostly hours, and are
beginning to look like a ghost;" for Webb had thrown himself into a
chair, and was haggard from the exhaustion of his long conflict. The
light and kindly way in which he answered his brother proved that he was
victor. "Webb," said Burt, putting his hand on the elder brother's shoulder, "you
saved my life last winter, and life has become of immense value to me. If
you had not found me, I should have missed a happiness that falls to the
lot of few--a happiness of which all your science can never give you, you
old delver, even an idea. I meant to tell mother and father first, but I
feel to-night how much I owe to your brave, patient search, and I want
your congratulations." "I think you might have told father and mother last night, for I suppose
it's morning now." "I did not get home in time, and did not wish to excite mother, and spoil
her rest." "Well, then, you might have come earlier or gone later. I think not, if you know all about what I didn't know, and
could scarcely believe possible myself, till an hour or two since." I think you might have stayed at home
with Amy to-night, of all times. An accident, Burt, revealed to me your
success, and I do congratulate you most sincerely. You have now the
truest and loveliest girl in the world." "That's true, but what possible accident could have revealed the fact to
you?" "Don't think I was spying upon you. From the top of a ladder in the
orchard I saw, as the result of a casual glance, your reward to Amy for
words that must have been very satisfactory." Burt began to laugh as if he could not control himself. "What a surprise
I have for you all!" "I went where I did last night with Amy's
full knowledge and consent. She never cared a rap for me, but the only
other girl in the world who is her equal does, and her name is Gertrude
Hargrove." Webb gave a great start, and sank into a chair. "Don't be so taken aback, old fellow. I suppose you and the rest had set
your hearts on my marrying Amy. You have only to follow Amy's example,
and give me your blessing. Yes, you saw me give Amy a very grateful and
affectionate greeting last evening. She's the dearest little sister that
ever a man had, and that's all she ever wanted to be to me. I felt
infernally mean when I came to her yesterday, for I was in an awkward
strait. I had promised to wait for her till she did care, but she told me
that there was no use in waiting, and I don't believe there would have
been. She would have seen some one in the future who would awaken a very
different feeling from any that I could inspire, and then, if she had
promised herself to me, she would have been in the same predicament that
I was. She is the best and most sensible little girl that ever breathed,
and feels toward me just as she does toward you, only she very justly
thinks you have forgotten more than lever knew. As for Gertrude--Hang it
all! You'll say I'm at my old
tricks, but I'm not. You've seen how circumstances have brought us
together, and I tell you my eye and heart are filled now for all time. She will be over to-morrow, and I want her to receive the greeting she
deserves." The affair seemed of such tremendous importance to Burt that he was not
in the least surprised that Webb was deeply moved, and fortunately he
talked long enough to give his brother time to regain his self-control. Webb did congratulate him in a way that was entirely satisfactory, and
then bundled him out of the room in the most summary manner, saying,
"Because you are a hare-brained lover, you shouldn't keep sane people
awake any longer." It were hard to say, however, who was the less sane
that night, Webb or Burt. The former threw open his window, and gazed at
the moonlit mountains in long, deep ecstasy. Unlike Burt's, his more
intense feeling would find quiet expression. All he knew was that there
was a chance for him--that he had the right to put forth the best effort
of which he was capable--and he thanked God for that. At the same time he
remembered Amy's parable of the rose. He would woo as warily as
earnestly. With Burt's experience before his eyes, he would never stun
her with sudden and violent declarations. His love, like sunshine, would
seek to develop the flower of her love. He was up and out in the October dawn, too happy and excited for sleep. His weariness was gone; his sinews seemed braced with steel as he strode
to a lofty eminence. No hue on the richly tinted leaves nor on the rival
chrysanthemums was brighter than his hope, and the cool, pure air, in
which there was as yet no frostiness, was like exhilarating wine. From
the height he looked down on his home, the loved casket of the more
dearly prized jewel. He viewed the broad acres on which he had toiled,
remembering with a dull wonder that once he had been satisfied with their
material products. Now there was a glamour upon them, and upon all the
landscape. The river gleamed and sparkled; the mountains flamed like the
plumage of some tropical bird. The earth and
his old materiality became the foundation-stones on which his awakened
mind, kindled and made poetic, should rear an airy, yet enduring,
structure of beauty, consecrated to Amy. He had loved nature before, but
it had been to him like a palace in which, as a dull serving-man, he had
employed himself in caring for its furniture and the frames of its
paintings. But he had been touched by a magic wand, and within the frames
glowed ever-changing pictures, and the furniture was seen to be the work
of divine art. The palace was no longer empty, but enshrined a living
presence, a lovely embodiment of Nature's purest and best manifestation. The development of no flower in all the past summer was so clear to him
as that of the girl he loved. He felt as if he had known her thoughts
from childhood. Her young womanhood was like that of the roses he had
shown to her in the dewy June dawn that seemed so long ago. It was still like a bud of his favorite
mossrose, wrapped in its green calyx. Oh, what a wealth of fragrant
beauty would be revealed! But she should
waken in her own time; and if he had not the power to impart the deep,
subtile impulse, then that nearest to her, Nature, should be his bride. They were all at the breakfast-table when he returned, and this plotter
against Amy's peace entered and greeted her with a very quiet
"Good-morning," but he laid beside her plate a four-leaved clover which
he had espied on his way back. "Thanks, Webb," she said, with eyes full of merriment; "I foresee an
amazing amount of good luck in this little emblem. Indeed, I feel sure
that startling proofs of it will occur to-day;" and she looked
significantly at Burt, who laughed very consciously. "What mischief has Burt been up to, Amy?" "He was
ready to explode with suppressed something last evening at supper, and
now he is effervescing in somewhat different style, but quite as
remarkably. You boys needn't think you can hide anything from mother very
long; she knows you too well." Both Webb and Burt, with Amy, began to laugh, and they looked at each
other as if there were a good deal that mother did not know. "Webb and Amy have evidently some joke on Burt," remarked Leonard. "Webb
was out last night, and I bet a pippin he caught Burt flirting with Miss
Hargrove." "Burt is going to settle down now and be
steady. We'll make him sign a pledge before he goes West, won't we, Amy?" "Yes, indeed," gasped Amy, almost beside herself with merriment; "he'll
have to sign one in big capitals." "Burt," said his father, looking at him over his spectacles, "you've been
getting yourself into some scrape as sure as the world. That's right,
Amy; you laugh at him well, and--"

"A truce!" "If I'm in a scrape, I don't propose to get
out of it, but rather to make you all share in it. As Amy says, her
four-leaved clover will prove a true prophet, green as it looks. I now
beg off, and shall prove that my scrape has not spoiled my appetite." "Well," said Leonard, "I never could find any four-leaved clovers, but
I've had good luck, haven't I, Maggie?" "You had indeed, when you came courting me." "I am satisfied," began Webb, "that I could develop acres of four-leaved
clover. I have counted twenty-odd on
one root. If seed from such a plant were sown, and then seed selected
again from the new plants most characterized by this'sport,' I believe
the trait would become fixed, and we could have a field of four-leaved
clover. New varieties of fruits, vegetables, and flowers are often thus
developed from chance'sports' or abnormal specimens." "He would turn this ancient symbol of fortune
into a marketable commodity." "Pardon me; I was saying what might be done, not what I proposed to do. I
found this emblem of good chance by chance, and I picked it with the
'wish' attacked to the stem. Thus to the utmost I have honored the
superstition, and you have only to make your wish to carry it out fully." "My wishes are in vain, and all the four-leaved clovers in the world
wouldn't help them. I wish I was a scientific problem, a crop that
required great skill to develop, a rare rose that all the rose-maniacs
were after, a new theory that required a great deal of consideration and
investigation, and accompanied with experiments that needed much
observation, and any number of other t-i-o-n-shuns. Then I shouldn't be
left alone evenings by the great inquiring mind of the family. Burt's
going away, and, as his father says, has got into a scrape; so what's to
become of me?" They all arose from the table amid general laughter, of which Webb and
Burt were equally the objects, and on the faces of those not in the
secret there was much perplexed curiosity. exclaimed Maggie, "if Webb should concentrate his mind
on you as you suggest, it would end by his falling in love with you." This speech was received with shouts of merriment, and Amy felt the color
rushing into her face, but she scouted the possibility. "The idea of
Webb's falling in love with any one!" "I should as soon expect
to see old Storm King toppling over." "Still waters run--" began Maggie, but a sudden flash from Webb's eyes
checked her. "Some still waters don't run at all. Not
for the world would I have Webb incur the dreadful risk that you suggest." "I think I'm almost old enough to take care of myself, sister Amy, and I
promise you to try to be as entertaining as such an old fellow can be. As
to falling in love with you, that happened long ago--the first evening
you came, when you stood in the doorway blushing and frightened at the
crowd of your new relations." "Haven't I got over being afraid of them remarkably? I never was a bit
afraid of you even at first. It took me a long time, however, to find out
how learned you were, and what deep subjects are required to interest
you. Alas, I shall never be a deep subject." Clifford, putting his arm around her, "you have
come like sunshine into the old home, and we old people can't help
wishing you may never go out of it while we are alive." "I'm not a bit jealous, Amy," said Maggie. "I think it's time this mutual admiration society broke up," the young
girl said, with tears trembling in her eyes. "When I think of it all, and
what a home I've found, I'm just silly enough to cry. I think it's time,
Burt, that you obtained your father's and mother's forgiveness or
blessing, or whatever it is to be." "You are right, Amy, as you always are. and
if you will accompany us, sir (to his father), you shall learn the
meaning of Amy's four-leaved clover." "You needn't think you are going to get Amy without my consent," Leonard
called after him. "I've known her longer than any of you--ever since she
was a little girl at the depot." Amy and Webb began laughing so heartily at the speaker that he went away
remarking that he could pick apples if he couldn't solve riddles. "Come up to my room, Amy," said Maggie, excitedly. "No, no, Mother Eve, I shall go to my own room, and dress for company." "Burt said something more than
good-by to Miss Hargrove last evening." Amy would not answer, and the sound of a mirthful snatch of song died
musically away in the distance. Webb," Maggie resumed, "what did _you_ mean by that ominous
flash from your cavern-like eyes?" "It meant that Amy has probably been satisfied with one lover in the
family and its unexpected result. I don't wish our relations embarrassed
by the feeling that she must be on her guard against another." "Oh, I see, you don't wish her to be on her guard." "Dear Maggie, whatever you may see, appear blind. Heaven only knows what
you women don't see." I've suspected you for
some time, but thought Burt and Amy were committed to each other." "Amy does not suspect anything, and she must not. She is not ready for
the knowledge, and may never be. All the help I ask is to keep her
unconscious. I've been expecting you would find me out, for you married
ladies have had an experience which doubles your insight, and I'm glad of
the chance to caution you. Amy is happy in loving me as a brother. She
shall never be unhappy in this home if I can prevent it." Maggie entered heart and soul into Webb's cause, for he was a great
favorite with her. He was kind to her children, and in a quiet way taught
them almost as much as they learned at school. He went to his work with
mind much relieved, for she and his mother were the only ones that he
feared might surmise his feeling, and by manner or remark reveal it to
Amy, thus destroying their unembarrassed relations, and perhaps his
chance to win the girl's heart. CHAPTER LVII

OCTOBER HUES AND HARVESTS


Burt's interview with his parents, their mingled surprise, pleasure, and
disappointment, and their deep sympathy, need not be dwelt upon. Clifford was desirous of first seeing Amy, and satisfying himself that
she did not in the slightest degree feel herself slighted or treated in
bad faith, but his wife, with her low laugh, said: "Rest assured, father,
Burt is right. He has won nothing more from Amy than sisterly love,
though I had hoped that he might in time. We shall keep Amy, and gain a new daughter that we have already learned
to admire and love." Burt's mind was too full of the one great theme to remember what Mr. Hargrove had said about the Western land, and when at last Miss Hargrove
came to say good-by, with a blushing consciousness quite unlike her usual
self-possession, he was enchanted anew, and so were all the household. The old people's reception seemed like a benediction; Amy banished the
faintest trace of doubt by her mirthful ecstasies; and after their
mountain experience there was no ice to break between Gertrude and
Maggie. The former was persuaded to defer her trip to New York until the morrow,
and so Amy would have her nutting expedition after all. When Leonard came
down to dinner, Burt took Gertrude's hand, and said, "Now, Len, this is
your only chance to give your consent. You can't have any dinner till you
do." His swift, deprecating look at Amy's laughing face reassured him. "Well,"
he said, slowly, as if trying to comprehend it all, "I do believe I'm
growing old. When _did_ all this take
place?" "Your eyesight is not to blame, Leonard," said his wife, with much
superiority. "It's because you are only a man." "That's all I ever pretended to be." Then, with a dignity that almost
surprised Gertrude, he, as eldest brother, welcomed her in simple,
heartfelt words. At the dinner-table Miss Hargrove referred to the Western land. Burt laid
down his knife and fork, and exclaimed, "I declare, I forgot all about
it!" Miss Hargrove laughed heartily as she said, "A high tribute to me!" and
then made known her father's statement that the Clifford tract in the
West adjoined his own, that it would soon be very valuable, and that he
was interested in the railroad approaching it. "I left him," she
concluded, "poring over his maps, and he told me to say to you, sir" (to
Mr. Clifford), "that he wished to see you soon." "How about the four-leaved clover now?" In the afternoon they started for the chestnut-trees. Webb carried a light
ladder, and both he and Burt had dressed themselves in close-fitting
flannel suits for climbing. The orchard, as they passed through it,
presented a beautiful autumn picture. Great heaps of yellow and red cheeked
apples were upon the ground; other varieties were in barrels, some headed
up and ready for market, while Mr. Clifford was giving the final cooperage
to other barrels as fast as they were filled. "Father can still head up a barrel better than any of us," Leonard
remarked to Miss Hargrove. "Well, my dear," said the old gentleman, "I've had over half a century's
experience." "It's time I obtained some idea of rural affairs," said Gertrude to Webb. "There seem to be many different kinds of apples here. "Yes, as easily as you know different dress fabrics at Arnold's. Those
umbrella-shaped trees are Rhode Island greenings; those that are rather
long and slender branching are yellow bell-flowers; and those with short
and stubby branches and twigs are the old-fashioned dominies. Don't you see how green the fruit is? It will not be
in perfection till next March. Not only a summer, but an autumn and a
winter are required to perfect that superb apple, but then it becomes one
of Nature's triumphs. Some of those heaps on the ground will furnish
cider and vinegar. Nuts, cider, and a wood fire are among the privations
of a farmer's life." "Farming, as you carry it on, appears to me a fine art. How very full
some of the trees are! and others look as if they had been half picked
over." The largest and ripest apples are taken
off first, and the rest of the fruit improves wonderfully in two or three
weeks. By this course we greatly increase both the quality and the bulk
of the crop." "You are very happy in your calling, Webb. How strange it seems for me to
be addressing you as Webb!" "It does not seem so strange to me; nor does it seem strange that I am
talking to you in this way. I soon recognized that you were one of those
fortunate beings in whom city life had not quenched nature." They had fallen a little behind the others, and were out of ear-shot. "I think," she said, hesitatingly and shyly, "that I had an ally in you
all along." He laughed and replied, "At one time I was very dubious over my
expedition to Fort Putnam." "I imagine that in suggesting that expedition you put in two words for
yourself." "I wish you might be as happy as I am. I'm not blind either, and I wonder
that Amy is so unconscious." "I hope she will remain so until she awakens as naturally as from sleep. She has never had a brother, and as such I try to act toward her. My one
thought is her happiness, and, perhaps, I can secure it in no other way. I feared long since that you had guessed my secret, and am grateful that
you have not suggested it to Amy. Few would have shown so much delicacy
and consideration." "I'm not sure that you are right, Webb. If Amy knew of your feeling, it
would influence her powerfully. "Yes, it was necessary that she should misunderstand me, and think of me
as absorbed in things remote from her life. The knowledge you suggest
might make her very sad, for there never was a gentler-hearted girl. Please use it to prevent the constraint which might
arise between us." Burt now joined them with much pretended jealousy, and they soon reached
the trees, which, under the young men's vigorous blows, rained down the
prickly burrs, downy chestnuts, and golden leaves. Blue jays screamed
indignantly from the mountain-side, and squirrels barked their protest at
the inroads made upon their winter stores. As the night approached the
air grew chilly, and Webb remarked that frost was coming at last. He
hastened home before the others to cover up certain plants that might be
sheltered through the first cold snap. The tenderer ones had long since
been taken up and prepared for winter blooming. To Amy's inquiry where Johnnie was, Maggie had replied that she had gone
nutting by previous engagement with Mr. Alvord, and as the party returned
in the glowing evening they met the oddly assorted friends with their
baskets well filled. In the eyes of the recluse there was a gentler
expression, proving that Johnnie's and Nature's ministry had not been
wholly in vain. He glanced swiftly from Burt to Miss Hargrove, then at
Amy, and a faint suggestion of a smile hovered about his mouth. He was
about to leave them abruptly when Johnnie interposed, pleading: "Mr. Alvord, don't go home till I pick you some of your favorite heart's-ease,
as you call my <DW29>s. They have grown to be as large and beautiful as
they were last spring. Do you know, in the hot weather they were almost
as small as johnny-jumpers? but I wouldn't let 'em be called by that
name." "They will ever be heart's-ease to me, Johnnie-doubly so when you give
them," and he followed her to the garden. In the evening a great pitcher of cider fresh from the press, flanked by
dishes of golden fall pippins and grapes, was placed on the table. The
young people roasted chestnuts on hickory coals, and every one, even to
the invalid, seemed to glow with a kindred warmth and happiness. The city
belle contrasted the true home-atmosphere with the grand air of a city
house, and thanked God for her choice. At an early hour she said good-by
for a brief time and departed with Burt. He was greeted with stately
courtesy by Mrs. Hargrove herself, whom her husband and the prospective
value of the Western land had reconciled to the momentous event. Burt and
Gertrude were formally engaged, and he declared his intention of
accompanying her to the city to procure the significant diamond. After the culminating scenes of Burt's little drama, life went on very
serenely and quietly at the Clifford home. Out of school hours Alf,
Johnnie, and Ned vied with the squirrels in gathering their hoard of
various nuts. The boughs in the orchard grew lighter daily. Frost came as
Webb had predicted, and dahlias, salvias, and other flowers, that had
flamed and glowed till almost the middle of October, turned black in one
morning's sun. The butternut-trees had lost their foliage, and countless
leaves were fluttering down in every breeze like many-hued gems. The
richer bronzed colors of the oak were predominating in the landscape, and
only the apple, cherry, and willow trees about the house kept up the
green suggestion of summer. CHAPTER LVIII

THE MOONLIGHT OMEN


Webb permitted no marked change in his manner. He toiled steadily with
Leonard in gathering the fall produce and in preparing for winter, but
Amy noticed that his old preoccupied look was passing away. Daily he
appeared to grow more genial and to have more time and thought for her. With increasing wonder she learned the richness and fulness of his mind. In the evenings he read aloud to them all with his strong, musical
intonation, in which the author's thought was emphasized so clearly that
it seemed to have double the force that it possessed when she read the
same words herself. He found time for occasional rambles and horseback
excursions, and was so companionable during long rainy days that they
seemed to her the brightest of the week. Maggie smiled to herself and saw
that Webb's spell was working. He was making himself so quietly and
unobtrusively essential to Amy that she would find half of her life gone
if she were separated from him. Gertrude returned for a short time, and then went to the city for the
winter. He was much in New York, and
often with Mr. Hargrove, from whom he was receiving instructions in
regard to his Western expedition. That gentleman's opinion of Burt's
business capacity grew more favorable daily, for the young fellow now
proposed to show that he meant to take life in earnest. "If this lasts he
will make a trusty young lieutenant," the merchant thought, "and I can
make his fortune while furthering mine." Burt had plenty of brains and
good executive ability to carry out the wiser counsels of others, while
his easy, vivacious manner won him friends and acceptance everywhere. It was arranged, after his departure, that Amy should visit her friend in
the city, and Webb looked forward to her absence with dread and
self-depreciation, fearing that he should suffer by contrast with the
brilliant men of society, and that the quiet country life would seem
dull, indeed, thereafter. Before Amy went on this visit there came an Indian summer morning in
November, that by its soft, dreamy beauty wooed every one out of doors. "Amy," said Webb, after dinner, "suppose we drive over to West Point and
return by moonlight." She was delighted with the idea, and they were soon
slowly ascending the mountain. He felt that this was his special
opportunity, not to break her trustful unconsciousness, but to reveal his
power to interest her and make impressions that should be enduring. He
exerted every faculty to please, recalling poetic and legendary allusions
connected with the trees, plants, and scenes by which they were passing. "Oh, Webb, how you idealize nature!" "You make every object
suggest something fanciful, beautiful, or entertaining. How have you
learned to do it?" "As I told you last Easter Sunday--how long ago it seems--if I have any
power for such idealization it is largely through your influence. My
knowledge was much like the trees as they then appeared. I was prepared
for better things, but the time for them had not yet come. I had studied
the material world in a material sort of way, employing my mind with
facts that were like the bare branches and twigs. You awakened in me a
sense of the beautiful side of nature. Who can
explain the rapid development of foliage and flowers when all is ready?" "But, Webb, you appeared, during the summer, to go back to your old
materiality worse than ever. You made me feel that I had no power to do
anything for you. You treated me as if I were your very little sister who
would have to go to school a few years before I could be your companion." "Those were busy days," he replied, laughing. "Besides," he added,
hesitatingly, "Burt was at one time inclined to be jealous. Of course, it
was very absurd in him, but I suppose lovers are always a little absurd." I saw whither Burt was drifting long
ago--at the time of the great flood which swept away things of more value
than my silly expectations. What an unsophisticated little goose I was! I
suppose Johnnie expects to be married some day, and in much the same way
I looked forward to woman's fate; and since you all seemed to wish that
it should be Burt, I thought, 'Why not?' Wasn't it lucky for Burt, and,
indeed, for all of you, that I was not a grown-up and sentimental young
woman? Hargrove, by uniting his interests with yours in the West,
will make your fortunes, and Burt will bring you a lovely sister. It
pleases me to see how Gertrude is learning to like you. I used to be
provoked with her at first, because she didn't appreciate you. Do you
know, I think you ought to write? You could make people fall in love with
nature. Americans don't care half as much for out-door life and pursuits
as the English. It seems to me that city life cannot compare with that of
the country." "You may think differently after you have been a few weeks in Gertrude's
elegant home." They had paused again on the brow of Cro' Nest, and were looking out on
the wide landscape. "No, Webb," she said; "her home, no doubt, is
elegant, but it is artificial. This is simple and grand, and to-day, seen
through the soft haze, is lovely to me beyond all words. I honestly half
regret that I am going to town. Of course, I shall enjoy myself--I always
do with Gertrude--but the last few quiet weeks have been so happy and
satisfying that I dread any change." "Think of the awful vacuum that your absence will make in the old home!" "Well, I'm a little glad; I want to be missed. But I shall write to you
and tell you of all the frivolous things we are doing. Besides, you must
come to see me as often as you can." They saw evening parade, the moon rising meanwhile over Sugarloaf
Mountain, and filling the early twilight with a soft radiance. The music
seemed enchanting, for their hearts were attuned to it. As the long line
of cadets shifted their guns from "carry arms" to "shoulder arms" with
instantaneous action, Webb said that the muskets sent out a shivering
sound like that of a tree almost ready to fall under the last blows of an
axe. Webb felt that should he exist millions of ages he should never forget the
ride homeward. The moon looked through the haze like a veiled beauty, and
in its softened light Amy's pure, sweet profile was endowed with ethereal
beauty. The beech trees, with their bleached leaves still clinging to them,
were almost spectral, and the oaks in their bronzed foliage stood like
black giants by the roadside. There were suggestive vistas of light and
shadow that were full of mystery, making it easy to believe that on a night
like this the mountain was haunted by creatures as strange as the fancy
could shape. The supreme gift of a
boundless love overflowed his heart to his very lips. She was so near, and
the spell of her loveliness so strong, that at times he felt that he must
give it expression, but he ever restrained himself. His words might bring
pain and consternation to the peaceful face. She was alone with him, and
there would be no escape should he speak now. No; he had resolved to wait
till her heart awoke by its own impulses, and he would keep his purpose
even through the witchery of that moonlight drive. "How strangely isolated
we are," he thought, "that such feeling as mine can fill my very soul with
its immense desire, and she not be aware of anything but my quiet,
fraternal manner!" As they were descending the home <DW72> of the mountain they witnessed a
rare and beautiful sight. A few light clouds had gathered around the
moon, and these at last opened in a rift. The rays of light through the
misty atmosphere created the perfect colors of a rainbow, and this
phenomenon took the remarkable form of a shield, its base resting upon
one cloud, and its point extending into a little opening in the cloud
above. "Was there ever anything so
strange and lovely?" Webb checked his horse, and they looked at the vision with wonder. "I
never saw anything to equal that," said Webb. she asked, turning a little from him that she
might look upward, and leaning on his shoulder with the unconsciousness
of a child. "Let us make it one, dear sister Amy," he said, drawing her nearer to
him. "Let it remind you, as you recall it, that as far as I can I will
ever shield you from every evil of life." As he spoke the rainbow colors
became wonderfully distinct, and then faded slowly away. Her head drooped
lower on his shoulder, and she said, dreamily:

"It seems to me that I never was so happy before in my life as I am now. You are so different, and can be so much to me, now that your old absurd
constraint is gone. Oh, Webb, you used to make me so unhappy! You made me
feel that you had found me out--how little I knew, and that it was a bore
to have to talk with me and explain. I went everywhere with papa, and he always appeared to think
of me as a little girl. And then during the last year or two of his life
he was so ill that I did not do much else than watch over him with fear
and trembling, and try to nurse him and beguile the hours that were so
full of pain and weakness. But I'm not contented to be ignorant, and you
can teach me so much. I fairly thrill with excitement and feeling
sometimes when you are reading a fine or beautiful thing. If I can feel
that way I can't be stupid, can I?" "Think how much faster I could learn this winter if you would direct my
reading, and explain what is obscure!" "I will very gladly do anything you wish. There is a stupidity of heart which is
far worse than that of the mind, a selfish callousness in regard to
others and their rights and feelings, which mars the beauty of some women
worse than physical deformity. From the day you entered our home as a
stranger, graceful tact, sincerity, and the impulse of ministry have
characterized your life. Can you imagine that mere cleverness, trained
mental acuteness, and a knowledge of facts can take the place of these
traits? No man can love unless he imagines that a woman has these
qualities, and bitter will be his disappointment if he finds them
wanting." Her laugh rang out musically on the still air. "I believe you have constructed an ideally perfect
creature out of nature, and that you hold trysts with her on moonlight
nights, you go out to walk so often alone. Well, well, I won't be jealous
of such a sister-in-law, but I want to keep you a little while longer
before you follow Burt's example." "I shall never give you a sister-in-law, Amy." "You don't know what you'll do. If you ever love, it will be for always; and I don't
like to think of it. I'd like to keep you just as you are. Now that you
see how selfish I am, where is woman's highest charm?" Webb laughed, and urged his horse into a sharp trot. "I am unchangeable
in my opinions too, as far as you are concerned," he remarked. "She is
not ready yet," was his silent thought. When she came down to the late supper her eyes were shining with
happiness, and Maggie thought the decisive hour had come; but in answer
to a question about the drive, Amy said, "I couldn't have believed that
so much enjoyment was to be had in one afternoon. Webb is a brother worth
having, and I'm sorry I'm going to New York." "Oh, you are excellent, as far as you go, but you are so wrapped up in
Maggie that you are not of much account; and as for Burt, he is more over
head and ears than you are. Even if a woman was in love, I should think
she would like a man to be sensible." you don't know what you are talking About," said Maggie. I suppose it is a kind of disease, and that all are more
or less out of their heads." "We've been out of our heads a good many years, mother, haven't we?" "Well," said Leonard, "I just hope Amy will catch the disease, and have
it very bad some day." When I do, I'll send for Dr. A few days later Webb took her to New York, and left her with her friend. "Don't be persuaded into staying very long," he found opportunity to say,
in a low tone. "Indeed I won't; I'm homesick already;" and she looked after him very
wistfully. Gertrude looked so hurt and disappointed
when she spoke of returning, and had planned so much, that days
lengthened into weeks. CHAPTER LIX

THE HOSE REVEALS ITS HEART


Webb returned to a region that was haunted. Wherever he went, a presence
was there before him. In every room, on the lawn, in the garden, in lanes
no longer shaded, but carpeted with brown, rustling leaves, on mountain
roads, he saw Amy with almost the vividness of actual vision, as he had
seen her in these places from the time of her first coming. At church he
created her form in her accustomed seat, and his worship was a little
confused. She had asked him to write, and he made home life and the
varying aspects of nature real to her. His letters, however, were so
impersonal that she could read the greater part of them to Gertrude, who
had resolved to be pleased out of good-will to Webb, and with the
intention of aiding his cause. But she soon found herself expressing
genuine wonder and delight at their simple, vigorous diction, their
subtile humor, and the fine poetic images they often suggested. "Oh,
Amy," she said, "I couldn't have believed it. I don't think he himself is
aware of his power of expression." "He has read and observed so much," Amy replied, "that he has much to
express." "It's more than that," said Gertrude; "there are touches here and there
which mere knowledge can't account for. They have a delicacy and beauty
which seem the result of woman's influence, and I believe it is yours. I
should think you would be proud of him." "I am," she answered, with exultation and heightened color, "but it seems
absurd to suppose that such a little ignoramus as I am can help him
much." Meanwhile, to all appearance, Webb maintained the even tenor of his way. He had been so long schooled in patience that he waited and hoped on in
silence as before, and busied himself incessantly. The last of the corn
was husked, and the golden treasure stored. The stalks were stacked near
the barn for winter use, and all the labors of the year were rounded out
and completed. Twice he went to the city to see Amy, and on one of these
occasions he was a guest at a large party given in her honor. During much
of the evening he was dazzled by her beauty, and dazed by her
surroundings. Her father had had her instructed carefully in dancing, and
she and Burt had often waltzed together, but he could scarcely believe
his eyes as she appeared on the floor unsurpassed in beauty and grace,
her favor sought by all. Was that the simple girl who on the shaggy sides
of Storm King had leaned against his shoulder? Miss Hargrove gave him little time for such musings. She, as hostess,
often took his arm and made him useful. The ladies found him reserved
rather than shy, but he was not long among the more mature and thoughtful
men present before a knot gathered around him, and some of Mr. Hargrove's
more intimate friends ventured to say, "There seems to be plenty of
brains in the family into which your daughter is to enter." After an hour or two had passed, and Amy had not had a chance to speak to
him, he began to look so disconsolate that she came and whispered,
"What's the matter, old fellow?" "Oh, Amy," he replied, discontentedly, "I wish we were back on Storm
King. "So do I," she said, "and so we will be many a time again. But you are
not out of place here. I heard one lady remarking how'reserved and
_distingue_ you were, and another," she added, with a flash of her
ever-ready mirthfulness, "said you were 'deliciously homely.' I was just
delighted with that compliment," and she flitted away to join her partner
in the dance. Webb brightened up amazingly after this, and before he
departed in the "wee sma' hours," when the rooms were empty, Gertrude
gave him a chance for a brief, quiet talk, which proved that Amy's heart
was still in the Highlands, even if he did not yet possess it. Burt would not return till late in December; but Amy came home about the
middle of the month, and received an ovation that was enough "to turn any
one's head," she declared. Their old quiet life was resumed, and Webb
watched keenly for any discontent with it. "I've had my little fling," she said, "and I suppose it was
time I saw more of the world and society, but oh, what a refuge and haven
of rest the old place is! Gertrude is lovely, her father very gallant and
polite, but Mrs. Hargrove's stateliness oppresses me, and in society I
felt that I had to take a grain of salt with everything said to me. Gertrude showed her sense in preferring a home. I was in some superb
houses in the city that did not seem like homes." Webb, in his solicitude that the country-house should not appear dull,
found time to go out with her on pleasant days, and to interest her
deeply in a course of reading. It was a season of leisure; but his mother
began to smile to herself as she saw how absorbed he was in his pupil. The nights grew colder, the stars gained a frosty glitter, the ground was
rock-like, and the ponds were covered with a glare of black ice. Amy was
eager to learn to skate, and Webb found his duty of instructor
delightful. Little danger of her falling, although, with a beginner's
awkwardness, she essayed to do so often; strong arms were ever near and
ready, and any one would have been glad to catch Amy in such peril. They were now looking forward to Burt's return and the holiday season,
which Gertrude would spend with them. Not merely the shops, but busy and stealthy fingers, would furnish the
gifts. Webb had bought his present for Amy, but had also burned the
midnight oil in the preparation of another--a paper for a magazine, and
it had been accepted. He had planned and composed it while at work
stripping the husks from the yellow corn, superintending the wood teams
and the choppers in the mountain, and aiding in cutting from an adjacent
pond the crystal blocks of ice--the stored coolness for the coming
summer. Then while others thought him sleeping he wrote and rewrote the
thoughts he had harvested during the day. One of his most delightful tasks, however, was in aiding Amy to embower
the old house in wreaths and festoons of evergreens. The rooms grew into
aromatic bowers. Autumn leaves and ferns gave to the heavier decorations
a light, airy beauty which he had never seen before. Grace itself Amy
appeared as she mounted the step-ladder and reached here and there,
twining and coaxing everything into harmony. What was the effect of all this companionship on her mind? She least of
all could have answered: she did not analyze. She was being carried forward on a shining tide of happiness, and
yet its motion was so even, quiet, and strong that there was nothing to
disturb her maidenly serenity. If Webb had been any one but Webb, and if
she had been in the habit of regarding all men as possible admirers, she
would have understood herself long before this. If she had been brought
up with brothers in her own home she would have known that she welcomed
this quiet brother with a gladness that had a deeper root than sisterly
affection. But the fact that he was Webb, the quiet, self-controlled man
who had called her sister Amy for a year, made his presence, his deep
sympathy with her and for her, seem natural. His approaches had been so
gradual that he was stealing into her heart as spring enters a flower. You can never name the first hour of its presence; you take no note of
the imperceptible yet steady development. The process is quiet, yet vital
and sure, and at last there comes an hour when the bud is ready to open. That time was near, and Webb hoped that it was. His tones were now and
then so tender and gentle that she looked at him a little wonderingly,
but his manner was quiet and far removed from that of the impetuous Burt. There was a warmth in it, however, like the increasing power of the sun,
and in human hearts bleak December can be the spring-time as truly as
May. It was the twenty-third--one of the stormiest days of a stormy month. The
snowflakes were whirling without, and making many a circle in the gale
before joining their innumerable comrades that whitened the ground. The
wind sighed and soughed about the old house as it had done a year before,
but Webb and Amy were armed against its mournfulness. They were in the
parlor, on whose wide hearth glowed an ample fire. Burt and Gertrude were
expected on the evening train. "Gertie is coming home through the snow just as I did," said Amy,
fastening a spray of mistletoe that a friend had sent her from England to
the chandelier; "and the same old warm welcome awaits her." "What a marvellous year it has been!" Burt is engaged to one of whose
existence he did not know a year ago. He has been out West, and found
that you have land that will make you all rich." "Are these the greatest marvels of the year, Amy?" I didn't know you a year ago to-day, and now
I seem to have known you always, you great patient, homely old
fellow--'deliciously homely.' "The eyes of scores of young fellows looked at you that evening as if you
were deliciously handsome." "And you looked at me one time as if you hadn't a friend in the world,
and you wanted to be back in your native wilds." "Not without you, Amy; and you said you wished you were looking at the
rainbow shield with me again." "Oh, I didn't say all that; and then I saw you needed heartening up a
little." You were dancing with a terrible swell, worth, it was
said, half a million, who was devouring you with his eyes." "I'm all here, thank you, and you look as if you were doing some
devouring yourself. "Yes, some color, but it's just as Nature arranged it, and you know
Nature's best work always fascinates me." There, don't you think that is arranged
well?" and she stood beneath the mistletoe looking up critically at it. "Let me see if it is," and he advanced to her side. "This is the only
test," he said, and quick as a flash he encircled her with his arm and
pressed a kiss upon her lips. She sprang aloof and looked at him with dilating eyes. He had often
kissed her before, and she had thought nothing more of it than of a
brother's salute. Was it a subtile, mysterious power in the mistletoe
itself with which it had been endowed by ages of superstition? Was that
kiss like the final ray of the Jane sun that opens the heart of the rose
when at last it is ready to expand? She looked at him wonderingly,
tremblingly, the color of the rose mounting higher and higher, and
deepening as if the blood were coming from the depths of her heart. In answer to her wondering, questioning look, he only bent
full upon her his dark eyes that had held hers once before in a moment of
terror. She saw his secret in their depths at last, the devotion, the
love, which she herself had unsuspectingly said would "last always." She
took a faltering step toward him, then covered her burning face with her
hands. "Amy," he said, taking her gently in his arms, "do you understand me now? Dear, blind little girl, I have been worshipping all these months, and
you have not known it." "I--I thought you were in love with nature," she whispered. "So I am, and you are nature in its sweetest and highest embodiment. Every beautiful thing in nature has long suggested you to me. It seems to me now that I
have loved you almost from the first hour I saw you. I have known that I
loved you ever since that June evening when you left me in the rose
garden. Have I not proved that I can be patient and wait?" She only pressed her burning face closer upon his shoulder. "It's all
growing clear now," she again whispered. "I can be 'only your brother,' if you so wish," he said, gravely. "Your
happiness is my first thought." She looked up at him shyly, tears in her eyes, and a smile hovering about
her tremulous lips. "I don't think I understood myself any better than I
did you. I never had a brother, and--and--I don't believe I loved you
just right for a brother;" and her face was hidden again. His eyes went up to heaven, as if he meant that his mating should be
recognized there. Then gently stroking her brown hair, he asked, "Then I
shan't have to wait, Amy?" cried Webb, lifting the dewy, flower-like
face and kissing it again and again. "Oh, I beg your pardon; I didn't know," began Mr. Clifford from the
doorway, and was about to make a hasty and excited retreat. "A year ago you received this dear girl as
your daughter. She has consented to make the tie closer still if
possible." The old gentleman took Amy in his arms for a moment, and then said, "This
is too good to keep to myself for a moment," and he hastened the
blushing, laughing girl to his wife, and exclaimed, "See what I've
brought you for a Christmas present. See what that sly, silent Webb has
been up to. He has been making love to our Amy right under our noses, and
we didn't know it." "_You_ didn't know it, father; mother's eyes are not so blind. Amy,
darling, I've been hoping and praying for this. You have made a good
choice, my dear, if it is his mother that says it. Webb will never
change, and he will always be as gentle and good to you as he has been to
me." "Well, well, well," said Mr. Clifford, "our cup is running over, sure
enough. Maggie, come here," he called, as he heard her step in the hall. I once felt a little like grumbling because we
hadn't a daughter, and now I have three, and the best and prettiest in
the land. "Didn't I, Webb--as long ago as last October, too?" "Oh, Webb, you ought to have told me first," said Amy, reproachfully,
when they were alone. "I did not tell Maggie; she saw," Webb answered. Then, taking a rosebud
which she had been wearing, he pushed open the petals with his finger,
and asked, "Who told me that 'this is no way for a flower to bloom'? I've
watched and waited till your heart was ready, Amy." And so the time flew
in mutual confidences, and the past grew clear when illumined by love. said Amy, with a mingled sigh and laugh. "There you were
growing as gaunt as a scarecrow, and I loving you all the time. If you had looked at Gertrude as Burt did I should
have found myself out long ago. Why hadn't you the sense to employ Burt's
tactics?" "Because I had resolved that nature should be my sole ally. Was not my
kiss under the mistletoe a better way of awakening my sleeping beauty
than a stab of jealousy?" "Yes, Webb, dear, patient Webb. The rainbow shield was a true omen, and I
am sheltered indeed." CHAPTER LX

CHRISTMAS LIGHTS AND SHADOWS


Leonard had long since gone to the depot, and now the chimes of his
returning bells announced that Burt and Gertrude were near. To them both
it was in truth a coming home. Gertrude rushed in, followed by the
exultant Burt, her brilliant eyes and tropical beauty rendered tenfold
more effective by the wintry twilight without; and she received a welcome
that accorded with her nature. She was hardly in Amy's room, which she
was to share, before she looked in eager scrutiny at her friend. Oh, you little
wild-flower, you've found out that he is saying his prayers to you at
last, have you? Evidently he hasn't said them in vain. Oh, Amy darling, I was true to you and didn't
lose Burt either." Maggie had provided a feast, and Leonard beamed on the table and on every
one, when something in Webb and Amy's manner caught his attention. "This
occasion," he began, "reminds me of a somewhat similar one a year ago
to-morrow night. It is my good fortune to bring lovely women into this
household. My first and best effort was made when I brought Maggie. Then
I picked up a little girl at the depot, and she grew into a tall, lovely
creature on the way home, didn't she, Johnnie? And now to-night I've
brought in a princess from the snow, and one of these days poor Webb will
be captured by a female of the MacStinger type, for he will never muster
up courage enough--What on earth are you all laughing about?" "Thank you," said Amy, looking like a peony. "You had better put your head under Maggie's wing and subside," Webb
added. Then, putting his arm about Amy, he asked, "Is this a female of
the MacStinger type?" "Well," said he, at last, "when
_did_ this happen? When I was
courting, the whole neighborhood was talking about it, and knew I was
accepted long before I did. Did you see all this going on, Maggie?" "Now, I don't believe Amy saw it herself," cried Leonard, half
desperately, and laughter broke out anew. "Oh, Amy, I'm so glad!" said Burt, and he gave her the counterpart of the
embrace that had turned the bright October evening black to Webb. "To think that Webb should have got such a prize!" "Well, well, the boys in this family are in luck." "It will be my turn next," cried Johnnie. "No, sir; I'm the oldest," Alf protested. "Let's have supper," Ned remarked, removing his thumb from his mouth. "Score one for Ned," said Burt. "There is at least one member of the
family whose head is not turned by all these marvellous events." Can the sunshine and fragrance of a June day be photographed? No more can
the light and gladness of that long, happy evening be portrayed. Clifford held Gertrude's hand as she had Amy's when receiving her as a
daughter. The beautiful girl, whose unmistakable metropolitan air was
blended with gentle womanly grace, had a strong fascination for the
invalid. She kindled the imagination of the recluse, and gave her a
glimpse into a world she had never known. "Webb," said Amy, as they were parting for the night, "I can see a sad,
pale orphan girl clad in mourning. I can see you kissing her for the
first time. I had a strange little thrill at heart
then, and you said, 'Come to me, Amy, when you are in trouble.' There is
one thing that troubles me to-night. All whom I so dearly love know of my
happiness but papa. "Tell it to him, Amy," he answered, gently, "and tell it to God." There were bustle and renewed mystery on the following day. Astonishing-looking packages were smuggled from one room to another. Ned created a succession of panics, and at last the ubiquitous and
garrulous little urchin had to be tied into a chair. Johnnie and Alf
were in the seventh heaven of anticipation, and when Webb brought Amy
a check for fifty dollars, and told her that it was the proceeds of
his first crop from his brains, and that she must spend the money, she
went into Mr. Clifford's room waving it as if it were a trophy such as
no knight had ever brought to his lady-love. "Of course, I'll spend it," she cried. It
shall go into books that we can read together. What's that agricultural
jargon of yours, Webb, about returning as much as possible to the soil? We'll return this to the soil," she said, kissing his forehead, "although
I think it is too rich for me already." In the afternoon she and Webb, with a sleigh well laden, drove into the
mountains on a visit to Lumley. He had repaired the rough, rocky lane
leading through the wood to what was no longer a wretched hovel. The
inmates had been expecting this visit, and Lumley rushed bareheaded
out-of-doors the moment he heard the bells. Although he had swept a path
from his door again and again, the high wind would almost instantly drift
in the snow. Poor Lumley had never heard of Sir Walter Raleigh or Queen
Elizabeth, but he had given his homage to a better queen, and with loyal
impulse he instantly threw off his coat, and laid it on the snow, that
Amy might walk dry-shod into the single room that formed his home. She
and Webb smiled significantly at each other, and then the young girl put
her hand into that of the mountaineer as he helped her from the sleigh,
and said "Merry Christmas!" with a smile that brought tears into the eyes
of the grateful man. "Yer making no empty wish, Miss Amy. I never thought sich a Christmas 'ud
ever come to me or mine. But come in, come in out of the cold wind, an'
see how you've changed everything. Webb, and I'll tie
an' blanket your hoss. Lord, to think that sich a May blossom 'ud go into
my hut!" Lumley, neatly clad in some dark woollen material,
made a queer, old-fashioned courtesy that her husband had had her
practice for the occasion. But the baby, now grown into a plump, healthy
child, greeted her benefactress with nature's own grace, crowing,
laughing, and calling, "Pitty lady; nice lady," with exuberant welcome. The inmates did not now depend for precarious warmth upon two logs,
reaching across a dirty floor and pushed together, but a neat box,
painted green, was filled with billets of wood. The carpeted floor was
scrupulously clean, and so was the bright new furniture. A few evergreen
wreaths hung on the walls with the pictures that Amy had given, and on
the mantel was her photograph--poor Lumley's patron saint. Webb brought in his armful of gifts, and Amy took the child on her lap
and opened a volume of dear old "Mother Goose," profusely illustrated in
 prints--that classic that appeals alike to the hearts of
children, whether in mountain hovels or city palaces. The man looked on
as if dazed. Webb," he said, in his loud whisper, "I once saw a
picter of the Virgin and Child. Oh, golly, how she favors it!" Lumley," Amy began, "I think your housekeeping does you much
credit. I've not seen a neater room anywhere." "Well, mum, my ole man's turned over a new leaf sure nuff. There's no
livin' with him unless everythink is jesso, an, I guess it's better so,
too. Ef I let things git slack, he gits mighty savage." "You must try to be patient, Mr. You've made great changes for
the better, but you must remember that old ways can't be broken up in a
moment." "Lor' bless yer, Miss Amy, there's no think like breakin' off short,
there's nothink like turnin' the corner sharp, and fightin' the devil
tooth and nail. It's an awful tussle at first, an' I thought I was goin'
to knuckle under more'n once. So I would ef it hadn't 'a ben fer you, but
you give me this little ban', Miss Amy, an' looked at me as if I wa'n't a
beast, an' it's ben a liftin' me up ever sence. Oh, I've had good folks
talk at me an' lecter, an' I ben in jail, but it all on'y made me mad. The best on 'em wouldn't 'a teched me no more than they would a rattler,
sich as we killed on the mountain. But you guv me yer han', Miss Amy, an'
thar's mine on it agin; I'm goin' to be a _man_." She took the great horny palm in both her hands. "You make me very
happy," she said, simply, looking at him above the head of his child,
"and I'm sure your wife is going to help you. I shall enjoy the holidays
far more for this visit. You've told us good news, and we've got good
news for you and your wife. "Yes, Lumley," said Webb, clapping the man on the shoulder, "famous news. This little girl has been helping me just as much as she has you, and she
has promised to help me through life. One of these days we shall have a
home of our own, and you shall have a cottage near it, and the little
girl here that you've named Amy shall go to school and have a better
chance than you and your wife have had." exclaimed the man, almost breaking out into a
hornpipe. "The Lord on'y knows what will happen ef things once git a
goin' right! Webb, thar's my han' agin'. Ef yer'd gone ter heaven fer
her, yer couldn't 'a got sich a gell. Well, well, give me a chance on yer
place, an' I'll work fer yer all the time, even nights an' Sundays." The child dropped her books and toys,
and clung to Amy. "She knows yer; she knows all about yer," said the
delighted father. "Well, ef yer must go, yer'll take suthin' with us;"
and from a great pitcher of milk he filled several goblets, and they all
drank to the health of little Amy. "Yer'll fin' half-dozen pa'triges
under the seat, Miss Amy," he said, as they drove away. "I was bound I'd
have some kind of a present fer yer." She waved her hand back to him, and saw him standing bareheaded in the
cutting wind, looking after her. "Poor old Lumley was right," said Webb, drawing her to him; "I do feel as
if I had received my little girl from heaven. We will give those people a
chance, and try to turn the law of heredity in the right direction." Alvord sat over his lonely hearth,
his face buried in his hands. The day had been terribly long and
torturing; memory had presented, like mocking spectres, his past and what
it might have been. A sense of loneliness, a horror of great darkness,
overwhelmed him. Nature had grown cold and forbidding, and was losing its
power to solace. Johnnie, absorbed in her Christmas preparations, had not
been to see him for a long time. He had gone to inquire after her on the
previous evening, and through the lighted window of the Clifford home had
seen a picture that had made his own abode appear desolate indeed. In
despairing bitterness he had turned away, feeling that that happy home
was no more a place for him than was heaven. He had wandered out into the
storm for hours, like a lost spirit, and at last had returned and slept
in utter exhaustion. On the morning preceding Christmas memory awoke with
him, and as night approached he was sinking into sullen, dreary apathy. There was a light tap at the door, but he did not hear it. A child's face
peered in at his window, and Johnnie saw him cowering over his dying
fire. She had grown accustomed to his moods, and had learned to be
fearless, for she had banished his evil spells before. Therefore she
entered softly, laid down her bundles and stood beside him. she said, laying her hand on his shoulder. He started up,
and at the same moment a flickering blaze rose on the hearth, and
revealed the sunny-haired child standing beside him. If an angel had
come, the effect could not have been greater. Like all who are morbid, he
was largely under the dominion of imagination; and Johnnie, with her
fearless, gentle, commiserating eyes, had for him the potency of a
supernatural visitor. But the healthful, unconscious child had a better
power. Her words and touch brought saneness as well as hope. Alvord," she cried, "were you asleep? your fire is going
out, and your lamp is not lighted, and there is nothing ready for your
supper. What a queer man you are, for one who is so kind! Mamma said I
might come and spend a little of Christmas-eve with you, and bring my
gifts, and then that you would bring me home. I know how to fix up your
fire and light your lamp. and she bustled around, the embodiment of beautiful life. he said, taking her sweet face in his hands, and looking
into her clear eyes, "Heaven must have sent you. I was so lonely and sad
that I wished I had never lived." See what I've brought you,"
and she opened a book with the angels' song of "peace and good-will"
illustrated. "Mamma says that whoever believes that ought to be happy,"
said the child. "Yes, it's true for those who are like you and your mother." She leaned against him, and looked over his shoulder at the pictures. Alvord, mamma said the song was for you, too. Of course, mamma's
right. What else did He come for but to help people who are in trouble? I
read stories about Him every Sunday to mamma, and He was always helping
people who were in trouble, and who had done wrong. That's why we are
always glad on Christmas. You look at the book while I set your table." He did look at it till his eyes were blinded with tears, and like a sweet
refrain came the words. Half an hour later Leonard, with a kindly impulse, thought he would go to
take by the hand Johnnie's strange friend, and see how the little girl
was getting on. The scene within, as he passed the window, checked his
steps. Alvord's table, pouring tea for
him, chattering meanwhile with a child's freedom, and the hermit was
looking at her with such a smile on his haggard face as Leonard had never
seen there. He walked quietly home, deferring his call till the morrow,
feeling that Johnnie's spell must not be broken. Alvord put Johnnie down at her home, for he had
insisted on carrying her through the snow, and for the first time kissed
her, as he said:

"Good-by. You, to-night, have been like one of the angels that brought
the tidings of 'peace and good-will.'" "I'm sorry for him, mamma!" said the little girl, after telling her
story, "for he's very lonely, and he's such a queer, nice man. Isn't it
funny that he should be so old, and yet not know why we keep Christmas?" Amy sang again the Christmas hymn that her own father and the father who
had adopted her had loved so many years before. Clifford, as he was fondly bidding her good-night, "how sweetly you have
fulfilled the hopes you raised one year ago!" Clifford had gone to her room, leaning on the arm of Gertrude. As
the invalid kissed her in parting, she said:

"You have beautiful eyes, my dear, and they have seen far more of the
world than mine, but, thank God, they are clear and true. Keep them so,
my child, that I may welcome you again to a better home than this." Once more "the old house stood silent and dark in the pallid landscape." The winds were hushed, as if the peace within had been breathed into the
very heart of Nature, and she, too, could rest in her wintry sleep. The
moon was obscured by a veil of clouds, and the outlines of the trees were
faint upon the snow. A shadowy form drew near; a man paused, and looked
upon the dwelling. "If the angels' song could be heard anywhere to-night,
it should be over that home," Mr. Alvord murmured; but, even to his
morbid fancy, the deep silence of the night remained unbroken. He
returned to his home, and sat down in the firelight. A golden-haired
child again leaned upon his shoulder, and asked, "What else did He come
for but to help people who are in trouble, and who have done wrong?" Was it a voice deep in his own soul that was longing to
escape from evil? or was it a harmony far away in the sky, that whispered
of peace at last? That message from heaven is clearest where the need is
greatest. Hargrove's home was almost a palace, but its stately rooms were
desolate on Christmas-eve. He wandered restlessly through their
magnificence. He paid no heed to the costly furniture and costlier works
of art. "Trurie was right," he muttered. "What power have these things to
satisfy when the supreme need of the heart is unsatisfied? It seems as if
I could not sleep to-night without seeing her. There is no use in
disguising the truth that I'm losing her. Even on Christmas-eve she is
absent. It's late, and since I cannot see her, I'll see her gift;" and he
went to her room, where she had told him to look for her remembrance. To his surprise, he found that, according to her secret instructions, it
was lighted. He entered the dainty apartment, and saw the glow of autumn
leaves and the airy grace of ferns around the pictures and windows. He
started, for he almost saw herself, so true was the life-size and
lifelike portrait that smiled upon him. Beneath it were the words, "Merry
Christmas, papa! You have not lost me; you have only made me happy." The moon is again rising over old Storm King; the crystals that cover the
white fields and meadows are beginning to flash in its rays; the great
pine by the Clifford home is sighing and moaning. What heavy secret has
the old tree that it can sigh with such a group near as is now gathered
beneath it? Burt's black horse rears high as he reins him in, that
Gertrude may spring into the cutter, then speeds away like a shadow
through the moonlight Webb's steed is strong and quiet, like himself, and
as tireless. Amy steps to Webb's side, feeling it to be her place in very
truth. Sable Abram draws up next, with the great family sleigh, and in a
moment Alf is perched beside him. Then Leonard half smothers Johnnie and
Ned under the robes, and Maggie, about to pick her way through the snow,
finds herself taken up in strong arms, like one of the children, and is
with them. The chime of bells dies away in the distance. Wedding-bells
will be their echo. *       *       *       *       *

The merry Christmas-day has passed. Barkdale, and other friends have come and gone with their greetings;
the old people are left alone beside their cheery fire. "Here we are, mother, all by ourselves, just as we were once before on
Christmas night, when you were as fair and blooming as Amy or Gertrude. Well, my dear, the long journey seems short to-night. I suppose the
reason is that you have been such good company." "Dear old father, the journey would have been long and weary indeed, had
I not had your strong arm to lean upon, and a love that didn't fade with
my roses. There is only one short journey before us now, father, and then
we shall know fully the meaning of the 'good tidings of great joy'
forever." The carnage
was appalling to behold; and when the soldiers of the Union finally
retired they had learned a costly lesson which withheld them from attack
when another mine was exploded on July 1st. Meantime, let us take a view of the river below and the life of the people
within the doomed city. Far down the river, two hundred and fifty miles
from Vicksburg, was Port Hudson. The place was fortified and held by a
Confederate force under General Gardner. Like Vicksburg, it was besieged
by a Federal army, under Nathaniel P. Banks, of Cedar Mountain fame. On
May 27th, he made a desperate attack on the works and was powerfully aided
by Farragut with his fleet in the river. But aside from dismounting a few
guns and weakening the foe at a still heavier cost to their own ranks, the
Federals were unsuccessful. Again, on June 10th, and still again on the
14th, Banks made fruitless attempts to carry Port Hudson by storm. He
then, like Grant at Vicksburg, settled down to a siege. The defenders of
Port Hudson proved their courage by enduring every hardship. At Vicksburg, during the whole six weeks of the siege, the men in the
trenches worked steadily, advancing the coils about the city. Grant
received reenforcement and before the end of the siege his army numbered
over seventy thousand. Day and night, the roar of artillery continued. From the mortars across the river and from Porter's fleet the shrieking
shells rose in grand parabolic curves, bursting in midair or in the
streets of the city, spreading havoc in all directions. The people of the
city burrowed into the ground for safety. Many whole families lived in
these dismal abodes, their walls of clay being shaken by the roaring
battles that raged above the ground. In one of these dens, sixty-five
people found a home. The food supply ran low, and day by day it became
scarcer. At last, by the end of June, there was nothing to eat except mule
meat and a kind of bread made of beans and corn meal. It was ten o'clock in the morning of July 3d. White flags were seen above
the parapet. A strange quietness rested over the scene
of the long bombardment. On the afternoon of that day, the one, too, on
which was heard the last shot on the battlefield of Gettysburg, Grant and
Pemberton stood beneath an oak tree, in front of McPherson's corps, and
opened negotiations for the capitulation. On the following morning, the
Nation's birthday, about thirty thousand soldiers laid down their arms as
prisoners of war and were released on parole. The losses from May 1st to
the surrender were about ten thousand on each side. Three days later, at Port Hudson, a tremendous cheer arose from the
besieging army. The Confederates within the defenses were at a loss to
know the cause. Then some one shouted the news, "Vicksburg has
surrendered!" Port Hudson could not hope to stand alone; the greater
fortress had fallen. Two days later, July 9th, the gallant garrison, worn
and weary with the long siege, surrendered to General Banks. The whole
course of the mighty Mississippi was now under the Stars and Stripes. [Illustration: BEFORE VICKSBURG]

The close-set mouth, squared shoulders and lowering brow in this
photograph of Grant, taken in December, 1862, tell the story of the
intensity of his purpose while he was advancing upon Vicksburg--only to be
foiled by Van Dorn's raid on his line of communications at Holly Springs. His grim expression and determined jaw betokened no respite for the
Confederates, however. Six months later he marched into the coveted
stronghold. This photograph was taken by James Mullen at Oxford,
Mississippi, in December, 1862, just before Van Dorn's raid balked the
general's plans. [Illustration: AFTER VICKSBURG]

This photograph was taken in the fall of 1863, after the capture of the
Confederacy's Gibraltar had raised Grant to secure and everlasting fame. His attitude is relaxed and his eyebrows no longer mark a straight line
across the grim visage. The right brow is slightly arched with an almost
jovial expression. But the jaw is no less vigorous and determined, and the
steadfast eyes seem to be peering into that future which holds more
victories. He still has Chattanooga and his great campaigns in the East to
fight and the final magnificent struggle in the trenches at Petersburg. [Illustration: WHERE GRANT'S CAMPAIGN WAS HALTED

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] The second attempt to capture
Vicksburg originated with Grant. Since he had sprung into fame at Fort
Donelson early in 1862, he had done little to strengthen his reputation;
but to all urgings of his removal Lincoln replied: "I can't spare this
man; he fights." He proposed to push southward through Mississippi to
seize Jackson, the capital. If this could be accomplished, Vicksburg
(fifty miles to the west) would become untenable. At Washington his plan
was overruled to the extent of dividing his forces. Sherman, with a
separate expedition, was to move from Memphis down the Mississippi
directly against Vicksburg. It was Grant's hope that by marching on he
could unite with Sherman in an assault upon this key to the Mississippi. Pushing forward from Grand Junction, sixty miles, Grant reached Oxford
December 5, 1862, but his supplies were still drawn from Columbus,
Kentucky, over a single-track road to Holly Springs, and thence by wagon
over roads which were rapidly becoming impassable. Delay ensued in which
Van Dorn destroyed Federal stores at Holly Springs worth $1,500,000. This
put an end to Grant's advance. In the picture we see an Illinois regiment
guarding some of the 1200 Confederate prisoners taken during the advance
and here confined in the Courthouse. [Illustration: WHERE VICKSBURG'S FATE WAS SEALED

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. Here on May 16, 1863, Grant crowned
his daring maneuver against Vicksburg from the south with complete
success. Once across the river below Grand Gulf, after an easy victory at
Port Gibson, he was joined by Sherman. The army struck out across the
strange country south of the Big Black River and soon had driven
Pemberton's southern outposts across that stream. Grant was now on solid
ground; he had successfully turned the flank of the Confederates and he
grasped the opportunity to strike a telling blow. Pressing forward to
Raymond and Jackson, he captured both, and swept westward to meet the
astounded Pemberton, still vacillating between attempting a junction with
Johnston or attacking Grant in the rear. But Grant, moving with wonderful
precision, prevented either movement. On May 16th a battle ensued which
was most decisive around Champion's Hill. Pemberton was routed and put to
flight, and on the next day the Federals seized the crossings of the Big
Black River. Spiking their guns at Haynes' Bluff, the Confederates retired
into Vicksburg, never to come out again except as prisoners. In eighteen
days from the time he crossed the Mississippi, Grant had gained the
advantage for which the Federals had striven for more than a year at
Vicksburg. [Illustration: THE BRIDGE THE CONFEDERATES BURNED AT BIG BLACK RIVER

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] [Illustration: THE FIRST FEDERAL CROSSING--SHERMAN'S PONTOONS

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] The pursuit of Pemberton's army brought McClernand's Corps to the defenses
of the Big Black River Bridge early on May 17, 1863. McClernand's division carried the defenses and Bowen and Vaughn's
men fled with precipitate haste over the dreary swamp to the river and
crossed over and burned the railroad and other bridges just in time to
prevent McClernand from following. The necessary delay was aggravating to
Grant's forces. The rest of the day and night was consumed in building
bridges. Sherman had the only pontoon-train with the army and his bridge
was the first ready at Bridgeport, early in the evening. [Illustration: Vicksburg, taken under fire. COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] THE GATE TO THE MISSISSIPPI

The handwriting is that of Surgeon Bixby, of the Union hospital ship "Red
Rover." In his album he pasted this unique photograph from the western
shore of the river where the Federal guns and mortars threw a thousand
shells into Vicksburg during the siege. The prominent building is the
courthouse, the chief landmark during the investment. Here at Vicksburg
the Confederates were making their last brave stand for the possession of
the Mississippi River, that great artery of traffic. If it were wrested
from them the main source of their supplies would be cut off. Pemberton, a
brave and capable officer and a Pennsylvanian by birth, worked
unremittingly for the cause he had espoused. Warned by the early attacks
of General Williams and Admiral Farragut, he had left no stone unturned to
render Vicksburg strongly defended. It had proved impregnable to attack on
the north and east, and the powerful batteries planted on the river-front
could not be silenced by the fleet nor by the guns of the Federals on the
opposite shore. But Grant's masterful maneuver of cutting loose from his
base and advancing from the south had at last out-generaled both Pemberton
and Johnston. Nevertheless, Pemberton stoutly held his defenses. His high
river-battery is photographed below, as it frowned upon the Federals
opposite. [Illustration]


[Illustration: THE WELL-DEFENDED CITADEL

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] Behind these fortifications Pemberton, driven from the Big Black River,
gathered his twenty-one thousand troops to make the last stand for the
saving of the Mississippi to the Confederacy. In the upper picture we see
Fort Castle, one of the strongest defenses of the Confederacy. It had full
sweep of the river; here "Whistling Dick" (one of the most powerful guns
in possession of the South) did deadly work. In the lower picture we see
the fortifications to the east of the town, before which Grant's army was
now entrenching. When Vicksburg had first been threatened in 1862, the
Confederate fortifications had been laid out and work begun on them in
haste with but five hundred spades, many of the soldiers delving with
their bayonets. The sites were so well chosen and the work so well done
that they had withstood attacks for a year. They were to hold out still
longer. By May 18th the Federals had completely invested Vicksburg, and
Grant and Sherman rode out to Haynes' Bluff to view the open river to the
north, down which abundant supplies were now coming for the army. Sherman,
who had not believed that the plan could succeed, frankly acknowledged his
mistake. Sherman, assaulting the
fortifications of Vicksburg, the next day, was repulsed. A second attack,
on the 22d, failed and on the 25th Grant settled down to starve Pemberton
out. [Illustration]


[Illustration: THE WORK OF THE BESIEGERS

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] Battery Sherman, on the Jackson Road, before Vicksburg. Settling down to a
siege did not mean idleness for Grant's army. Fortifications had to be
opposed to the formidable one of the Confederates and a constant
bombardment kept up to silence their guns, one by one. It was to be a
drawn-out duel in which Pemberton, hoping for the long-delayed relief from
Johnston, held out bravely against starvation and even mutiny. For twelve
miles the Federal lines stretched around Vicksburg, investing it to the
river bank, north and south. More than eighty-nine battery positions were
constructed by the Federals. Battery Sherman was exceptionally well
built--not merely revetted with rails or cotton-bales and floored with
rough timber, as lack of proper material often made necessary. Gradually
the lines were drawn closer and closer as the Federals moved up their guns
to silence the works that they had failed to take in May. At the time of
the surrender Grant had more than 220 guns in position, mostly of heavy
caliber. By the 1st of July besieged and besiegers faced each other at a
distance of half-pistol shot. Starving and ravaged by disease, the
Confederates had repelled repeated attacks which depleted their forces,
while Grant, reenforced to three times their number, was showered with
supplies and ammunition that he might bring about the long-delayed victory
which the North had been eagerly awaiting since Chancellorsville. [Illustration: INVESTING BY INCHES

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS.] Logan's Division undermining the most formidable redoubt in the defenses
of Vicksburg. The position was immediately in front of this honeycombed
<DW72> on the Jackson road. Upon these troops fell most of the labor of
sapping and mining, which finally resulted in the wrecking of the fort so
gallantly defended by the veterans of the Third Louisiana. As the Federal
lines crept up, the men working night and day were forced to live in
burrows. They became proficient in such gopher work as the picture shows. Up to the "White House" (Shirley's) the troops could be marched in
comparative safety, but a short distance beyond they were exposed to the
Confederate sharpshooters, who had only rifles and muskets to depend on;
their artillery had long since been silenced. Near this house was
constructed "Coonskin's" Tower; it was built of railway iron and
cross-ties under the direction of Second Lieutenant Henry C. Foster, of
Company B, Twenty-third Indiana. A backwoodsman and dead-shot, he was
particularly active in paying the Confederate sharpshooters in their own
coin. He habitually wore a cap of raccoon fur, which gave him his nickname
and christened the tower, from which the interior of the Confederate works
could be seen. [Illustration: THE FIRST MONUMENT AT THE MEETING PLACE]

Independence Day, 1863, was a memorable anniversary of the nation's birth;
it brought to the anxious North the momentous news that Meade had won at
Gettysburg and that Vicksburg had fallen in the West. The marble shaft in
the picture was erected to mark the spot where Grant and Pemberton met on
July 3d to confer about the surrender. Under a tree, within a few hundred
feet of the Confederate lines, Grant greeted his adversary as an old
acquaintance. They had fought in the same division for a time in the
Mexican War. Each spoke but two sentences as to the surrender, for Grant
lived up to the nickname he gained at Donelson, and Pemberton's pride was
hurt. The former comrades walked and talked awhile on other things, and
then returned to their lines. Next day the final terms were arranged by
correspondence, and the Confederates marched out with colors flying; they
stacked their arms and, laying their colors upon them, marched back into
the city to be paroled. Those who signed the papers not to fight until
exchanged numbered 29,391. The tree where the commanders met was soon
carried away, root and branch, by relic-hunters. Subsequently the monument
which replaced it was chipped gradually into bits, and in 1866 a
64-pounder cannon took its place as a permanent memorial. [Illustration: VICKSBURG IN POSSESSION OF THE FEDERALS

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] [Illustration: A VIGILANT PATROLLER--THE "SILVER LAKE"]

In the picture the "Silver Lake" is lying off Vicksburg after its fall. While Admiral Porter was busy attacking Vicksburg with the Mississippi
squadron, Lieutenant-Commander Le Roy Fitch, with a few small gunboats,
was actively patrolling the Tennessee and Cumberland Rivers. It was soon
seen that the hold upon Tennessee and Kentucky gained by the Federals by
the fall of Forts Henry and Donelson would be lost without adequate
assistance from the navy, and Admiral Porter was authorized to purchase
small light-draft river steamers and add them to Fitch's flotilla as
rapidly as they could be converted into gunboats. One of the first to be
completed was the "Silver Lake." The little stern-wheel steamer first
distinguished herself on February 3, 1863, at Dover, Tennessee, where she
(with Fitch's flotilla) assisted in routing 4,500 Confederates, who were
attacking the Federals at that place. The little vessel continued to
render yeoman's service with the other gunboats, ably assisted by General
A. W. Ellet's marine brigade. [Illustration]


[Illustration: THE CONFEDERACY CUT IN TWAIN

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. The Levee at Vicksburg, February, 1864. For seven months the Federals had
been in possession of the city, and the Mississippi--now open through its
entire course--cut off the struggling Confederacy in the East from the
South and Southwest, the storehouses of their resources and their main
dependence in continuing the struggle. But even such a blow as this,
coming on top of Gettysburg, did not force the brave people of the South
to give up the struggle. In the picture the only remaining warlike signs
are the tents on the opposite shore. But on both sides of the river the
Confederates were still desperately striving to reunite their territory. In the East another year and more of the hardest kind of fighting was
ahead; another severing in twain of the South was inevitable before peace
could come, and before the muskets could be used to shoot the crows, and
before their horses could plough the neglected fields. WITHIN THE PARAPET AT PORT HUDSON IN THE SUMMER OF 1863

These fortifications withstood every attack of Banks' powerful army from
May 24 to July 9, 1863. Like Vicksburg, Port Hudson could be reduced only
by a weary siege. These pictures, taken within the fortifications, show in
the distance the ground over which the investing army approached to the
two unsuccessful grand assaults they made upon the Confederate defenders. A continuous line of parapet,
equally strong, had been thrown up for the defense of Port Hudson,
surrounding the town for a distance of three miles and more, each end
terminating on the riverbank. Four powerful forts were located at the
salients, and the line throughout was defended by thirty pieces of field
artillery. Brigadier-General Beall, who commanded the post in 1862,
constructed these works. Major-General Frank Gardner succeeded him in
command at the close of the year. [Illustration: THE WELL-DEFENDED WORKS]

[Illustration: CONFEDERATE FORTIFICATIONS BEFORE PORT HUDSON]

Gardner was behind these defenses with a garrison of about seven thousand
when Banks approached Port Hudson for the second time on May 24th. Gardner
was under orders to evacuate the place and join his force to that of
Johnston at Jackson, Mississippi, but the courier who brought the order
arrived at the very hour when Banks began to bottle up the Confederates. On the morning of May 25th Banks drove in the Confederate skirmishers and
outposts and, with an army of thirty thousand, invested the fortifications
from the eastward. At 10 A.M., after an artillery duel of more than four
hours, the Federals advanced to the assault of the works. Fighting in a
dense forest of magnolias, amid thick undergrowth and among ravines choked
with felled timber, the progress of the troops was too slow for a telling
attack. The battle has been described as "a gigantic bushwhack." The
Federals at the center reached the ditch in front of the Confederate works
but were driven off. It had cost
Banks nearly two thousand men. [Illustration: THE GUN THAT FOOLED THE FEDERALS]

A "Quaker gun" that was mounted by the Confederates in the fortifications
on the bluff at the river-front before Port Hudson. This gun was hewn out
of a pine log and mounted on a carriage, and a black ring was painted
around the end facing the river. Throughout the siege it was mistaken by
the Federals for a piece of real ordnance. To such devices as this the
beleaguered garrison was compelled constantly to resort in order to
impress the superior forces investing Port Hudson with the idea that the
position they sought to capture was formidably defended. Port Hudson was not again attacked from the river after the
passing of Farragut's two ships. [Illustration: WITHIN "THE CITADEL"

COLLECTION OF FREDERICK H. MESERVE

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] This bastion fort, near the left of the Confederate line of defenses at
Port Hudson, was the strongest of their works, and here Weitzel and
Grover's divisions of the Federals followed up the attack (begun at
daylight of June 14th) that Banks had ordered all along the line in his
second effort to capture the position. The only result was simply to
advance the Federal lines from fifty to two hundred yards nearer. In front
of the "citadel" an advance position was gained from which a mine was
subsequently run to within a few yards of the fort. [Illustration: THE FIRST INDIANA NAVY ARTILLERY AT BATON ROUGE

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] [Illustration: PHOTOGRAPHS THAT FURNISHED VALUABLE SECRET SERVICE
INFORMATION TO THE CONFEDERATES

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] The clearest and most trustworthy evidence of an opponent's strength is of
course an actual photograph. Such evidence, in spite of the early stage of
the art and the difficulty of "running in" chemical supplies on "orders to
trade," was supplied the Confederate leaders in the Southwest by Lytle,
the Baton Rouge photographer--really a member of the Confederate secret
service. Here are photographs of the First Indiana Heavy Artillery
(formerly the Twenty-first Indiana Infantry), showing its strength and
position on the arsenal grounds at Baton Rouge. As the Twenty-first
Indiana, the regiment had been at Baton Rouge during the first Federal
occupation, and after the fall of Port Hudson it returned there for
garrison duty. Little did its officers suspect that the quiet man
photographing the batteries at drill was about to convey the "information"
beyond their lines to their opponents. "MY EXECUTIVE OFFICER, MR. DEWEY"

[Illustration]

THE FUTURE ADMIRAL AS CIVIL WAR LIEUTENANT

In the fight with the batteries at Port Hudson, March 14, 1863, Farragut,
in the "Hartford" lashed to the "Albatross," got by, but the fine old
consort of the "Hartford," the "Mississippi," went down--her gunners
fighting to the last. Farragut, in anguish, could see her enveloped in
flames lighting up the river. She had grounded under the very guns of a
battery, and not until actually driven off by the flames did her men
leave her. When the "Mississippi" grounded, the shock threw her
lieutenant-commander into the river, and in confusion he swam toward the
shore; then, turning about, he swam back to his ship. Captain Smith thus
writes in his report: "I consider that I should be neglecting a most
important duty should I omit to mention the coolness of my executive
officer, Mr. Dewey, and the steady, fearless, and gallant manner in which
the officers and men of the 'Mississippi' defended her, and the orderly
and quiet manner in which she was abandoned after being thirty-five
minutes aground under the fire of the enemy's batteries. There was no
confusion in embarking the crew, and the only noise was from the enemy's
cannon." Lieutenant-Commander George Dewey, here mentioned at the age of
26, was to exemplify in Manila Bay on May 1, 1898, the lessons he was
learning from Farragut. [Illustration]




[Illustration: PICKETT'S CHARGE AT GETTYSBURG. _Painted by C. D. Graves._

  _Copyright, 1901, by Perrien-Keydel Co.,
  Detroit, Mich., U. S. A._]


WHILE LINCOLN SPOKE AT GETTYSBURG, NOVEMBER 19, 1863

[Illustration]

DURING THE FAMOUS ADDRESS IN DEDICATION OF THE CEMETERY

The most important American address is brief: "Fourscore and seven years
ago our fathers brought forth on this continent a new nation, conceived in
liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal. Now we are engaged in a great civil war, testing whether that nation, or
any nation so conceived and so dedicated, can long endure. We are met on a
great battlefield of that war. We have come to dedicate a portion of that
field as a final resting-place for those who here gave their lives that
that nation might live. It is altogether fitting and proper that we should
do this. But in a larger sense, we cannot dedicate, we cannot consecrate,
we cannot hallow this ground. The brave men, living and dead, who
struggled here, have consecrated it far above our poor power to add or
detract. The world will little note, nor long remember, what we say here,
but it can never forget what they did here. It is for us, the living,
rather, to be dedicated here to the unfinished work which they who fought
here have thus far so nobly advanced. It is rather for us to be here
dedicated to the great task remaining before us;--that from these honored
dead, we take increased devotion to that cause for which they gave the
last full measure of devotion;--that we here highly resolve that these
dead shall not have died in vain, that this nation, under God, shall have
a new birth of freedom, and that government of the people, by the people,
for the people, shall not perish from the earth." [Illustration: COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. THE BATTLE OF GETTYSBURG--THE HIGH-WATER MARK OF THE CIVIL WAR


The military operations of the American Civil War were carried on for the
most part south of the Mason and Dixon line; but the greatest and most
famous of the battles was fought on the soil of the old Keystone State,
which had given birth to the Declaration of Independence and to the
Constitution of the United States. Gettysburg is a quiet hamlet, nestling among the hills of Adams County,
and in 1863 contained about fifteen hundred inhabitants. It had been
founded in 1780 by James Gettys, who probably never dreamed that his name
thus given to the village would, through apparently accidental
circumstances, become famous in history for all time. The hills immediately around Gettysburg are not rugged or precipitous;
they are little more than gentle swells of ground, and many of them were
covered with timber when the hosts of the North and the legions of the
South fought out the destiny of the American republic on those memorable
July days in 1863. Lee's army was flushed with victory after Chancellorsville and was
strengthened by the memory of Fredericksburg. Southern hopes were high
after Hooker's defeat on the Rappahannock, in May, 1863, and public
opinion was unanimous in demanding an invasion of Northern soil. On the
other hand, the Army of the Potomac, under its several leaders, had met
with continual discouragement, and, with all its patriotism and valor, its
two years' warfare showed but few bright pages to cheer the heart of the
war-broken soldier, and to inspire the hopes of the anxious public in the
North. Leaving General Stuart with ten thousand cavalry and a part of Hill's
corps to prevent Hooker from pursuing, Lee crossed the Potomac early in
June, 1863, concentrated his army at Hagerstown, Maryland, and prepared
for a campaign in Pennsylvania, with Harrisburg as the objective. His army
was organized in three corps, under the respective commands of Longstreet,
Ewell, and A. P. Hill. Lee had divided his army so as to approach
Harrisburg by different routes and to assess the towns along the way for
large sums of money. Late in June, he was startled by the intelligence
that Stuart had failed to detain Hooker, and that the Federals had crossed
the Potomac and were in hot pursuit. Lee was quick to see that his plans must be changed. He knew that to
continue his march he must keep his army together to watch his pursuing
antagonist, and that such a course in this hostile country would mean
starvation, while the willing hands of the surrounding populace would
minister to the wants of his foe. Again, if he should scatter his forces
that they might secure the necessary supplies, the parts would be attacked
singly and destroyed. Lee saw, therefore, that he must abandon his
invasion of the North or turn upon his pursuing foe and disable him in
order to continue his march. But that foe was a giant of strength and
courage, more than equal to his own; and the coming together of two such
forces in a mighty death-struggle meant that a great battle must be
fought, a greater battle than this Western world had hitherto known. The Army of the Potomac had again changed leaders, and George Gordon Meade
was now its commander. Hooker, after a dispute with Halleck, resigned his
leadership, and Meade, the strongest of the corps commanders, was
appointed in his place, succeeding him on June 28th. The two great
armies--Union and Confederate--were scattered over portions of Maryland
and southern Pennsylvania. Both were marching northward, along almost
parallel lines. The Confederates were gradually pressing toward the east,
while the Federals were marching along a line eastward of that followed by
the Confederates. The new commander of the Army of the Potomac was keeping
his forces interposed between the legions of Lee and the Federal capital,
and watching for an opportunity to force the Confederates to battle where
the Federals would have the advantage of position. It was plain that they
must soon come together in a gigantic contest; but just where the shock of
battle would take place was yet unknown. Meade had ordered a general
movement toward Harrisburg, and General Buford was sent with four thousand
cavalry to intercept the Confederate advance guard. On the night of June 30th Buford encamped on a low hill, a mile west of
Gettysburg, and here on the following morning the famous battle had its
beginning. On the morning of July 1st the two armies were still scattered, the
extremes being forty miles apart. But General Reynolds, with two corps of
the Union army, was but a few miles away, and was hastening to Gettysburg,
while Longstreet and Hill were approaching from the west. Buford opened
the battle against Heth's division of Hill's corps. Reynolds soon joined
Buford, and three hours before noon the battle was in progress on Seminary
Ridge. Reynolds rode out to his fighting-lines on the ridge, and while
placing his troops, a little after ten o'clock in the morning, he received
a sharpshooter's bullet in the brain. John F. Reynolds, who had been promoted for gallantry at Buena Vista
in the Mexican War, was one of the bravest and ablest generals of the
Union army. No casualty of the war brought more widespread mourning to the
North than the death of Reynolds. But even this calamity could not stay the fury of the battle. By one
o'clock both sides had been greatly reenforced, and the battle-line
extended north of the town from Seminary Ridge to the bank of Rock Creek. Here for hours the roar of the battle was unceasing. About the middle of
the afternoon a breeze lifted the smoke that had enveloped the whole
battle-line in darkness, and revealed the fact that the Federals were
being pressed back toward Gettysburg. General Carl Schurz, who after
Reynolds' death directed the extreme right near Rock Creek, leaving nearly
half of his men dead or wounded on the field, retreated toward Cemetery
Hill, and in passing through the town the Confederates pursued and
captured a large number of the remainder. The left wing, now unable to
hold its position owing to the retreat of the right, was also forced back,
and it, too, took refuge on Cemetery Hill, which had been selected by
General O. O. Howard; and the first day's fight was over. It was several
hours before night, and had the Southerners known of the disorganized
condition of the Union troops, they might have pursued and captured a
large part of the army. Meade, who was still some miles from the field,
hearing of the death of Reynolds, had sent Hancock to take general command
until he himself should arrive. Hancock had ridden at full speed and arrived on the field between three
and four o'clock in the afternoon. His presence soon brought order out of
chaos. His superb bearing, his air of confidence, his promise of heavy
reenforcements during the night, all tended to inspire confidence and to
renew hope in the ranks of the discouraged army. Had this day ended the
affair at Gettysburg, the usual story of the defeat of the Army of the
Potomac would have gone forth to the world. Only the advance portions of
both armies had been engaged; and yet the battle had been a formidable
one. A great commander had fallen, and the rank
and file had suffered the fearful loss of ten thousand men. Meade reached the scene late in the night, and chose to make this field,
on which the advance of both armies had accidentally met, the place of a
general engagement. Lee had come to the same decision, and both called on
their outlying legions to make all possible speed to Gettysburg. Before
morning, nearly all the troops of both armies had reached the field. The
Union army rested with its center on Cemetery Ridge, with its right thrown
around to Culp's Hill and its left extended southward toward the rocky
peak called Round Top. The Confederate army, with its center on Seminary
Ridge, its wings extending from beyond Rock Creek on the north to a point
opposite Round Top on the south, lay in a great semi-circle, half
surrounding the Army of the Potomac. First,
"Stonewall" Jackson was gone, and second, Stuart was absent with his ten
thousand cavalry. Furthermore, Meade was on the defensive, and had the
advantage of occupying the inner ring of the huge half circle. Thus lay
the two mighty hosts, awaiting the morning, and the carnage that the day
was to bring. It seemed that the fate of the Republic was here to be
decided, and the people of the North and the South watched with breathless
eagerness for the decision about to be made at Gettysburg. The dawn of July 2d betokened a beautiful summer day in southern
Pennsylvania. The hours of the night had been spent by the two armies in
marshaling of battalions and maneuvering of corps and divisions, getting
into position for the mighty combat of the coming day. But, when morning
dawned, both armies hesitated, as if unwilling to begin the task of
bloodshed. They remained inactive, except for a stray shot here and there,
until nearly four o'clock in the afternoon. The fighting on this second day was chiefly confined to the two extremes,
the centers remaining comparatively inactive. Longstreet commanded the
Confederate right, and opposite him on the Union left was General Daniel
E. Sickles. The Confederate left wing, under Ewell, was opposite Slocum
and the Union right stationed on Culp's Hill. The plan of General Meade had been to have the corps commanded by General
Sickles connect with that of Hancock and extend southward near the base of
the Round Tops. Sickles found this ground low and disadvantageous as a
fighting-place. In his front he saw the high ground along the ridge on the
side of which the peach orchard was situated, and advanced his men to this
position, placing them along the Emmitsburg road, and back toward the
Trostle farm and the wheat-field, thus forming an angle at the peach
orchard. The left flank of Hancock's line now rested far behind the right
flank of Sickles' forces. The Third Corps was alone in its position in
advance of the Federal line. The Confederate troops later marched along
Sickles' front so that Longstreet's corps overlapped the left wing of the
Union army. The Northerners grimly watched the bristling cannon and the
files of men that faced them across the valley, as they waited for the
battle to commence. The boom of cannon from Longstreet's batteries announced the beginning of
the second day's battle. Lee had ordered Longstreet to attack Sickles in
full force. The fire was quickly answered by the Union troops, and before
long the fight extended from the peach orchard through the wheatfield and
along the whole line to the base of Little Round Top. The musketry
commenced with stray volleys here and there--then more and faster, until
there was one continuous roar, and no ear could distinguish one shot from
another. Longstreet swept forward in a magnificent line of battle, a mile
and a half long. He pressed back the Union infantry, and was seriously
threatening the artillery. At the extreme left, close to the Trostle house, Captain John Bigelow
commanded the Ninth Battery, Massachusetts Light Artillery. He was ordered
to hold his position at all hazards until reenforced. With double charges
of grape and canister, again and again he tore great gaps in the advancing
line, but it re-formed and pressed onward until the men in gray reached
the muzzles of the Federal guns. Again Bigelow fired, but the heroic band
had at last to give way to the increased numbers of the attack, which
finally resulted in a hand-to-hand struggle with a Mississippi regiment. Bigelow was wounded, and twenty-eight of his hundred and four men were
left on the bloody field, while he lost sixty-five out of eighty-eight
horses, and four of six guns. Such was one of many deeds of heroism
enacted at Gettysburg. But the most desperate struggle of the day was the fight for the
possession of Little Round Top. Just before the action began General Meade
sent his chief engineer, General G. K. Warren, to examine conditions on
the Union left. The battle was raging in the peach orchard when he came to
Little Round Top. It was unoccupied at the time, and Warren quickly saw
the great importance of preventing its occupation by the Confederates, for
the hill was the key to the whole battle-ground west and south of Cemetery
Ridge. Before long, the engineer saw Hood's division of Longstreet's corps
moving steadily toward the hill, evidently determined to occupy it. Had
Hood succeeded, the result would have been most disastrous to the Union
army, for the Confederates could then have subjected the entire Union
lines on the western edge of Cemetery Ridge to an enfilading fire. Warren
and a signal officer seized flags and waved them, to deceive the
Confederates as to the occupation of the height. Sykes' corps, marching to
the support of the left, soon came along, and Warren, dashing down the
side of the hill to meet it, caused the brigade under Colonel Vincent and
a part of that under General Weed to be detached, and these occupied the
coveted position. Hazlett's battery was dragged by hand up the rugged
<DW72> and planted on the summit. Meantime Hood's forces had come up the hill, and were striving at the very
summit; and now occurred one of the most desperate hand-to-hand conflicts
of the war--in which men forgot that they were human and tore at each
other like wild beasts. The opposing forces, not having time to reload,
charged each other with bayonets--men assaulted each other with clubbed
muskets--the Blue and the Gray grappled in mortal combat and fell dead,
side by side. The privates in the front ranks fought their way onward
until they fell, the officers sprang forward, seized the muskets from the
hands of the dying and the dead, and continued the combat. The furious
struggle continued for half an hour, when Hood's forces gave way and were
pressed down the hillside. But they rallied and advanced again by way of a
ravine on the left, and finally, after a most valiant charge, were driven
back at the point of the bayonet. Little Round Top was saved to the Union army, but the cost was appalling. The hill was covered with hundreds of the slain. Scores of the Confederate
sharpshooters had taken position among the crevasses in the Devil's Den,
where they could overlook the position on Little Round Top, and their
unerring aim spread death among the Federal officers and gunners. Colonel
O'Rourke and General Vincent were dead. General Weed was dying; and, as
Hazlett was stooping to receive Weed's last message, a sharpshooter's
bullet laid him--dead--across the body of his chief. During this attack, and for some hours thereafter, the battle continued in
the valley below on a grander scale and with demon-like fury. Sickles' whole line was pressed back to the base
of the hill from which it had advanced in the morning. Sickles' leg was
shattered by a shell, necessitating amputation, while scores of his brave
officers, and thousands of his men, lay on the field of battle when the
struggle ceased at nightfall. This valley has been appropriately named the
"Valley of Death." Before the close of this main part of the second day's battle, there was
another clash of arms, fierce but of short duration, at the other extreme
of the line. Lee had ordered Ewell to attack Cemetery Hill and Culp's Hill
on the north, held by Slocum, who had been weakened by the sending of a
large portion of the Twelfth Corps to the assistance of the left wing. Ewell had three divisions, two of which were commanded by Generals Early
and Johnson. It was nearly sunset when he sent Early to attack Cemetery
Hill. Early was repulsed after an hour's bloody and desperate hand-to-hand
fight, in which muskets and bayonets, rammers, clubs, and stones were
used. Johnson's attack on Culp's Hill was more successful. After a severe
struggle of two or three hours General Greene, who alone of the Twelfth
Corps remained on the right, succeeded, after reenforcement, in driving
the right of Johnson's division away from its entrenchments, but the left
had no difficulty in taking possession of the abandoned works of Geary and
Ruger, now gone to Round Top and Rock Creek to assist the left wing. Thus closed the second day's battle at Gettysburg. The harvest of death
had been frightful. The Union loss during the two days had exceeded twenty
thousand men; the Confederate loss was nearly equal. The Confederate army
had gained an apparent advantage in penetrating the Union breastworks on
Culp's Hill. But the Union lines, except on Culp's Hill, were unbroken. On
the night of July 2d, Lee and his generals held a council of war and
decided to make a grand final assault on Meade's center the following day. His counsel was that
Lee withdraw to the mountains, compel Meade to follow, and then turn and
attack him. But Lee was encouraged by the arrival of Pickett's division
and of Stuart's cavalry, and Longstreet's objections were overruled. Meade
and his corps commanders had met and made a like decision--that there
should be a fight to the death at Gettysburg. That night a brilliant July moon shed its luster upon the ghastly field on
which thousands of men lay, unable to rise. Their last battle was over, and their spirits had fled to the great
Beyond. But there were great numbers, torn and gashed with shot and shell,
who were still alive and calling for water or for the kindly touch of a
helping hand. Here and there in the
moonlight little rescuing parties were seeking out whom they might succor. They carried many to the improvised hospitals, where the surgeons worked
unceasingly and heroically, and many lives were saved. All through the night the Confederates were massing artillery along the
crest of Seminary Ridge. The sound horses were carefully fed and watered,
while those killed or disabled were replaced by others. The ammunition was
replenished and the guns were placed in favorable positions and made ready
for their work of destruction. On the other side, the Federals were diligently laboring in the moonlight,
and ere the coming of the day they had planted batteries on the brow of
the hill above the town as far as Little Round Top. The coming of the
morning revealed the two parallel lines of cannon, a mile apart, which
signified only too well the story of what the day would bring forth. The people of Gettysburg, which lay almost between the armies, were
awakened on that fateful morning--July 3, 1863--by the roar of artillery
from Culp's Hill, around the bend toward Rock Creek. This knoll in the
woods had, as we have seen, been taken by Johnson's men the night before. When Geary and Ruger returned and found their entrenchments occupied by
the Confederates they determined to recapture them in the morning, and
began firing their guns at daybreak. Seven hours of fierce bombardment and
daring charges were required to regain them. Every rod of space was
disputed at the cost of many a brave man's life. At eleven o'clock this
portion of the Twelfth Corps was again in its old position. But the most desperate onset of the three days' battle was yet to
come--Pickett's charge on Cemetery Ridge--preceded by the heaviest
cannonading ever heard on the American continent. With the exception of the contest at Culp's Hill and a cavalry fight east
of Rock Creek, the forenoon of July 3d passed with only an occasional
exchange of shots at irregular intervals. At noon there was a lull, almost
a deep silence, over the whole field. It was the ominous calm that
precedes the storm. At one o'clock signal guns were fired on Seminary
Ridge, and a few moments later there was a terrific outburst from one
hundred and fifty Confederate guns, and the whole crest of the ridge, for
two miles, was a line of flame. The scores of batteries were soon enveloped in smoke, through which the
flashes of burning powder were incessant. The long line of Federal guns withheld their fire for some minutes, when
they burst forth, answering the thunder of those on the opposite hill. An
eye-witness declares that the whole sky seemed filled with screaming
shells, whose sharp explosions, as they burst in mid-air, with the
hurtling of the fragments, formed a running accompaniment to the deep,
tremendous roar of the guns. Many of the Confederate shots went wild, passing over the Union army and
plowing up the earth on the other side of Cemetery Ridge. But others were
better aimed and burst among the Federal batteries, in one of which
twenty-seven out of thirty-six horses were killed in ten minutes. The
Confederate fire seemed to be concentrated upon one point between Cemetery
Ridge and Little Round Top, near a clump of scrub oaks. Here the batteries
were demolished and men and horses were slain by scores. The spot has been
called "Bloody Angle." The Federal fire proved equally accurate and the destruction on Seminary
Ridge was appalling. For nearly two hours the hills shook with the
tremendous cannonading, when it gradually slackened and ceased. The Union
army now prepared for the more deadly charge of infantry which it felt was
sure to follow. As the cannon smoke drifted away from between
the lines fifteen thousand of Longstreet's corps emerged in grand columns
from the wooded crest of Seminary Ridge under the command of General
Pickett on the right and General Pettigrew on the left. Longstreet had
planned the attack with a view to passing around Round Top, and gaining it
by flank and reverse attack, but Lee, when he came upon the scene a few
moments after the final orders had been given, directed the advance to be
made straight toward the Federal main position on Cemetery Ridge. The charge was one of the most daring in warfare. The distance to the
Federal lines was a mile. For half the distance the troops marched gayly,
with flying banners and glittering bayonets. Then came the burst of
Federal cannon, and the Confederate ranks were torn with exploding shells. Pettigrew's columns began to waver, but the lines re-formed and marched
on. When they came within musket-range, Hancock's infantry opened a
terrific fire, but the valiant band only quickened its pace and returned
the fire with volley after volley. Pettigrew's troops succumbed to the
storm. For now the lines in blue were fast converging. Federal troops from
all parts of the line now rushed to the aid of those in front of Pickett. The batteries which had been sending shell and solid shot changed their
ammunition, and double charges of grape and canister were hurled into the
column as it bravely pressed into the sea of flame. The Confederates came
close to the Federal lines and paused to close their ranks. Each moment
the fury of the storm from the Federal guns increased. "Forward," again rang the command along the line of the Confederate front,
and the Southerners dashed on. The first line of the Federals was driven
back. A stone wall behind them gave protection to the next Federal force. Riflemen rose from behind and hurled a
death-dealing volley into the Confederate ranks. A defiant cheer answered
the volley, and the Southerners placed their battle-flags on the ramparts. General Armistead grasped the flag from the hand of a falling bearer, and
leaped upon the wall, waving it in triumph. Almost instantly he fell
among the Federal troops, mortally wounded. General Garnett, leading his
brigade, fell dead close to the Federal line. General Kemper sank,
wounded, into the arms of one of his men. Troops from all directions rushed upon
him. Clubbed muskets and barrel-staves now became weapons of warfare. The
Confederates began surrendering in masses and Pickett ordered a retreat. Yet the energy of the indomitable Confederates was not spent. Several
supporting brigades moved forward, and only succumbed when they
encountered two regiments of Stannard's Vermont brigade, and the fire of
fresh batteries. As the remnant of the gallant division returned to the works on Seminary
Ridge General Lee rode out to meet them. His
features gave no evidence of his disappointment. With hat in hand he
greeted the men sympathetically. "It was all my fault," he said. "Now help
me to save that which remains." The
losses of the two armies reached fifty thousand, about half on either
side. More than seven thousand men had fallen dead on the field of battle. The tide could rise no higher; from this point the ebb must begin. Not
only here, but in the West the Southern cause took a downward turn; for at
this very hour of Pickett's charge, Grant and Pemberton, a thousand miles
away, stood under an oak tree on the heights above the Mississippi and
arranged for the surrender of Vicksburg. Lee could do nothing but lead his army back to Virginia. The Federals
pursued but feebly. The Union victory was not a very decisive one, but,
supported as it was by the fall of Vicksburg, the moral effect on the
nation and on the world was great. It
required but little prophetic vision to foresee that the Republic would
survive the dreadful shock of arms. [Illustration: THE CRISIS BRINGS FORTH THE MAN

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] Major-General George Gordon Meade and Staff. Not men, but a man is what
counts in war, said Napoleon; and Lee had proved it true in many a bitter
lesson administered to the Army of the Potomac. At the end of June, 1863,
for the third time in ten months, that army had a new commander. Promptness and caution were equally imperative in that hour. Meade's
fitness for the post was as yet undemonstrated; he had been advanced from
the command of the Fifth Corps three days before the army was to engage in
its greatest battle. Lee must be turned back from Harrisburg and
Philadelphia and kept from striking at Baltimore and Washington, and the
somewhat scattered Army of the Potomac must be concentrated. In the very
first flush of his advancement, Meade exemplified the qualities of sound
generalship that placed his name high on the list of Federal commanders. [Illustration: ROBERT E. LEE IN 1863

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] It was with the gravest misgivings that Lee began his invasion of the
North in 1863. He was too wise a general not to realize that a crushing
defeat was possible. Yet, with Vicksburg already doomed, the effort to win
a decisive victory in the East was imperative in its importance. Magnificent was the courage and fortitude of Lee's maneuvering during that
long march which was to end in failure. Hitherto he had made every one of
his veterans count for two of their antagonists, but at Gettysburg the
odds had fallen heavily against him. Jackson, his resourceful ally, was no
more. Longstreet advised strongly against giving battle, but Lee
unwaveringly made the tragic effort which sacrificed more than a third of
his splendid army. [Illustration: HANCOCK, "THE SUPERB"

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] Every man in this picture was wounded at Gettysburg. Seated, is Winfield
Scott Hancock; the boy-general, Francis C. Barlow (who was struck almost
mortally), leans against the tree. The other two are General John Gibbon
and General David B. Birney. About four o'clock on the afternoon of July
1st a foam-flecked charger dashed up Cemetery Hill bearing General
Hancock. He had galloped thirteen miles to take command. Apprised of the
loss of Reynolds, his main dependence, Meade knew that only a man of vigor
and judgment could save the situation. He chose wisely, for Hancock was
one of the best all-round soldiers that the Army of the Potomac had
developed. It was he who re-formed the shattered corps and chose the
position to be held for the decisive struggle. [Illustration: MUTE PLEADERS IN THE CAUSE OF PEACE

COPYRIGHT, 1911, BY PATRIOT PUB. There was little time that could be employed by either side in caring for
those who fell upon the fields of the almost uninterrupted fighting at
Gettysburg. On the morning of the 4th, when Lee began to abandon his
position on Seminary Ridge, opposite the Federal right, both sides sent
forth ambulance and burial details to remove the wounded and bury the dead
in the torrential rain then falling. Under cover of the hazy atmosphere,
Lee was getting his whole army in motion to retreat. Many an unfinished
shallow grave, like the one above, had to be left by the Confederates. In
this lower picture some men of the Twenty-fourth Michigan infantry are
lying dead on the field of battle. This regiment--one of the units of the
Iron Brigade--left seven distinct rows of dead as it fell back from
battle-line to battle-line, on the first day. Three-fourths of its members
were struck down. [Illustration: MEN OF THE IRON BRIGADE]


[Illustration: THE FIRST DAY'S TOLL

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. The lives laid down by the blue-clad soldiers in the first day's fighting
made possible the ultimate victory at Gettysburg. The stubborn resistance
of Buford's cavalry and of the First and Eleventh Corps checked the
Confederate advance for an entire day. The delay was priceless; it enabled
Meade to concentrate his army upon the heights to the south of Gettysburg,
a position which proved impregnable. To a Pennsylvanian, General John F.
Reynolds, falls the credit of the determined stand that was made that day. Commanding the advance of the army, he promptly went to Buford's support,
bringing up his infantry and artillery to hold back the Confederates. [Illustration: McPHERSON'S WOODS]

At the edge of these woods General Reynolds was killed by a Confederate
sharpshooter in the first vigorous contest of the day. The woods lay
between the two roads upon which the Confederates were advancing from the
west, and General Doubleday (in command of the First Corps) was ordered to
take the position so that the columns of the foe could be enfiladed by the
infantry, while contending with the artillery posted on both roads. The
Iron Brigade under General Meredith was ordered to hold the ground at all
hazards. As they charged, the troops shouted: "If we can't hold it, where
will you find the men who can?" On they swept, capturing General Archer
and many of his Confederate brigade that had entered the woods from the
other side. As Archer passed to the rear, Doubleday, who had been his
classmate at West Point, greeted him with "Good morning! [Illustration: FEDERAL DEAD AT GETTYSBURG, JULY 1, 1863

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. All the way from McPherson's Woods back to Cemetery Hill lay the Federal
soldiers, who had contested every foot of that retreat until nightfall. The Confederates were massing so rapidly from the west and north that
there was scant time to bring off the wounded and none for attention to
the dead. There on the field lay the shoes so much needed by the
Confederates, and the grim task of gathering them began. The dead were
stripped of arms, ammunition, caps, and accoutrements as well--in fact, of
everything that would be of the slightest use in enabling Lee's poorly
equipped army to continue the internecine strife. It was one of war's
awful expedients. [Illustration: SEMINARY RIDGE, BEYOND GETTYSBURG]

Along this road the Federals retreated toward Cemetery Hill in the late
afternoon of July 1st. The success of McPherson's Woods was but temporary,
for the Confederates under Hill were coming up in overpowering numbers,
and now Ewell's forces appeared from the north. The first Corps, under
Doubleday, "broken and defeated but not dismayed," fell back, pausing now
and again to fire a volley at the pursuing Confederates. It finally joined
the Eleventh Corps, which had also been driven back to Cemetery Hill. Lee
was on the field in time to watch the retreat of the Federals, and advised
Ewell to follow them up, but Ewell (who had lost 3,000 men) decided upon
discretion. Night fell with the beaten Federals, reinforced by the Twelfth
Corps and part of the Third, facing nearly the whole of Lee's army. [Illustration: IN THE DEVIL'S DEN

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. Upon this wide, steep hill, about five hundred yards due west of Little
Round Top and one hundred feet lower, was a chasm named by the country
folk "the Devil's Den." When the position fell into the hands of the
Confederates at the end of the second day's fighting, it became the
stronghold of their sharpshooters, and well did it fulfill its name. It
was a most dangerous post to occupy, since the Federal batteries on the
Round Top were constantly shelling it in an effort to dislodge the hardy
riflemen, many of whom met the fate of the one in the picture. Their
deadly work continued, however, and many a gallant officer of the Federals
was picked off during the fighting on the afternoon of the second day. General Vincent was one of the first victims; General Weed fell likewise;
and as Lieutenant Hazlett bent over him to catch his last words, a bullet
through the head prostrated that officer lifeless on the body of his
chief. [Illustration: THE UNGUARDED LINK

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] Little Round Top, the key to the Federal left at Gettysburg, which they
all but lost on the second day--was the scene of hand-to-hand fighting
rarely equaled since long-range weapons were invented. Twice the
Confederates in fierce conflict fought their way near to this summit, but
were repulsed. Had they gained it, they could have planted artillery which
would have enfiladed the left of Meade's line, and Gettysburg might have
been turned into an overwhelming defeat. Beginning at the right, the
Federal line stretched in the form of a fish-hook, with the barb resting
on Culp's Hill, the center at the bend in the hook on Cemetery Hill, and
the left (consisting of General Sickles' Third Corps) forming the shank to
the southward as far as Round Top. On his own responsibility Sickles had
advanced a portion of his line, leaving Little Round Top unprotected. Upon
this advanced line of Sickles, at the Peach Orchard on the Emmitsburg
road, the Confederates fell in an effort to turn what they supposed to be
Meade's left flank. Only the promptness of General Warren, who discovered
the gap and remedied it in time, saved the key. [Illustration: THE HEIGHT OF THE BATTLE-TIDE

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] Near this gate to the local cemetery of Gettysburg there stood during the
battle this sign: "All persons found using firearms in these grounds will
be prosecuted with the utmost rigor of the law." Many a soldier must have
smiled grimly at these words, for this gateway became the key of the
Federal line, the very center of the cruelest use of firearms yet seen on
this continent. On the first day Reynolds saw the value of Cemetery Hill
in case of a retreat. Howard posted his reserves here, and Hancock greatly
strengthened the position. One hundred and fifty Confederate guns were
turned against it that last afternoon. In five minutes every man of the
Federals had been forced to cover; for an hour and a half the shells fell
fast, dealing death and laying waste the summer verdure in the little
graveyard. Up to the very guns of the Federals on Cemetery Hill, Pickett
led his devoted troops. At night of the 3d it was one vast
slaughter-field. On this eminence, where thousands were buried, was
dedicated the soldiers' National Cemetery. [Illustration: PICKETT--THE MARSHALL NEY OF GETTYSBURG]

The Now-or-never Charge of Pickett's Men. When the Confederate artillery
opened at one o'clock on the afternoon of July 3d, Meade and his staff
were driven from their headquarters on Cemetery Ridge. Nothing could live
exposed on that hillside, swept by cannon that were being worked as fast
as human hands could work them. It was the beginning of Lee's last effort
to wrest victory from the odds that were against him. Longstreet, on the
morning of the 3d, had earnestly advised against renewing the battle
against the Gettysburg heights. But Lee saw that in this moment the fate
of the South hung in the balance; that if the Army of Northern Virginia
did not win, it would never again become the aggressor. Pickett's
division, as yet not engaged, was the force Lee designated for the
assault; every man was a Virginian, forming a veritable Tenth Legion in
valor. Auxiliary divisions swelled the charging column to 15,000. John moved to the bedroom. In the
middle of the afternoon the Federal guns ceased firing. Twice Pickett asked of Longstreet if he should go
forward. "Sir, I shall lead my division
forward," said Pickett at last, and the heavy-hearted Longstreet bowed his
head. As the splendid column swept out of the woods and across the plain
the Federal guns reopened with redoubled fury. For a mile Pickett and his
men kept on, facing a deadly greeting of round shot, canister, and the
bullets of Hancock's resolute infantry. It was magnificent--but every one
of Pickett's brigade commanders went down and their men fell by scores and
hundreds around them. A hundred led by Armistead, waving his cap on his
sword-point, actually broke through and captured a battery, Armistead
falling beside a gun. Longstreet had been right
when he said: "There never was a body of fifteen thousand men who could
make that attack successfully." Before the converging Federals the thinned
ranks of Confederates drifted wearily back toward Seminary Ridge. Victory
for the South was not to be. [Illustration: MEADE'S HEADQUARTERS ON CEMETERY RIDGE

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. [Illustration: WHERE PICKETT CHARGED

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] The prelude to Pickett's magnificent charge was a sudden deluge of shells
from 150 long-range Confederate guns trained upon Cemetery Ridge. General
Meade and his staff were instantly driven from their headquarters (already
illustrated) and within five minutes the concentrated artillery fire had
swept every unsheltered position on Cemetery Ridge clear of men. In the
woods, a mile and a half distant, Pickett and his men watched the effect
of the bombardment, expecting the order to "Go Forward" up the <DW72>
(shown in the picture). The Federals had instantly opened with their
eighty available guns, and for three hours the most terrific artillery
duel of the war was kept up. Then the Federal fire slackened, as though
the batteries were silenced. The Confederates' artillery ammunition also
was now low. And at
Longstreet's reluctant nod the commander led his 14,000 Virginians across
the plain in their tragic charge up Cemetery Ridge. [Illustration: GENERAL L. A. ARMISTEAD, C. S. In that historic charge was Armistead, who achieved a momentary victory
and met a hero's death. On across the Emmitsburg road came Pickett's
dauntless brigades, coolly closing up the fearful chasms torn in their
ranks by the canister. Up to the fence held by Hays' brigade dashed the
first gray line, only to be swept into confusion by a cruel enfilading
fire. Then the brigades of Armistead and Garnett moved forward, driving
Hays' brigade back through the batteries on the crest. Despite the
death-dealing bolts on all sides, Pickett determined to capture the guns;
and, at the order, Armistead, leaping the fence and waving his cap on his
sword-point, rushed forward, followed by about a hundred of his men. Up to
the very crest they fought the Federals back, and Armistead, shouting,
"Give them the cold steel, boys!" For a moment the
Confederate flag waved triumphantly over the Federal battery. For a brief
interval the fight raged fiercely at close quarters. Armistead was shot
down beside the gun he had taken, and his men were driven back. Pickett,
as he looked around the top of the ridge he had gained, could see his men
fighting all about with clubbed muskets and even flagstaffs against the
troops that were rushing in upon them from all sides. Flesh and blood
could not hold the heights against such terrible odds, and with a heart
full of anguish Pickett ordered a retreat. The despairing Longstreet,
watching from Seminary Ridge, saw through the smoke the shattered remnants
drift sullenly down the <DW72> and knew that Pickett's glorious but costly
charge was ended. [Illustration: THE MAN WHO HELD THE CENTER

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] Headquarters of Brigadier-General Alexander S. Webb. It devolved upon the
man pictured here (booted and in full uniform, before his headquarters
tent to the left of the picture) to meet the shock of Pickett's great
charge. With four Pennsylvania regiments (the Sixty-Ninth, Seventy-First,
Seventy-Second, and One Hundred and Sixth) of Hancock's Second Corps, Webb
was equal to the emergency. Stirred to great deeds by the example of a
patriotic ancestry, he felt that upon his holding his position depended
the outcome of the day. His front had been the focus of the Confederate
artillery fire. Batteries to right and left of his line were practically
silenced. Young Lieutenant Cushing, mortally wounded, fired the last
serviceable gun and fell dead as Pickett's men came on. Cowan's First New
York Battery on the left of Cushing's used canister on the assailants at
less than ten yards. Webb at the head of the Seventy-Second Pennsylvania
fought back the on-rush, posting a line of slightly wounded in his rear. Webb himself fell wounded but his command checked the assault till Hall's
brilliant charge turned the tide at this point. [Illustration: MAJOR-GENERAL GEORGE ARMSTRONG CUSTER WITH GENERAL
PLEASONTON

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. The _beau sabreur_ of the Federal service is pictured here in his favorite
velvet suit, with General Alfred Pleasonton, who commanded the cavalry at
Gettysburg. This photograph was taken at Warrenton, Va., three months
after that battle. At the time this picture was taken, Custer was a
brigadier-general in command of the second brigade of the third division
of General Pleasonton's cavalry. General Custer's impetuosity finally cost
him his own life and the lives of his entire command at the hands of the
Sioux Indians June 25, 1876. Custer was born in 1839 and graduated at West
Point in 1861. As captain of volunteers he served with McClellan on the
Peninsula. In June, 1863, he was made brigadier-general of volunteers and
as the head of a brigade of cavalry distinguished himself at Gettysburg. Later he served with Sheridan in the Shenandoah, won honor at Cedar Creek,
and was brevetted major-general of volunteers on October 19, 1864. Under
Sheridan he participated in the battles of Five Forks, Dinwiddie Court
House, and other important cavalry engagements of Grant's last campaign. [Illustration: SUMTER

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] Searching all history for a parallel, it is impossible to find any
defenses of a beleaguered city that stood so severe a bombardment as did
this bravely defended and never conquered fortress of Sumter, in
Charleston Harbor. It is estimated that about eighty thousand projectiles
were discharged from the fleet and the marsh batteries, and yet
Charleston, with its battered water-front, was not abandoned until all
other Confederate positions along the Atlantic Coast were in Federal hands
and Sherman's triumphant army was sweeping in from the West and South. The
picture shows Sumter from the Confederate Fort Johnson. The powerful
batteries in the foreground played havoc with the Federal fleet whenever
it came down the main ship-channel to engage the forts. Protected by
almost impassable swamps, morasses, and a network of creeks to the
eastward, Fort Johnson held an almost impregnable position; and from its
protection by Cummings' Point, on which was Battery Gregg, the Federal
fleet could not approach nearer than two miles. Could it have been taken
by land assault or reduced by gun-fire, Charleston would have fallen. [Illustration: WHERE SHOT AND SHELL STRUCK SUMTER]

These views show the result of the bombardment from August 17 to 23, 1863. The object was to force the surrender of the fort and thus effect an
entrance into Charleston. The report of Colonel John W. Turner, Federal
chief of artillery runs: "The fire from the breaching batteries upon
Sumter was incessant, and kept up continuously from daylight till dark,
until the evening of the 23d.... The fire upon the gorge had, by the
morning of the 23d, succeeded in destroying every gun upon the parapet of
it. The parapet and ramparts of the gorge were completely demolished for
nearly the entire length of the face, and in places everything was swept
off down to the arches, the _debris_ forming an accessible ramp to the top
of the ruins. Nothing further being gained by a longer fire upon this
face, all the guns were directed this day upon the southeasterly flank,
and continued an incessant fire throughout the day. The demolition of the
fort at the close of the day's firing was complete, so far as its
offensive powers were considered." [Illustration: SOME OF THE 450 SHOT A DAY]

[Illustration: THE LIGHTHOUSE ABOVE THE DEBRIS]


[Illustration: THE PARROTT IN BATTERY STRONG

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] This 300-pounder rifle was directed against Fort Sumter and Battery
Wagner. The length of bore of the gun before it burst was 136 inches. It fired a projectile weighing 250 pounds, with a
maximum charge of powder of 25 pounds. The gun was fractured at the
twenty-seventh round by a shell bursting in the muzzle, blowing off about
20 inches of the barrel. After the bursting the gun was "chipped" back
beyond the termination of the fracture and afterwards fired 371 rounds
with as good results as before the injury. At the end of that time the
muzzle began to crack again, rendering the gun entirely useless. [Illustration: TWO PARROTTS IN BATTERY STEVENS

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. It was begun July 27,
1863. Most of the work was done at night, for the fire from the adjacent
Confederate forts rendered work in daylight dangerous. By August 17th,
most of the guns were in position, and two days later the whole series of
batteries "on the left," as they were designated, were pounding away at
Fort Sumter. [Illustration: IN CHARLESTON AFTER THE BOMBARDMENT

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. So long as the Confederate flag flew over the ramparts of Sumter,
Charleston remained the one stronghold of the South that was firmly held. It was lowered for an evacuation, not a
surrender. The story of Charleston's determined resistance did not end in
triumph for the South, but it did leave behind it a sunset glory, in which
the valor and dash of the Federal attack is paralleled by the heroism and
self-sacrifice of the Confederate defense, in spite of wreck and ruin. [Illustration: SCENE OF THE NIGHT ATTACK ON SUMTER, SEPTEMBER 8, 1863]

The lower picture was taken after the war, when relic-hunters had removed
the shells, and a beacon light had been erected where once stood the
parapet. On September 8, 1863, at the very position in these photographs,
the garrison repelled a bold assault with musketry fire alone, causing the
Federals severe loss. The flag of the Confederacy floated triumphantly
over the position during the whole of the long struggle. Every effort of
the Federals to reduce the crumbling ruins into submission was unavailing. It stood the continual bombardment of ironclads until it was nothing but a
mass of brickdust, but still the gallant garrison held it. It is strange
that despite the awful destruction the loss of lives within the fort was
few. For weeks the bombardment, assisted by the guns of the fleet, tore
great chasms in the parapet. Fort Sumter never fell, but was abandoned
only on the approach of Sherman's army. It had withstood continuous
efforts against it for 587 days. From April, 1863, to September of the
same year, the fortress was garrisoned by the First South Carolina
Artillery, enlisted as regulars. Afterward the garrison was made up of
detachments of infantry from Georgia, North Carolina, and South Carolina. Artillerists also served turns of duty during this period. [Illustration: COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] [Illustration: RALLYING THE LINE. _Painted by C. D. Graves._

  _Copyright, 1901, by Perrien-Keydel Co.,
  Detroit, Mich., U. S. A._]




CHICKAMAUGA--THE BLOODIEST CONFLICT IN THE WEST

    In its dimensions and its murderousness the battle of Chickamauga was
    the greatest battle fought by our Western armies, and one of the
    greatest of modern times. In our Civil War it was exceeded only by
    Gettysburg and the Wilderness; in European history we may compare with
    it such battles as Neerwinden, or Malplaquet, or Waterloo.--_John
    Fiske in "The Mississippi Valley in the Civil War. "_


The town of Chattanooga, Tennessee, lies in a great bend of the Tennessee
River and within a vast amphitheater of mountains, ranging in a general
southwesterly direction, and traversed at intervals by great depressions
or valleys. These passes form a natural gateway from the mid-Mississippi
valley to the seaboard States. To dislodge the Confederate army under
General Bragg from this natural fortress would remove the last barrier to
the invading Federals, and permit an easy entry upon the plains of
Georgia. The importance of this position was readily apparent to the
Confederate Government, and any approach by the Federal forces toward this
point was almost certain to be met by stubborn resistance. Rosecrans' forward movement from Murfreesboro, in the early summer of
1863, forced Bragg over the Cumberland Mountains and across the Tennessee. The Confederate leader destroyed the railroad bridge at Bridgeport and
entrenched himself in and around Chattanooga. The three Federal corps
under Crittenden, Thomas and McCook crossed the Tennessee without meeting
resistance, and began to endanger Bragg's lines of communication. But on
September 8th, before their moves had been accomplished, Bragg abandoned
his stronghold. Crittenden the next day marched around the north end of
Lookout and entered the town, while Hazen and Wagner crossed over from the
opposite bank of the Tennessee. Rosecrans believed that Bragg was in full retreat toward Rome, Georgia,
and Crittenden, leaving one brigade in Chattanooga, was ordered to pursue. Bragg encouraged his adversary in the belief that he was avoiding an
engagement and sent spies as deserters into the Federal ranks to narrate
the details of his flight. Meanwhile, he was concentrating at Lafayette,
about twenty-five miles south of Chattanooga. Hither General S. B.
Buckner, entirely too weak to cope with Burnside's heavy column
approaching from Kentucky, brought his troops from Knoxville. Breckinridge
and two brigades arrived from Mississippi, while twelve thousand of Lee's
veterans, under Lee's most trusted and illustrious lieutenant, Longstreet,
were hastening from Virginia to add their numbers to Bragg's Army of
Tennessee. The three corps of the Union army, as we have seen, were now separated
over a wide extent of territory by intervening ridges, so intent was
Rosecrans on intercepting the vanished Bragg. But the latter, by no means
vanished, and with his face toward Chattanooga, considered the position of
his antagonist and discovered his own army almost opposite the Federal
center. Crittenden was advancing toward Ringgold, and the remoteness of
Thomas' corps on his right precluded any immediate union of the Federal
forces. Bragg was quick to grasp the opportunity made by Rosecrans' division of
the army in the face of his opponent. He at once perceived the
possibilities of a master-stroke; to crush Thomas' advanced divisions with
an overwhelming force. The attempt failed, owing to a delay in the attack, which permitted the
endangered Baird and Negley to fall back. Bragg then resolved to throw
himself upon Crittenden, who had divided his corps. Polk was ordered to
advance upon that portion of it at Lee and Gordon's Mills, but when Bragg
came to the front September 13th, expecting to witness the annihilation
of the Twenty-first Corps, he found to his bitter disappointment that the
bishop-general had made no move and that Crittenden had reunited his
divisions and was safe on the west bank of the Chickamauga. Thus his
splendid chances of breaking up the Army of the Cumberland were ruined. When Bragg's position became known to Rosecrans, great was his haste to
effect the concentration of his army. Couriers dashed toward Alpine with
orders for McCook to join Thomas with the utmost celerity. The former
started at once, shortly after midnight on the 13th, in response to
Thomas's urgent call. It was a real race of life and death, attended by
the greatest hardships. Ignorant of the roads, McCook submitted his troops
to a most exhausting march, twice up and down the mountain, fifty-seven
miles of the most arduous toil, often dragging artillery up by hand and
letting it down steep declines by means of ropes. But he closed up with
Thomas on the 17th, and the Army of the Cumberland was saved from its
desperate peril. Crittenden's corps now took position at Lee and Gordon's Mills on the left
bank of Chickamauga Creek, and the Federal troops were all within
supporting distance. In the Indian tongue Chickamauga means "The River of
Death," a name strangely prophetic of that gigantic conflict soon to be
waged by these hostile forces throughout this beautiful and heretofore
peaceful valley. The Confederate army, its corps under Generals Polk, D. H. Hill, and
Buckner, was stationed on the east side of the stream, its right wing
below Lee and Gordon's Mills, and the left extending up the creek toward
Lafayette. On the Federal side Thomas was moved to the left, with
Crittenden in the center and McCook on the right. Their strength has been
estimated at fifty-five to sixty-nine thousand men. On the 18th,
Longstreet's troops were arriving from Virginia, and by the morning of the
19th the greater part of the Confederate army had crossed the
Chickamauga. The two mighty armies were now face to face, and none could
doubt that the impending struggle would be attended by frightful loss to
both sides. It was Bragg's intention to send Polk, commanding the right wing, in a
flanking movement against the Federal left under Thomas, and thus
intervene between it and Chattanooga. The first encounter, at 10 o'clock
in the morning of the 19th, resulted in a Confederate repulse, but fresh
divisions were constantly pushed forward under the deadly fire of the
Federal artillery. The Federals were gradually forced back by the
incessant charge of the Confederates; but assailed and assailant fought
with such great courage and determination that any decided advantage was
withheld from either. Meanwhile, the Federal right was hard pressed by
Hood, commanding Longstreet's corps, and a desperate battle ensued along
the entire line. It seemed, however, more like a struggle between separate
divisions than the clash of two great armies. When night descended the
Federals had been forced back from the creek, but the result had been
indecisive. Disaster to the Union army had been averted by the use of powerful
artillery when the infantry seemed unable to withstand the onslaught. Rosecrans had assumed the defensive, and his troops had so far receded as
to enable the Confederates to form their lines on all the territory fought
over on that day. During the night preparations were made in both camps
for a renewal of the battle on the following morning, which was Sunday. A
fresh disposition of the troops was made by both leaders. Near midnight
General Longstreet arrived on the field, and was once placed in command of
the Confederate left, Polk retaining the right. Not all of Longstreet's
troops arrived in time for the battle, but Bragg's force has been
estimated at fifty-one to seventy-one thousand strong. Thomas was given command of the Union left, with McCook at his right,
while Crittenden's forces occupied the center, but to the rear of both
Thomas and McCook. Thomas had spent the night in throwing up breastworks
on the brow of Snodgrass Hill, as it was anticipated that the Confederates
would concentrate their attack upon his position. Hostilities began with a general movement of the Confederate right wing in
an attempt to flank the Union left. General Bragg had ordered Polk to
begin the attack at daybreak, but it was nearly ten o'clock in the morning
before Breckinridge's division, supported by General Cleburne, advanced
upon Thomas' entrenchments. Fighting desperately, the Confederates did not
falter under the heavy fire of the Federals, and it seemed as if the
latter must be driven from their position. Rosecrans, in response to
urgent requests for reenforcements, despatched troops again and again to
the aid of Thomas, and the assault was finally repulsed. Cleburne's
division was driven back with heavy loss, and Breckinridge, unable to
retain any advantage, was forced to defend his right, which was being
seriously menaced. The battle at this point had been desperately waged,
both sides exhibiting marked courage and determination. As on the previous
day, the Confederates had been the aggressors, but the Federal troops had
resisted all attempts to invade their breastworks. However, the fortunes of battle were soon to incline to the side of the
Southern army. Bragg sent Stewart's division forward, and it pressed
Reynolds' and Brannan's men back to their entrenchments. Rosecrans sent
Wood word to close up on Reynolds. Through some misunderstanding in giving
or interpreting this order, General Wood withdrew his division from its
position on the right of Brannan. By this movement a large opening was
left almost in the center of the battle-line. Johnson's, Hindman's, and
Kershaw's divisions rushed into the gap and fell upon the Union right and
center with an impetus that was irresistible. The Confederate general,
Bushrod Johnson, has given us an unforgetable picture of the thrilling
event: "The resolute and impetuous charge, the rush of our heavy columns
sweeping out from the shadow and gloom of the forest into the open fields
flooded with sunlight, the glitter of arms, the onward dash of artillery
and mounted men, the retreat of the foe, the shouts of the hosts of our
army, the dust, the smoke, the noise of fire-arms--of whistling balls, and
grape-shot, and of bursting shell--made up a battle-scene of unsurpassed
grandeur. Here, General Hood gave me the last order I received from him on
the field, 'Go ahead and keep ahead of everything.'" A moment later, and
Hood fell, severely wounded, with a minie ball in his thigh. Wood's right brigade was shattered even before it had cleared the opening. Sheridan's entire division, and part of Davis' and Van Cleve's, were
driven from the field. Longstreet now gave a fine exhibition of his
military genius. The orders of battle were to separate the two wings of
the opposing army. But with the right wing of his opponents in hopeless
ruin, he wheeled to the right and compelled the further withdrawal of
Federal troops in order to escape being surrounded. The brave
soldier-poet, William H. Lytle, fell at the head of his brigade as he
strove to re-form his line. McCook and Crittenden were unable, in spite of
several gallant efforts, to rally their troops and keep back the onrushing
heroes of Stone's River and Bull Run. The broken mass fled in confusion
toward Chattanooga, carrying with it McCook, Crittenden, and Rosecrans. The latter telegraphed to Washington that his army had been beaten. In
this famous charge the Confederates took several thousand prisoners and
forty pieces of artillery. Flushed with victory, the Confederates now concentrated their attack upon
Thomas, who thus far, on Horseshoe Ridge and its spurs, had repelled all
attempts to dislodge him. The Confederates, with victory within their
grasp, and led by the indomitable Longstreet, swarmed up the <DW72>s in
great numbers, but they were hurled back with fearful slaughter. Thomas
was looking anxiously for Sheridan, whom, as he knew, Rosecrans had
ordered with two brigades to his support. But in Longstreet's rout of the
right wing Sheridan, with the rest, had been carried on toward
Chattanooga, and he found himself completely cut off from Thomas, as the
Confederates were moving parallel to him. Yet the indomitable Sheridan, in
spite of his terrible experience of the morning, did not give up the
attempt. Foiled in his efforts to get through McFarland's Gap, he moved
quickly on Rossville and came down the Lafayette road toward Thomas' left
flank. Meanwhile, advised by the incessant roar of musketry, General Gordon
Granger, in command of the reserve corps near Rossville, advanced rapidly
with his fresh troops. Acting with promptness and alacrity under orders,
Granger sent Steedman to Thomas' right. Directly across the line of Thomas' right was a ridge, on which Longstreet
stationed Hindman with a large command, ready for an attack on Thomas'
flank--a further and terrible menace to the nearly exhausted general, but
it was not all. In the ridge was a small gap, and through this Kershaw was
pouring his division, intent on getting to Thomas' rear. Rosecrans thus
describes the help afforded to Thomas: "Steedman, taking a regimental
color, led the column. Swift was the charge and terrible the conflict, but
the enemy was broken." The fighting grew fiercer, and at intervals was almost hand to hand. The
casualties among the officers, who frequently led their troops in person,
were mounting higher and higher as the moments passed. All the afternoon
the assaults continued, but the Union forces stood their ground. Ammunition ran dangerously low, but Steedman had brought a small supply,
and when this was distributed each man had about ten rounds. Finally, as
the sun was setting in the west, the Confederate troops advanced in a
mighty concourse. The combined forces of Kershaw, Law, Preston, and
Hindman once more rushed forward, gained possession of their lost ridge at
several points, but were unable to drive their attack home. In many places
the Union lines stood firm and both sides rested in the positions taken. The onslaught on the Federal left of the
battlefield was one of the heaviest attacks made on a single point during
the war. History records no grander spectacle than Thomas' stand at Chickamauga. He
was ever afterwards known as "The Rock of Chickamauga." Under the cover of
darkness, Thomas, having received word from Rosecrans to withdraw, retired
his army in good order to Rossville, and on the following day rejoined
Rosecrans in Chattanooga. The battle of Chickamauga, considering the
forces engaged, was one of the most destructive of the Civil War. The
Union army lost approximately sixteen thousand men, and while the loss to
the Confederate army is not definitely known, it was probably nearly
eighteen thousand. The personal daring and tenacious courage displayed in
the ranks of both armies have never been excelled on any battlefield. The
Confederate generals, Helm, Deshler, and Preston Smith were killed; Adams,
Hood, Brown, Gregg, Clayton, Hindman, and McNair were wounded. The battle is generally considered a Confederate victory,
and yet, aside from the terrible loss of human life, no distinct advantage
accrued to either side. The Federal army retained possession of
Chattanooga, but the Confederates had for the time checked the Army of the
Cumberland from a further occupation of Southern soil. It is a singular coincidence that the generals-in-chief of both armies
exercised but little supervision over the movements of their respective
troops. The brunt of the battle fell, for the most part, upon the
commanders of the wings. To the subordinate generals on each side were
awarded the highest honors. Longstreet, because of his eventful charge,
which swept the right wing of the Union army from the field, was
proclaimed the victor of Chickamauga; and to General Thomas, who by his
firmness and courage withstood the combined attack of the Confederate
forces when disaster threatened on every side, is due the brightest
laurels from the adherents of the North. [Illustration: THE CONFEDERATE LEADER AT CHICKAMAUGA

COLLECTION OF FREDERICK H. MESERVE

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] Major-General Braxton Bragg, C. S. A. Born, 1815; West Point, 1837; Died,
1876. Bragg's name before 1861 was perhaps better known in military annals
than that of any other Southern leader because of his brilliant record in
the Mexican War. In the Civil War he distinguished himself first at Shiloh
and by meritorious services thereafter. But his delays rendered him
scarcely a match for Rosecrans, to say nothing of Grant and Sherman. Flanked out of two strong positions, he missed the opportunity presented
by Rosecrans' widely separated forces and failed to crush the Army of the
Cumberland in detail, as it advanced to the battle of Chickamauga. The
error cost the Confederates the loss of Tennessee, eventually. [Illustration: THOMAS--THE "ROCK OF CHICKAMAUGA" WHO BECAME THE "SLEDGE OF
NASHVILLE"

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] Major-General George Henry Thomas, Virginia-born soldier loyal to the
Union; commended for gallantry in the Seminole War, and for service in
Mexico; won the battle of Mill Spring, January 19, 1862; commanded the
right wing of the Army of the Tennessee against Corinth and at Perryville,
and the center at Stone's River. Only his stability averted overwhelming
defeat for the Federals at Chickamauga. At Lookout Mountain and Missionary
Ridge he was a host in himself. After Sherman had taken Atlanta he sent
Thomas back to Tennessee to grapple with Hood. How he crushed Hood by his
sledge-hammer blows is told in the story of "Nashville." Thomas, sitting
down in Nashville, bearing the brunt of Grant's impatience, and ignoring
completely the proddings from Washington to advance before he was ready,
while he waited grimly for the psychological moment to strike the oncoming
Confederate host under Hood, is one of the really big dramatic figures of
the entire war. It has been well said of Thomas that every promotion he
received was a reward of merit; and that during his long and varied career
as a soldier no crisis ever arose too great for his ability. [Illustration: BEFORE CHICKAMAUGA--IN THE RUSH OF EVENTS

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] Rarely does the camera afford such a perfectly contemporaneous record of
the march of events so momentous. This photograph shows the hotel at
Stevenson, Alabama, during the Union advance that ended in Chickamauga. Sentinels are parading the street in front of the hotel, several horses
are tied to the hotel posts, and the officers evidently have gone into the
hotel headquarters. General Alexander McDowell McCook, commanding the old
Twentieth Army Corps, took possession of the hotel as temporary
headquarters on the movement of the Army of the Cumberland from Tullahoma. On August 29, 1863, between Stevenson and Caperton's Ferry, on the
Tennessee River, McCook gathered his boats and pontoons, hidden under the
dense foliage of overhanging trees, and when ready for his crossing
suddenly launched them into and across the river. Thence the troops
marched over Sand Mountain and at length into Lookout Valley. During the
movements the army was in extreme peril, for McCook was at one time three
days' march from Thomas, so that Bragg might have annihilated the
divisions in detail. Finally the scattered corps were concentrated along
Chickamauga Creek, where the bloody struggle of September 19th and 20th
was so bravely fought. [Illustration: ON THE WAY TO CHICKAMAUGA

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] This solitary observer, if he was standing here September 20, 1863,
shortly before this was photographed, certainly gazed at the base of the
hill to the left. For through the pass called Rossville Gap a column in
blue was streaming--Steedman's Division of the Reserve Corps, rushing to
aid Thomas, so sore pressed at Chickamauga. Those <DW72>s by Chickamauga
Creek witnessed the deadliest battle in the West and the highest in
percentage of killed and wounded of the entire war. It was fought as a
result of Rosecrans' attempt to maneuver Bragg out of Chattanooga. The
Federal army crossed the Tennessee River west of the city, passed through
the mountain-ranges, and came upon Bragg's line of communications. Finding
his position untenable, the Southern leader moved southward and fell upon
the united forces of Rosecrans along Chickamauga Creek. The vital point in
the Federal line was the left, held by Thomas. Should that give way, the
army would be cut off from Chattanooga, with no base to fall back on. The
heavy fighting of September 19th showed that Bragg realized the situation. For a time, the Union army was
driven back. But at nightfall Thomas had regained the lost ground. He
re-formed during the night in order to protect the road leading into
Chattanooga. Since the second day was foggy till the middle of the
forenoon, the fighting was not renewed till late. About noon a break was
made in the right of the Federal battle-line, into which the eager
Longstreet promptly hurled his men. Colonel Dodge writes: "Everything
seems lost. The entire right of the army, with Rosecrans and his staff, is
driven from the field in utter rout. But, unknown even to the commanding
general, Thomas, the Rock of Chickamauga, stands there at bay, surrounded,
facing two to one. Heedless of the wreck of one-half the army, he knows
not how to yield." [Illustration: THE TOO-ADVANCED POSITION

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] Crawfish Spring, to the South of the Chickamauga Battle-field. Rosecrans,
in concentrating his troops on the 18th of September, was still possessed
of the idea that Bragg was covering his retreat upon his railroad
connections at Dalton. Instead, the Confederate commander had massed his
forces on the other side of Chickamauga and was only awaiting the arrival
of Longstreet to assume the aggressive. On the morning of the 19th,
McCook's right wing at Crawfish Spring was strongly threatened by the
Confederates, while the real attack was made against the left in an effort
to turn it and cut Rosecrans off from a retreat upon Chattanooga. All day
long, brigade after brigade was marched from the right of the Federal line
in order to extend the left under Thomas and withstand this flanking
movement. Even after nightfall, Thomas, trying to re-form his lines and
carry them still farther to the left for the work of the morrow, brought
on a sharp conflict in the darkness. The Confederates had been held back,
but at heavy cost. That night, at the Widow Glenn's house, Rosecrans
consulted his generals. The exhausted Thomas, when roused from sleep for
his opinion, invariably answered, "I would strengthen the left." There
seemed as yet to be no crisis at hand, and the council closed with a song
by the debonair McCook. [Illustration: WHERE THE LINES WERE SWEPT BACK

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] Lee & Gordon's mill, seen in the picture, marked the extreme right of the
Federal line on the second day at Chickamauga. From it, northward, were
posted the commands of McCook and Crittenden, depleted by the detachments
of troops the day before to strengthen the left. All might have gone well
if the main attack of the Confederates had continued to the left, as
Rosecrans expected. But hidden in the woods, almost within a stone's throw
of the Federal right on that misty morning, was the entire corps of
Longstreet, drawn up in columns of brigades at half distance--"a
masterpiece of tactics," giving space for each column to swing right or
left. Seizing a momentous opportunity which would have lasted but thirty
minutes at the most, Longstreet hurled them through a gap which, owing to
a misunderstanding, had been left open, and the entire Federal right was
swept from the field. [Illustration: THE HOUSE WHENCE HELP CAME

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] Here, at his headquarters, holding the Federal line of retreat at
Rossville Gap (the Confederate objective in the battle), General Gordon
Granger heard with increasing anxiety the sounds of the conflict, three
miles away, growing more and more ominous. Finally, in disobedience of
orders, he set in motion his three brigades to the relief of Thomas,
pushing forward two of them under Steedman. These arrived upon the field
early in the afternoon, the most critical period of the battle, as
Longstreet charged afresh on Thomas' right and rear. Seizing a
battle-flag, Steedman (at the order of General Granger) led his command in
a counter-charge which saved the Army of the Cumberland. This old house at
Rossville was built by John Ross, a chief of the Cherokee Indians, and he
lived in it till 1832, giving his name to the hamlet. Half-breed
descendants of the Cherokees who had intermarried with both whites and
<DW64>s were numerous in the vicinity of Chickamauga, and many of them
fought with their white neighbors on the Confederate side. THE BATTLES ON LOOKOUT MOUNTAIN AND MISSIONARY RIDGE

    AFTER CHATTANOOGA: "The Confederate lines... could not be rebuilt. The blue-crested
    flood which had broken these lines was not disappearing. The fountains
    which supplied it were exhaustless. It was still coming with an ever
    increasing current, swelling higher and growing more resistless. This
    triune disaster [Vicksburg, Gettysburg, Missionary Ridge] was
    especially depressing to the people because it came like a blight upon
    their hopes which had been awakened by recent Confederate
    victories." --_General John B. Gordon, C. S. A., in "Reminiscences of
    the Civil War. "_


Following the defeat of Rosecrans' army at Chickamauga in September 1863
Bragg at once took strong positions on Missionary Ridge and Lookout
Mountain. From these heights he was able to besiege the entire Army of the
Cumberland in Chattanooga and obstruct the main arteries of supply to the
Federal troops. Rosecrans was forced to abandon the route along the south
bank of the Tennessee River, which led from Bridgeport, in Alabama, and to
depend exclusively upon a long and mountainous wagon road on the north
side of the river for the transportation of supplies. The Confederate
cavalry, crossing the Tennessee above Chattanooga, fell upon the trains
entangled in the mud of the Sequatchie valley, destroying in one day three
hundred wagons, and killing or capturing about eighteen hundred mules. Within a short time the wisdom of Bragg's plan became apparent; famine
threatened the Union army and several thousand horses and mules had
already died from starvation. By his relentless vigil, the Confederate
leader seemed destined to achieve a greater victory over his opponent than
had hitherto attended his efforts in actual conflict. Meanwhile, a complete reorganization of the Federal forces in the West was
effected. Under the title of the Military Division of the Mississippi, the
Departments of the Ohio, the Cumberland, and the Tennessee were united
with Grant as general commanding, and Rosecrans was replaced by Thomas at
the head of the Army of the Cumberland. A hurried concentration of the Federal forces was now ordered by General
Halleck. Hooker with fifteen thousand men of the Army of the Potomac came
rapidly by rail to Bridgeport. Sherman, with a portion of his army, about
twenty thousand strong, was summoned from Vicksburg and at once embarked
in steamers for Memphis. General Grant decided to assume personal charge
of the Federal forces; but before he reached his new command, Thomas, ably
assisted by his chief engineer, General W. F. Smith, had begun to act on a
plan which Rosecrans had conceived, and which proved in the end to be a
brilliant conception. This was to seize a low range of hills known as
Raccoon Mountain on the peninsula made by a bend of the river, on its
south side and west of Chattanooga, and establish a wagon road to Kelly's
Ferry, a point farther down the river to which supplies could be brought
by boat from Bridgeport, and at the same time communication effected with
Hooker. A direct line was not only secured to Bridgeport, but Hooker advanced with
a portion of his troops into Lookout Valley and after a short but decisive
skirmish drove the Confederates across Lookout Creek, leaving his forces
in possession of the hills he had gained. The route was now opened between
Bridgeport and Brown's Ferry; abundant supplies were at once available and
the Army of the Cumberland relieved of its perilous position. Unlike the condition which had prevailed at Chickamauga, reenforcements
from all sides were hastening to the aid of Thomas' army; Hooker was
already on the ground; Sherman was advancing rapidly from Memphis, and he
arrived in person on November 15th, while Burnside's forces at Knoxville
offered protection to the left flank of the Federal army. The disposition of the Confederate troops at this time was a formidable
one; the left flank rested on the northern end of Lookout Mountain and the
line extended a distance of twelve miles across Chattanooga Valley to
Missionary Ridge. This position was further strengthened by entrenchments
throughout the lowlands. Despite the danger which threatened his army from
the converging Union forces, General Bragg determined to attack Burnside
and despatched Longstreet with twenty thousand of his best troops to
Knoxville. His army materially weakened, the Confederate general continued
to hold the same extended position, although his combined force was
smaller than had opposed Rosecrans alone at Chickamauga. On the 23d of November, after a long and fatiguing march over roads almost
impassable by reason of continuous rains, Sherman crossed the Tennessee by
the pontoon bridge at Brown's Ferry, recrossed it above Chattanooga, and
was assigned a position to the left of the main army near the mouth of
Chickamauga Creek. Grant had now some eighty thousand men, of whom sixty
thousand were on the scene of the coming battle, and, though fearful lest
Burnside should be dislodged from his position at Knoxville, he would not
be diverted from his purpose of sweeping the Confederates from the front
of Chattanooga. It had been Grant's plan to attack on the 24th, but
information reached him that Bragg was preparing a retreat. He, therefore,
on the 23d, ordered Thomas to advance upon Bragg's center. Preparations for movement were made in full view of the Confederates; from
the appearance of the troops, clad in their best uniforms, the advance
line of the Southern army was content to watch this display, in the belief
that the maneuvering army was parading in review. Suddenly, the peaceful
pageant turned into a furious charge, before which the Confederate
pickets, taken by surprise, retreated from the first line of earthworks,
and Thomas, with little loss to either side, captured Orchard Knob,
between Chattanooga and Missionary Ridge. From this point, which was
almost a mile in advance of the position occupied during the morning,
Grant directed the movements of his army on the following day. The Federal position was of less extent than that occupied by the
Confederates. Sherman was in command of the left wing, while Thomas held
the center, and "Fighting Joe" Hooker, with the Union right in Lookout
Valley, threatened Lookout Mountain. The plan of battle was for Sherman to
engage the Confederate right and sever communications between Bragg and
Longstreet; Hooker was to carry out an assault on the Southern left flank,
and at the same time maintain connection with Bridgeport. With both wings
assailed by a superior force, it was believed that Bragg must reenforce
these positions and permit Thomas, with overwhelming numbers, to
concentrate upon the center. On the 24th, two distinct movements were in progress. Sherman met with but
little opposition in his initial attack upon the Confederate right and
promptly seized and occupied the north end of Missionary Ridge. The
Confederates, late in the afternoon, fought desperately to regain the hill
but were finally repulsed, and Sherman fortified the position he had
gained. In the mean time, Hooker, early in the day, had begun his
operations against Lookout Mountain. Standing like a lone sentinel above
the surrounding valleys, its steep, rocky, and deeply furrowed <DW72>s,
rising into a high, palisaded crest, frowned defiance upon the advancing
troops, while a well-constructed line of defenses completed the imposing
barrier. Hooker had in addition to his own troops a division of Sherman's army
(Osterhaus') which, owing to damage to the pontoon bridge at Brown's
Ferry, had been prevented from joining its own leader. As ordered by
Hooker, General Geary took his division up the valley to Wauhatchie,
crossed the creek and marched down the east bank, sweeping the
Confederate outposts before him. The remainder of the command got across
by bridges lower down. Gaining the <DW72>s of the mountain the Federal
troops rushed on in their advance. From the high palisaded summit,
invisible in the low-hanging clouds, the guns of General Stevenson's
brigades poured an iron deluge upon them. But on they went, climbing over
ledges and boulders, up hill and down, while the soldiers of the South
with musket and cannon tried in vain to check them. Position after
position was abandoned to the onrushing Federals, and by noon Geary's
advanced troops had rounded the north <DW72> of the mountain and passed
from the sight of General Hooker, who was watching the contest from a
vantage point to the west. Grant and Thomas from the headquarters on
Orchard Knob were likewise eager witnesses of the struggle, although the
haze was so dense that they caught a glimpse only now and then as the
clouds would rise. Reenforcements came to the Confederates and they availed nothing. Geary's
troops had been ordered to halt when they reached the foot of the
palisades, but fired by success they pressed impetuously forward. From its
higher position at the base of the cliff Cobham's brigade showered volley
after volley upon the Confederate main line of defense, while that of
Ireland gradually rolled up the flank. The Federal batteries on Moccasin
Point across the river were doing what they could to clear the mountain. The Southerners made a last stand in their walls and pits around the
Craven house, but were finally driven in force over rocks and precipices
into Chattanooga Valley. Such was the "battle in the clouds," a wonderful spectacle denied the
remainder of Hooker's troops holding Lookout Valley. That general says,
"From the moment we had rounded the peak of the mountain it was only from
the roar of battle and the occasional glimpses our comrades in the valley
could catch of our lines and standards that they knew of the strife or
its progress, and when from these evidences our true condition was
revealed to them their painful anxiety yielded to transports of joy which
only soldiers can feel in the earliest moments of dawning victory." By two in the afternoon the clouds had settled completely into the valley
and the ensuing darkness put an end to further operations. Hooker
established and strengthened a new position and waited for reenforcements,
which General Carlin brought from Chattanooga at five o'clock. Until after
midnight an irregular fire was kept up, but the Confederates could not
break the new line. Before dawn General Stevenson abandoned the summit,
leaving behind twenty thousand rations and the camp equipage of his three
brigades. Hooker, anticipating this move, sent several detachments to
scale the palisades. A party of six men from the Eighth Kentucky regiment,
by means of ladders, was the first to reach the summit, and the waving
Stars and Stripes greeted the rising sun of November 25th on Lookout
Mountain, amid the wild and prolonged cheers of "Fighting Joe's" valiant
troops. The fighting of Sherman and Hooker on the 24th secured to Grant's army a
distinct advantage in position. From the north end of Lookout Mountain
across Chattanooga Valley to the north end of Missionary Ridge the Union
forces maintained an unbroken front. The morning of the 25th dawned cold, and an impenetrable mist which lay
deep in the valleys was soon driven away. From Orchard Knob, a point
almost in the center of the united Federal host, General Grant watched the
preparations for the battle. At sunrise, Sherman's command was in motion. In his front, an open space intervened between his position and a ridge
held by the Confederates, while just beyond rose a much higher hill. Toward the first ridge the attacking column, under General Corse, advanced
rapidly and in full view of the foe. For a time it seemed as if the
Confederates must recede before the terrific onslaught, but the advance
was abruptly checked after a very close and stubborn struggle, when
within a short distance of the entrenchment. Unmindful of the numbers which opposed him, General Hardee not only
succeeded in repulsing the attack, but, assuming the offensive, drove back
the forces under General John E. Smith, who had sought to turn his left,
and captured several hundred prisoners. The Federals, quickly re-forming
their lines, renewed the assault and for several hours the fighting was
desperate on both sides. A general advance of the Northern forces had been
withheld, awaiting the arrival of Hooker who, under orders from Grant, was
sweeping down Chickamauga Valley, and was to operate against the
Confederate left and rear, in the expectation that Bragg would further
weaken his line by massing at those points. But Hooker's army had been
delayed several hours by repairs to the bridge crossing Chattanooga Creek. Although Sherman had failed in his attempt to turn the Confederate right
he had forced Bragg to draw heavily upon his center for reenforcements. Grant, satisfied that Hooker was not far off, ordered the signal--six guns
fired in rapid succession from the battery on Orchard Knob--for a general
advance of Thomas' army upon the Confederate center. It was now three o'clock in the afternoon. The four division commanders of
the Army of the Cumberland, Sheridan, Wood, Baird, and Johnson, gave the
word to advance. Between Orchard Knob and the base of Missionary Ridge, a
mile away, is a broad valley covered for the most part with heavy timber. This had to be crossed before the entrenchments at the foot of the hill
could be assaulted. Scarcely were the Cumberland troops in motion when
fifty pieces of artillery on the crest of Missionary Ridge opened a
terrific fire upon them. But the onward rush of the Federals was not
checked in the slightest degree. The line of entrenchments at the base was
carried with little opposition. Most of Breckinridge's men abandoned the
ditches as the Federal skirmishers approached and sought refuge up the
hill, breaking and throwing into confusion other troops as they passed
through. At the foot of Missionary Ridge Thomas' army had reached its goal. But, as General Wood has related, "the
enthusiasm and impetuosity of the troops were such that those who first
reached the entrenchments at the base of the ridge bounded over them and
pressed on up the ascent.... Moreover the entrenchments were no protection
against the artillery on the ridge. To remain would be destruction--to
return would be both expensive in life, and disgraceful. Officers and men,
all seemed impressed with this truth.... Without waiting for an order the
vast mass pressed forward in the race for glory, each man anxious to be
the first on the summit.... Artillery and musketry could not check the
impetuous assault. To have done so would
have been ruinous. Little was left to the commanders of the troops than to
cheer on the foremost--to encourage the weaker of limb and to sustain the
very few who seemed to be faint-hearted." Midway up the <DW72> was a small line of rifle-pits, but these proved of no
use in stemming the Federal tide. In the immediate front, however, Major
Weaver of the Sixtieth North Carolina rallied a sufficient number of the
demoralized Confederates to send a well-directed and effective fire upon
the advancing troops. At this point the first line of oncoming Federals
was vigorously repulsed, and thrown back to the vacated Confederate
trenches. General Bragg, noticing this, rode along the ridge to spread his
good news among the troops, but he had not gone far when word was brought
that the right flank was broken and that the Federal standard had been
seen on the summit. A second and a third flag appeared in quick
succession. Bragg sent General Bate to drive the foe back, but the
disaster was so great that the latter was unable to repair it. Even the
artillery had abandoned the infantry. The Confederate flank had gone, and
within an hour of the start from Orchard Knob the crest of Missionary
Ridge was occupied by Federal troops. He went
down the eastern <DW72>, driving all in front of him toward Chickamauga
Creek. On a more easterly ridge he rested until midnight, when he advanced
to the creek and took many prisoners and stores. While the Army of the Cumberland accomplished these things, Hooker was
advancing his divisions at charging pace from the south. Cruft was on the
crest, Osterhaus in the eastern valley, and Geary in the western--all
within easy supporting distance. Before Cruft's onrush the left wing of
Bragg's army was scattered in all directions from the ridge. Many ran down
the eastern <DW72> into Osterhaus' column and the very few who chose a way
of flight to the west, were captured by Geary. The bulk of them, however,
fell back from trench to trench upon the crest until finally, as the sun
was sinking, they found themselves surrounded by Johnson's division of the
Army of the Cumberland. Such was the fate of Stewart's division; only a
small portion of it got away. On the Confederate right Hardee held his own against Sherman, but with the
left and center routed and in rapid flight Bragg realized the day was
lost. He could do nothing but cover Breckinridge's retreat as best he
might and order Hardee to retire across Chickamauga Creek. Bragg's army had been wholly
defeated, and, after being pursued for some days, it found a resting place
at Dalton among the mountains of Georgia. The Federal victory was the
result of a campaign carefully planned by Generals Halleck and Grant and
ably carried out by the efforts of the subordinate generals. The losses in killed and wounded sustained by Grant were over fifty-eight
hundred and those of Bragg about sixty-six hundred, four thousand being
prisoners. But the advantage of the great position had been forever
wrested from the Southern army. [Illustration: THE BESIEGED

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. At this point, where Citico Creek joins the Tennessee, the left of the
Eleventh Corps of the Army of the Cumberland rested on the river bank, the
limit of the Federal line of defense, east of Chattanooga. Here, on high
ground overlooking the stream, was posted Battery McAloon to keep the
Confederates back from the river, so that timber and firewood could be
rafted down to the besieged army. In the chill of autumn, with scanty
rations, the soldiers had a hard time keeping warm, as all fuel within the
lines had been consumed. The Army of the Cumberland was almost conquered
by hardship. Grant feared that the soldiers "could not be got out of their
trenches to assume the offensive." But it was these very men who achieved
the most signal victory in the battle of Chattanooga. [Illustration: OPENING "THE CRACKER LINE"

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] _Chattanooga_ was the first steamboat built by the Federals
on the upper Tennessee River. Had the gunboats on the Ohio been able to
come up the Tennessee River nearly three hundred miles, to the assistance
of Rosecrans, Bragg could never have bottled him up in Chattanooga. But
between Florence and Decatur, Alabama, Muscle Shoals lay in the stream,
making the river impassable. While Bragg's pickets invested the railroad
and river, supplies could not be brought up from Bridgeport; and besides,
with the exception of one small steamboat (the _Dunbar_), the Federals had
no boats on the river. General W. F. Smith, Chief Engineer of the Army of
the Cumberland, had established a saw-mill with an old engine at
Bridgeport for the purpose of getting out lumber from logs rafted down the
river, with which to construct pontoons. Here Captain Arthur Edwards,
Assistant Quartermaster, had been endeavoring since the siege began to
build a steamboat consisting of a flat-bottom scow, with engine, boiler,
and stern-wheel mounted upon it. On October 24th, after many difficulties
and discouragements had been overcome, the vessel was launched
successfully and christened the _Chattanooga_. On the 29th she made her
trial trip. That very night, Hooker, in the battle of Wauhatchie,
definitely established control of the new twelve-mile "Cracker Line" from
Kelley's Ferry, which Grant had ordered for the relief of the starving
army. The next day the little _Chattanooga_, with steam up, was ready to
start from Bridgeport with a heavy load of the much-needed supplies, and
her arrival was anxiously awaited at Kelley's Ferry, where the
wagon-trains were all ready to rush forward the rations and forage to
Chattanooga. The mechanics were still at work upon the little vessel's
unfinished pilot-house and boiler-deck while she and the two barges she
was to tow were being loaded, and at 4 A.M. on November 30th she set out
to make the 45-mile journey against unfavorable head-winds. [Illustration: THE WELCOME NEWCOMER

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] The home-made little steamboat _Chattanooga_ was beset with difficulties
and dangers on her memorable voyage of November 30th. She made but slow
progress against the wind and the rapid current of the tortuous Tennessee. Fearful of breaking a steam pipe or starting a leak, she crawled along all
day, and then was enveloped in one of the darkest of nights, out of which
a blinding rain stung the faces of her anxious crew. Assistant
Quartermaster William G. Le Duc, in command of the expedition, helped the
pilot to feel his way through the darkness. At last the camp-fires of the
Federals became guiding beacons from the shore and soon the _Chattanooga_
tied up safely at Kelley's Ferry. The "Cracker Line" was at last opened in
the nick of time, for there were but four boxes of hard bread left in the
commissary at Chattanooga, where four cakes of hard bread and one-quarter
of a pound of pork were being issued as a three-days' ration. [Illustration: WHERE AN ARMY GAVE ITS OWN ORDERS

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] At Missionary Ridge (seen in the distance in the lower picture) the Army
of the Cumberland removed forever from Grant's mind any doubt of its
fighting qualities. Grant, anxious to develop Bragg's strength, ordered
Thomas, on November 23d, to demonstrate against the forces on his front. Moving out as if on parade, the troops under Gordon Granger drove back the
Confederates and captured Orchard Knob (or Indian Hill) a day before it
had been planned to do so. Still another surprise awaited Grant on the
25th, when from this eminence he watched the magnificent spectacle of the
battle of Chattanooga. Thomas' men again pressed forward in what was
ordered as a demonstration against Missionary Ridge. Up and over it they
drove the Confederates from one entrenchment after another, capturing the
guns parked in the lower picture. "By whose orders are those troops going
up the hill?" "Old Pap" Thomas, who knew his men better than did Grant,
replied that it was probably by their own orders. It was the most signal
victory of the day. [Illustration: THE CAPTURED CONFEDERATE GUNS

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] [Illustration: THE MEN WHO COMPLETED THE VICTORY

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] General Hooker and Staff at Lookout Mountain. Hooker's forces of about
9,700 men had been sent from the East to reenforce Rosecrans, but until
the arrival of Grant they were simply so many more mouths to feed in the
besieged city. In the battle of Wauhatchie, on the night of October 20th,
they drove back the Confederates and established the new line of
communication. On November 24th they, too, had a surprise in store for
Grant. Their part in the triple conflict was also ordered merely as a
"demonstration," but they astounded the eyes and ears of their comrades
with the spectacular fight by which they made their way up Lookout
Mountain. The next day, pushing on to Rossville, the daring Hooker
attacked one of Bragg's divisions and forced it into precipitate retreat. [Illustration: HOOKER'S CAMP AT THE BASE OF LOOKOUT MOUNTAIN

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] [Illustration: THE BATTLE-FIELD ABOVE THE CLOUDS

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] Up such rugged heights as these,
heavily timbered and full of chasms, Hooker's men fought their way on the
afternoon of November 24th. Bridging Lookout Creek, the troops crossed,
hidden by the friendly mist, and began ascending the mountain-sides,
driving the Confederates from one line of rifle-pits and then from
another. The heavy musketry fire and the boom of the Confederate battery
on the top of the mountain apprised the waiting Federals before
Chattanooga that the battle had begun. Now and again the fitful lifting of
the mist disclosed to Grant and Thomas, watching from Orchard Knob, the
men of Hooker fighting upon the heights. Then all would be curtained once
more. At two o'clock in the afternoon the mist became so heavy that Hooker
and his men could not see what they were doing, and paused to entrench. By
four o'clock, however, he had pushed on to the summit and reported to
Grant that his position was impregnable. Direct communication was then
established and reenforcements sent. [Illustration: THE PEAK OF VICTORY--THE MORNING AFTER THE BATTLE

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] Pulpit Rock, the Summit of Lookout Mountain. Before dawn of November 25th,
Hooker, anticipating the withdrawal of the Confederates, sent detachments
to seize the very summit of the mountain, here 2,400 feet high. Six
volunteers from the Eighth Kentucky Regiment scaled the palisades by means
of the ladders seen in this picture, and made their way to the top. The
rest of the regiment quickly followed; then came the Ninety-sixth
Illinois. The rays of the rising sun disclosed the Stars and Stripes
floating in triumph from the lofty peak "amid the wild and prolonged
cheers of the men whose dauntless valor had borne them to that point." [Illustration: THE FLANKING PASS

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] The Gap in Missionary Ridge at Rossville. Through this Georgia
mountain-pass runs the road to Ringgold. Rosecrans took advantage of it
when he turned Bragg's flank before the battle of Chickamauga; and on
November 25, 1863, Thomas ordered Hooker to advance from Lookout Mountain
to this point and strike the Confederates on their left flank, while in
their front he (Thomas) stood ready to attack. The movement was entirely
successful, and in a brilliant battle, begun by Hooker, Bragg's army was
swept from Missionary Ridge and pursued in retreat to Georgia. [Illustration: THE SKIRMISH LINE

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. Multiply the number of these men by ten, strike out the tents, and we see
vividly how the advancing line of Thomas' Army of the Cumberland appeared
to the Confederates as they swept up the <DW72> at Missionary Ridge to win
the brilliant victory of November 25th. This view of drilling Federal
troops in Chattanooga preserves the exact appearance of the line of battle
only a couple of months before the picture was taken. The skirmishers,
thrown out in advance of the line, are "firing" from such positions as the
character of the ground makes most effective. The main line is waiting for
the order to charge. [Illustration: BATTLE OF MOBILE BAY. _Painted by E. Packbauer._

  _Copyright, 1901, by Perrien-Keydel Co.,
  Detroit, Mich., U. S. A._]




THE BATTLE IN THE WILDERNESS

    The volunteers who composed the armies of the Potomac and Northern
    Virginia were real soldiers now, inured to war, and desperate in their
    determination to do its work without faltering or failure. This
    fact--this change in the temper and _morale_ of the men on either
    side--had greatly simplified the tasks set for Grant and Lee to solve. They knew that those men would stand against
    anything, endure slaughter without flinching, hardship without
    complaining, and make desperate endeavor without shrinking. The two
    armies had become what they had not been earlier in the contest,
    _perfect instruments of war_, that could be relied upon as confidently
    as the machinist relies upon his engine scheduled to make so many
    revolutions per minute at a given rate of horse-power, and with the
    precision of science itself.--_George Cary Eggleston, in "The History
    of the Confederate War. "_


After the battle of Gettysburg, Lee started for the Potomac, which he
crossed with some difficulty, but with little interruption from the
Federals, above Harper's Ferry, on July 14, 1863. The thwarted invader of
Pennsylvania wished to get to the plains of Virginia as quickly as
possible, but the Shenandoah was found to be impassable. Meade, in the
mean time, had crossed the Potomac east of the Blue Ridge and seized the
principal outlets from the lower part of the Valley. Lee, therefore, was
compelled to continue his retreat up the Shenandoah until Longstreet, sent
in advance with part of his command, had so blocked the Federal pursuit
that most of the Confederate army was able to emerge through Chester Gap
and move to Culpeper Court House. Ewell marched through Thornton's Gap and
by the 4th of August practically the whole Army of Northern Virginia was
south of the Rapidan, prepared to dispute the crossing of that river. But
Meade, continuing his flank pursuit, halted at Culpeper Court House,
deeming it imprudent to attempt the Rapidan in the face of the strongly
entrenched Confederates. In the entire movement there had been no fighting
except a few cavalry skirmishes and no serious loss on either side. On the 9th of September, Lee sent Longstreet and his corps to assist Bragg
in the great conflict that was seen to be inevitable around Chattanooga. In spite of reduced strength, Lee proceeded to assume a threatening
attitude toward Meade, and in October and early November there were
several small but severe engagements as the Confederate leader attempted
to turn Meade's flank and force him back to the old line of Bull Run. On
the 7th of November, Sedgwick made a brilliant capture of the redoubts on
the Rappahannock, and Lee returned once more to his old position on the
south side of the Rapidan. This lay between Barnett's Ford, near Orange
Court House (Lee's headquarters), and Morton's Ford, twenty miles below. Its right was also protected by entrenchments along the course of Mine
Run. Against these, in the last days of November, Meade sent French,
Sedgwick, and Warren. It was found impossible to carry the Confederate
position, and on December 1st the Federal troops were ordered to recross
the Rapidan. In this short campaign the Union lost sixteen hundred men and
the Confederacy half that number. With the exception of an unsuccessful
cavalry raid against Richmond, in February, nothing disturbed the
existence of the two armies until the coming of Grant. In the early months of 1864, the Army of the Potomac lay between the
Rapidan and the Rappahannock, most of it in the vicinity of Culpeper Court
House, although some of the troops were guarding the railroad to
Washington as far as Bristoe Station, close to Manassas Junction. On the
south side of the Rapidan, the Army of Northern Virginia was, as has been
seen, securely entrenched. The Confederates' ranks were thin and their
supplies were scarce; but the valiant spirit which had characterized the
Southern hosts in former battles still burned fiercely within their
breasts, presaging many desperate battles before the heel of the invader
should tread upon their cherished capital, Richmond, and their loved
cause, the Confederacy. Within the camp religious services had been held for weeks in succession,
resulting in the conversion of large numbers of the soldiers. The influence of the awakening among the men in the
army during this revival was manifest after the war was over, when the
soldiers had gone back to civil life, under conditions most trying and
severe. To this spiritual frame of mind may be credited, perhaps, some of
the remarkable feats accomplished in subsequent battles by the Confederate
army. On February 29, 1864, the United States Congress passed law reviving the
grade of lieutenant-general, the title being intended for Grant, who was
made general-in-chief of the armies of the United States. Grant had come
from his victorious battle-grounds in the West, and all eyes turned to him
as the chieftain who should lead the Union army to success. On the 9th of
March he received his commission. He now planned the final great double
movement of the war. Taking control of the whole campaign against Lee, but
leaving the Army of the Potomac under Meade's direct command, he chose the
strongest of his corps commanders, W. T. Sherman, for the head of affairs
in the West. Grant's immediate objects were to defeat Lee's army and to
capture Richmond, the latter to be accomplished by General Butler and the
Army of the James; Sherman's object was to crush Johnston, to seize that
important railroad center, Atlanta, Georgia, and, with Banks' assistance,
to open a way between the Atlantic coast and Mobile, on the Gulf, thus
dividing the Confederacy north and south, as the conquest of the
Mississippi had parted it east and west. It was believed that if either or
both of these campaigns were successful, the downfall of the Confederacy
would be assured. On a recommendation of General Meade's, the Army of the Potomac was
reorganized into three corps instead of the previous five. The Second,
Fifth, and Sixth corps were retained, absorbing the First and Third. Hancock was in command of the Second; Warren, the Fifth; and Sedgwick, the
Sixth. The Ninth Corps acted as a
separate army under Burnside, and was now protecting the Orange and
Alexandria Railroad. As soon as Meade had crossed the Rapidan, Burnside
was ordered to move promptly, and he reached the battlefield of the
Wilderness on the morning of May 6th. On May 24th his corps was assigned
to the Army of the Potomac. The Union forces, including the Ninth Corps,
numbered about one hundred and eighteen thousand men. The Army of Northern Virginia consisted of three corps of infantry, the
First under Longstreet, the Second under Ewell, and the Third under A. P.
Hill, and a cavalry corps commanded by Stuart. A notable fact in the
organization of the Confederate army was the few changes made in
commanders. The total forces under Lee were about sixty-two thousand. After assuming command, Grant established his headquarters at Culpeper
Court House, whence he visited Washington once a week to consult with
President Lincoln and the Secretary of War. He was given full authority,
however, as to men and movements, and worked out a plan of campaign which
resulted in a series of battles in Virginia unparalleled in history. The
first of these was precipitated in a dense forest, a wilderness, from
which the battle takes its name. Grant decided on a general advance of the Army of the Potomac upon Lee,
and early on the morning of May 4th the movement began by crossing the
Rapidan at several fords below Lee's entrenched position, and moving by
his right flank. The crossing was effected successfully, the line of march
taking part of the Federal troops over a scene of defeat in the previous
spring. One year before, the magnificent Army of the Potomac, just from a
long winter's rest in the encampment at Falmouth on the north bank of the
Rappahannock, had met the legions of the South in deadly combat on the
battlefield of Chancellorsville. And now Grant was leading the same army,
whose ranks had been freshened by new recruits from the North, through the
same field of war. By eight o'clock on the morning of the 4th the various rumors as to the
Federal army's crossing the Rapidan received by Lee were fully confirmed,
and at once he prepared to set his own army in motion for the Wilderness,
and to throw himself across the path of his foe. Two days before he had
gathered his corps and division commanders around him at the signal
station on Clark's Mountain, a considerable eminence south of the Rapidan,
near Robertson's Ford. Here he expressed the opinion that Grant would
cross at the lower fords, as he did, but nevertheless Longstreet was kept
at Gordonsville in case the Federals should move by the Confederate left. The day was oppressively hot, and the troops suffered greatly from thirst
as they plodded along the forest aisles through the jungle-like region. The Wilderness was a maze of trees, underbrush, and ragged foliage. Low-limbed pines, scrub-oaks, hazels, and chinkapins interlaced their
branches on the sides of rough country roads that lead through this
labyrinth of desolation. The weary troops looked upon the heavy tangles of
fallen timber and dense undergrowth with a sense of isolation. Only the
sounds of the birds in the trees, the rustling of the leaves, and the
passing of the army relieved the heavy pall of solitude that bore upon the
senses of the Federal host. The forces of the Northern army advanced into the vast no-man's land by
the roads leading from the fords. In the afternoon, Hancock was resting at
Chancellorsville, while Warren posted his corps near the Wilderness
Tavern, in which General Grant established his headquarters. Sedgwick's
corps had followed in the track of Warren's veterans, but was ordered to
halt near the river crossing, or a little south of it. The cavalry, as
much as was not covering the rear wagon trains, was stationed near
Chancellorsville and the Wilderness Tavern. That night the men from the
North lay in bivouac with little fear of being attacked in this wilderness
of waste, where military maneuvers would be very difficult. Two roads--the old Orange turnpike and the Orange plank road--enter the
Wilderness from the southwest. Along these the Confederates moved from
their entrenched position to oppose the advancing hosts of the North. Ewell took the old turnpike and Hill the plank road. Longstreet was
hastening from Gordonsville. The troops of Longstreet, on the one side,
and of Burnside, on the other, arrived on the field after exhausting
forced marches. The locality in which the Federal army found itself on the 5th of May was
not one that any commander would choose for a battle-ground. Lee was more
familiar with its terrible features than was his opponent, but this gave
him little or no advantage. Grant, having decided to move by the
Confederate right flank, could only hope to pass through the desolate
region and reach more open country before the inevitable clash would come. General Humphreys, who was Meade's chief of staff,
says in his "Virginia Campaign of 1864 and 1865": "So far as I know, no
great battle ever took place before on such ground. But little of the
combatants could be seen, and its progress was known to the senses chiefly
by the rising and falling sounds of a vast musketry fire that continually
swept along the lines of battle, many miles in length, sounds which at
times approached to the sublime." As Ewell, moving along the old turnpike on the morning of May 5th, came
near the Germanna Ford road, Warren's corps was marching down the latter
on its way to Parker's store, the destination assigned it by the orders of
the day. This meeting precipitated the battle of the Wilderness. Meade learned the position of Ewell's advance division and ordered an
attack. The Confederates were driven back a mile or two, but, re-forming
and reenforced, the tide of battle was turned the other way. Sedgwick's
marching orders were sending him to the Wilderness Tavern on the turnpike. He was on his way when the battle began, and he now turned to the right
from the Germanna Ford road and formed several of his divisions on
Warren's right. The presence of Hill on the plank road became known to
Meade and Grant, about eight in the morning. Hancock, at Chancellorsville,
was too far away to check him, so Getty's division of Sedgwick's corps, on
its way to the right, was sent over the Brock road to its junction with
the plank road for the purpose of driving Hill back, if possible, beyond
Parker's store. Warren and Sedgwick began to entrench themselves when they realized that
Ewell had effectively blocked their progress. Getty, at the junction of
the Brock and the Orange plank roads, was likewise throwing up breastworks
as fast as he could. Hancock, coming down the Brock road from
Chancellorsville, reached him at two in the afternoon and found two of A.
P. Hill's divisions in front. After waiting to finish his breastworks,
Getty, a little after four o'clock, started, with Hancock supporting him,
to carry out his orders to drive Hill back. Hancock says: "The fighting
became very fierce at once. The lines of battle were exceedingly close,
the musketry continuous and deadly along the entire line.... The battle
raged with great severity and obstinacy until about 8 P.M. Here, on the Federal left, and in this
desperate engagement, General Alexander Hays, one of Hancock's brigade
commanders, was shot through the head and killed. The afternoon had worn away with heavy skirmishing on the right. About
five o'clock Meade made another attempt on Ewell's forces. Both lines were
well entrenched, but the Confederate artillery enfiladed the Federal
positions. It was after dark when General Seymour of Sedgwick's corps
finally withdrew his brigade, with heavy loss in killed and wounded. When the battle roar had ceased, the rank and file of the Confederate
soldiers learned with sorrow of the death of one of the most dashing
brigade leaders in Ewell's corps, General John M. Jones. This fighting was
the preliminary struggle for position in the formation of the battle-lines
of the two armies, to secure the final hold for the death grapple. The
contestants were without advantage on either side when the sanguinary
day's work was finished. Both armies had constructed breastworks and were entrenched very close to
each other, front to front, gathered and poised for a deadly spring. Early
on the morning of May 6th Hancock was reenforced by Burnside, and Hill by
Longstreet. Grant issued orders, through Meade, for a general attack by Sedgwick,
Warren, and Hancock along the entire line, at five o'clock on the morning
of the 6th. Fifteen minutes before five the Confederates opened fire on
Sedgwick's right, and soon the battle was raging along the whole five-mile
front. It became a hand-to-hand contest. The Federals advanced with great
difficulty. The combatants came upon each other but a few paces apart. Soldiers on one side became hopelessly mixed with those of the other. Artillery played but little part in the battle of the Wilderness. The
cavalry of the two armies had one indecisive engagement on the 5th. The
next day both Custer and Gregg repulsed Hampton and Fitzhugh Lee in two
separate encounters, but Sheridan was unable to follow up the advantage. He had been entrusted with the care of the wagon trains and dared not take
his cavalry too far from them. The battle was chiefly one of musketry. Volley upon volley was poured out unceasingly; screaming bullets mingled
with terrific yells in the dense woods. The noise became deafening, and
the wounded and dying lying on the ground among the trees made a scene of
indescribable horror. Living men rushed in to take the places of those
who had fallen. The missiles cut branches from the trees, and saplings
were mowed down as grass in a meadow is cut by a scythe. Bloody remnants
of uniforms, blue and gray, hung as weird and uncanny decorations from
remaining branches. The story of the Federal right during the morning is easily told. Persistently and often as he tried, Warren could make no impression on the
strongly entrenched Ewell--nor could Sedgwick, who was trying equally hard
with Wright's division of his corps. But with Hancock on the left, in his
entrenchments on the Brock road, it was different. The gallant and heroic
charges here have elicited praise and admiration from friend and foe
alike. At first, Hill was forced back in disorder, and driven in confusion
a mile and a half from his line. The Confederates seemed on the verge of
panic and rout. From the rear of the troops in gray came the beloved
leader of the Southern host, General Lee. He was astride his favorite
battle-horse, and his face was set in lines of determination. Though the
crisis of the battle for the Confederates had arrived, Lee's voice was
calm and soft as he commanded, "Follow me," and then urged his charger
toward the bristling front of the Federal lines. The Confederate ranks
were electrified by the brave example of their commander. A ragged veteran
who had followed Lee through many campaigns, leaped forward and caught the
bridle-rein of the horse. "We won't go on until you go back," cried the
devoted warrior. Instantly the Confederate ranks resounded with the cry,
"Lee to the rear! and the great general went back to
safety while his soldiers again took up the gage of battle and plunged
into the smoke and death-laden storm. But Lee, by his personal presence,
and the arrival of Longstreet, had restored order and courage in the
ranks, and their original position was soon regained. The pursuit of the Confederates through the dense forest had caused
confusion and disorganization in Hancock's corps. That cohesion and
strength in a battle-line of soldiers, where the men can "feel the touch,"
shoulder to shoulder, was wanting, and the usual form and regular
alignment was broken. It was two hours before the lines were re-formed. That short time had been well utilized by the Confederates. Gregg's eight
hundred Texans made a desperate charge through the thicket of the pine
against Webb's brigade of Hancock's corps, cutting through the growth, and
wildly shouting amid the crash and roar of the battle. Half of their
number were left on the field, but the blow had effectually checked the
Federal advance. While the battle was raging Grant's general demeanor was imperturbable. He
remained with Meade nearly the whole day at headquarters at the Lacy
house. He sat upon a stump most of the time, or at the foot of a tree,
leaning against its trunk, whittling sticks with his pocket-knife and
smoking big black cigars--twenty during the day. He received reports of
the progress of the battle and gave orders without the least evidence of
excitement or emotion. "His orders," said one of his staff, "were given
with a spur," implying instant action. On one occasion, when an officer,
in great excitement, brought him the report of Hancock's misfortune and
expressed apprehension as to Lee's purpose, Grant exclaimed with some
warmth: "Oh, I am heartily tired of hearing what Lee is going to do. Go
back to your command and try to think what we are going to do ourselves." Several brigades of Longstreet's troops, though weary from their forced
march, were sent on a flanking movement against Hancock's left, which
demoralized Mott's division and caused it to fall back three-quarters of a
mile. Longstreet now advanced with the rest of his corps. The dashing
leader, while riding with Generals Kershaw and Jenkins at the head of
Jenkins' brigade on the right of the Southern battle array, was screened
by the tangled thickets from the view of his own troops, flushed with the
success of brilliant flank movement. Suddenly the passing column was seen
indistinctly through an opening and a volley burst forth and struck the
officers. When the smoke lifted Longstreet and Jenkins were down--the
former seriously wounded, and the latter killed outright. As at
Chancellorsville a year before and on the same battle-ground, a great
captain of the Confederacy was shot down by his own men, and by accident,
at the crisis of a battle. Jackson lingered several days after
Chancellorsville, while Longstreet recovered and lived to fight for the
Confederacy till the surrender at Appomattox. General Wadsworth, of
Hancock's corps, was mortally wounded during the day, while making a
daring assault on the Confederate works, at the head of his men. During the afternoon, the Confederate attack upon Hancock's and Burnside's
forces, which constituted nearly half the entire army, was so severe that
the Federal lines began to give way. The combatants swayed back and forth;
the Confederates seized the Federal breastworks repeatedly, only to be
repulsed again and again. Once, the Southern colors were placed on the
Union battlements. A fire in the forest, which had been burning for hours,
and in which, it is estimated, about two hundred of the Federal wounded
perished, was communicated to the timber entrenchments, the heat and smoke
driving into the faces of the men on the Union side, and compelling them
in some places to abandon the works. Hancock made a gallant and heroic
effort to re-form his lines and push the attack, and, as he rode along the
lines, his inspiring presence elicited cheer upon cheer from the men, but
the troops had exhausted their ammunition, the wagons were in the rear,
and as night was approaching, further attack was abandoned. The contest
ended on the lines where it began. Later in the evening consternation swept the Federal camp when heavy
firing was heard in the direction of Sedgwick's corps, on the right. The
report was current that the entire Sixth Corps had been attacked and
broken. What had happened was a surprise attack by the Confederates,
commanded by General John B. Gordon, on Sedgwick's right flank, Generals
Seymour and Shaler with six hundred men being captured. When a message was
received from Sedgwick that the Sixth Corps was safe in an entirely new
line, there was great rejoicing in the Union camp. Thus ended the two days' fighting of the battle of the Wilderness, one of
the greatest struggles in history. It was Grant's first experience in the
East, and his trial measure of arms with his great antagonist, General
Lee. The latter returned to his entrenchments and the Federals remained in
their position. While Grant had been
defeated in his plan to pass around Lee, yet he had made a new record for
the Army of the Potomac, and he was not turned from his purpose of putting
himself between the Army of Northern Virginia and the capital of the
Confederacy. During the two days' engagement, there were ten hours of
actual fighting, with a loss in killed and wounded of about seventeen
thousand Union and nearly twelve thousand Confederates, nearly three
thousand men sacrificed each hour. It is the belief of some military
writers that Lee deliberately chose the Wilderness as a battle-ground, as
it would effectually conceal great inferiority of force, but if this be so
he seems to have come to share the unanimous opinions of the generals of
both sides that its difficulties were unsurmountable, and within his
entrenchments he awaited further attack. The next night, May 7th, Grant's march by the Confederate right flank was
resumed, but only to be blocked again by the dogged determination of the
tenacious antagonist, a few miles beyond, at Spotsylvania. It is not strange that the minds of these two
men moved along the same lines in military strategy, when we remember they
were both military experts of the highest order, and were now working out
the same problem. The results obtained by each are told in the story of
the battle of Spotsylvania. [Illustration: LEE'S MEN]

The faces of the veterans in this photograph of 1864 reflect more forcibly
than volumes of historical essays, the privations and the courage of the
ragged veterans in gray who faced Grant, with Lee as their leader. They
did not know that their struggle had already become unavailing; that no
amount of perseverance and devotion could make headway against the
resources, determination, and discipline of the Northern armies, now that
they had become concentrated and wielded by a master of men like Grant. But Grant was as yet little more than a name to the armies of the East. His successes had been won on Western fields--Donelson, Vicksburg,
Chattanooga. It was not yet known that the Army of the Potomac under the
new general-in-chief was to prove irresistible. [Illustration: CONFEDERATE SOLDIERS IN VIRGINIA, 1864

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] Though prisoners when this picture was taken--a remnant of Grant's heavy
captures during May and June, when he sent some ten thousand Confederates
to Coxey's Landing, Virginia, as a result of his first stroke against
Lee--though their arms have been taken from them, though their uniforms
are anything but "uniform," their hats partly the regulation felt of the
Army of Northern Virginia, partly captured Federal caps, and partly
nondescript--yet these ragged veterans stand and sit with the dignity of
accomplishment. To them, "Marse Robert" is still the general
unconquerable, under whom inferior numbers again and again have held their
own, and more; the brilliant leader under whom every man gladly rushes to
any assault, however impossible it seems, knowing that every order will be
made to count. [Illustration: THE COMING OF THE STRANGER GRANT

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] Hither, to Meade's headquarters at Brandy Station, came Grant on March 10,
1864. The day before, in Washington, President Lincoln handed him his
commission, appointing him Lieutenant-General in command of all the
Federal forces. His visit to Washington convinced him of the wisdom of
remaining in the East to direct affairs, and his first interview with
Meade decided him to retain that efficient general in command of the Army
of the Potomac. The two men had known each other but slightly from casual
meetings during the Mexican War. "I was a stranger to most of the Army of
the Potomac," said Grant, "but Meade's modesty and willingness to serve in
any capacity impressed me even more than had his victory at Gettysburg." The only prominent officers Grant brought on from the West were Sheridan
and Rawlins. [Illustration: SIGNALING ORDERS FROM GENERAL MEADE'S HEADQUARTERS, JUST
BEFORE THE WILDERNESS

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] In April, 1864, General Meade's headquarters lay north of the Rapidan. The
Signal Corps was kept busy transmitting the orders preliminary to the
Wilderness campaign, which was to begin May 5th. The headquarters are
below the brow of the hill. A most important part of the Signal Corps'
duty was the interception and translation of messages interchanged between
the Confederate signal-men. A veteran of Sheridan's army tells of his
impressions as follows: "On the evening of the 18th of October, 1864, the
soldiers of Sheridan's army lay in their lines at Cedar Creek. Our
attention was suddenly directed to the ridge of Massanutten, or Three Top
Mountain, the <DW72> of which covered the left wing of the army--the Eighth
Corps. A lively series of signals was being flashed out from the peak, and
it was evident that messages were being sent both eastward and westward of
the ridge. I can recall now the feeling with which we looked up at those
flashes going over our heads, knowing that they must be Confederate
messages. It was only later that we learned that a keen-eyed Union officer
had been able to read the message: 'To Lieutenant-General Early. Be ready
to move as soon as my forces join you, and we will crush Sheridan. The sturdiness of Sheridan's veterans and
the fresh spirit put into the hearts of the men by the return of Sheridan
himself from 'Winchester, twenty miles away,' a ride rendered immortal by
Read's poem, proved too much at last for the pluck and persistency of
Early's worn-out troops." [Illustration: ON THE WAY TO THE FRONT

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] The Streets of Culpeper, Virginia, in March, 1864. After Grant's arrival,
the Army of the Potomac awoke to the activity of the spring campaign. One
of the first essentials was to get the vast transport trains in readiness
to cross the Rapidan. Wagons were massed by thousands at Culpeper, near
where Meade's troops had spent the winter. The work of the teamsters was
most arduous; wearied by long night marches--nodding, reins in hand, for
lack of sleep--they might at any moment be suddenly attacked in a bold
attempt to capture or destroy their precious freight. When the
arrangements were completed, each wagon bore the corps badge, division
color, and number of the brigade it was to serve. Its contents were also
designated, together with the branch of the service for which it was
intended. While loaded, the wagons must keep pace with the army movements
whenever possible in order to be parked at night near the brigades to
which they belonged. [Illustration: THE "GRAND CAMPAIGN" UNDER WAY--THE DAY BEFORE THE BATTLE

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. Pontoon-Bridges at Germanna Ford, on the Rapidan. Here the Sixth Corps
under Sedgwick and Warren's Fifth Corps began crossing on the morning of
May 4, 1864. The Second Corps, under Hancock, crossed at Ely's Ford,
farther to the east. The cavalry, under Sheridan, was in advance. By night
the army, with the exception of Burnside's Ninth Corps, was south of the
Rapidan, advancing into the Wilderness. The Ninth Corps (a reserve of
twenty thousand men) remained temporarily north of the Rappahannock,
guarding railway communications. On the wooden pontoon-bridge the
rear-guard is crossing while the pontonniers are taking up the canvas
bridge beyond. The movement was magnificently managed; Grant believed it
to be a complete surprise, as Lee had offered no opposition. In the baffling fighting of the Wilderness and Spotsylvania Court
House, Grant was to lose a third of his superior number, arriving a month
later on the James with a dispirited army that had left behind 54,926
comrades in a month. [Illustration: THE TANGLED BATTLEFIELD

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] The Edge of the Wilderness, May 5, 1864. Stretching away to the westward
between Grant's army and Lee's lay no-man's-land--the Wilderness. Covered
with a second-growth of thicket, thorny underbrush, and twisted vines, it
was an almost impassable labyrinth, with here and there small clearings in
which stood deserted barns and houses, reached only by unused and
overgrown farm roads. The Federal advance into this region was not a
surprise to Lee, as Grant supposed. The Confederate commander had caused
the region to be carefully surveyed, hoping for the precise opportunity
that Grant was about to give him. At the very outset of the campaign he
could strike the Federals in a position where superior numbers counted
little. If he could drive Grant beyond the Rappahannock--as he had forced
Pope, Burnside and Hooker before him--says George Cary Eggleston (in the
"History of the Confederate War"), "loud and almost irresistible would
have been the cry for an armistice, supported (as it would have been) by
Wall Street and all Europe." [Illustration: WHERE EWELL'S CHARGE SURPRISED GRANT

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] A photograph of Confederate breastworks raised by Ewell's men a few months
before, while they fought in the Wilderness, May 5, 1864. In the picture
we see some of the customary breastworks which both contending armies
threw up to strengthen their positions. These were in a field near the
turnpike in front of Ewell's main line. The impracticable nature of the
ground tore the lines on both sides into fragments; as they swept back and
forth, squads and companies strove fiercely with one another,
hand-to-hand. Grant had confidently expressed the belief to one of his
staff officers that there was no more advance left in Lee's army. He was
surprised to learn on the 5th that Ewell's Corps was marching rapidly down
the Orange turnpike to strike at Sedgwick and Warren, while A. P. Hill,
with Longstreet close behind, was pushing forward on the Orange plank-road
against Hancock. LEE GIVES BLOW FOR BLOW

[Illustration: COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] Another view of Ewell's advanced entrenchments--the bark still fresh where
the Confederates had worked with the logs. In the Wilderness, Lee, ever
bold and aggressive, executed one of the most brilliant maneuvers of his
career. His advance was a sudden surprise for Grant, and the manner in
which he gave battle was another. Grant harbored the notion that his
adversary would act on the defensive, and that there would be opportunity
to attack the Army of Northern Virginia only behind strong entrenchments. But in the Wilderness, Lee's veterans, the backbone of the South's
fighting strength, showed again their unquenchable spirit of
aggressiveness. They came forth to meet Grant's men on equal terms in the
thorny thickets. About noon, May 5th, the stillness was broken by the
rattle of musketry and the roar of artillery, which told that Warren had
met with resistance on the turnpike and that the battle had begun. Nearly
a mile were Ewell's men driven back, and then they came magnificently on
again, fighting furiously in the smoke-filled thickets with Warren's now
retreating troops. Sedgwick, coming to the support of Warren, renewed the
conflict. To the southward on the plank road, Getty's division, of the
Sixth Corps, hard pressed by the forces of A. P. Hill, was succored by
Hancock with the Second Corps, and together these commanders achieved what
seemed success. It was brief; Longstreet was close at hand to save the day
for the Confederates. TREES IN THE TRACK OF THE IRON STORM

[Illustration: COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] The Wilderness to the north of the Orange turnpike. Over ground like this,
where men had seldom trod before, ebbed and flowed the tide of trampling
thousands on May 5 and 6, 1864. Artillery, of which Grant had a
superabundance, was well-nigh useless, wreaking its impotent fury upon the
defenseless trees. Even the efficacy of musketry fire was hampered. Men
tripping and falling in the tangled underbrush arose bleeding from the
briars to struggle with an adversary whose every movement was impeded
also. The cold steel of the bayonet finished the work which rifles had
begun. In the terrible turmoil of death the hopes of both Grant and Lee
were doomed to disappointment. Lee,
disregarding his own safety, endeavored to rally the disordered ranks of
A. P. Hill, and could only be persuaded to retire by the pledge of
Longstreet that his advancing force would win the coveted victory. Falling
upon Hancock's flank, the fresh troops seemed about to crush the Second
Corps, as Jackson's men had crushed the Eleventh the previous year at
Chancellorsville. But now, as Jackson, at the critical moment, had fallen
by the fire of his own men, so Longstreet and his staff, galloping along
the plank road, were mistaken by their own soldiers for Federals and fired
upon. A minie-ball struck Longstreet in the shoulder, and he was carried
from the field, feebly waving his hat that his men might know that he was
not killed. With him departed from the field the life of the attack. [Illustration: A LOSS IN "EFFECTIVE STRENGTH"--WOUNDED AT FREDERICKSBURG

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. Federal wounded in the Wilderness campaign, at Fredericksburg. of his numbers engaged in the two days' battles of the
Wilderness alone. Lee's loss was 18.1 per cent. More than 24,000 of the
Army of the Potomac and of the Army of Northern Virginia lay suffering in
those uninhabited thickets. There many of them died alone, and some
perished in the horror of a forest fire on the night of May 5th. The
Federals lost many gallant officers, among them the veteran Wadsworth. The
Confederates lost Generals Jenkins and Jones, killed, and suffered a
staggering blow in the disabling of Longstreet. The series of battles of
the Wilderness and Spotsylvania campaigns were more costly to the Federals
than Antietam and Gettysburg combined. [Illustration: ONE OF GRANT'S FIELD-TELEGRAPH STATIONS IN 1864

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. This photograph, taken at Wilcox Landing, near City Point, gives an
excellent idea of the difficulties under which telegraphing was done at
the front or on the march. With a tent-fly for shelter and a hard-tack box
for a table, the resourceful operator mounted his "relay," tested his
wire, and brought the commanding general into direct communication with
separated brigades or divisions. The U. S. Military Telegraph Corps,
through its Superintendent of Construction, Dennis Doren, kept Meade and
both wings of his army in communication from the crossing of the Rapidan
in May, 1864, till the siege of Petersburg. Over this field-line Grant
received daily reports from four separate armies, numbering a quarter of a
million men, and replied with daily directions for their operations over
an area of seven hundred and fifty thousand square miles. Though every
corps of Meade's army moved daily, Doren kept them in touch with
headquarters. The field-line was built of seven twisted, rubber-coated
wires which were hastily strung on trees or fences. TELEGRAPHING FOR THE ARMIES

[Illustration: ANDREW CARNEGIE SUPERINTENDED MILITARY RAILWAYS AND
GOVERNMENT TELEGRAPH LINES IN 1861]

ANDREW CARNEGIE

The man who established the Federal military telegraph system amid the
first horrors of war was to become one of the world's foremost advocates
of peace. As the right hand man of Thomas A. Scott, Assistant Secretary of
War, he came to Washington in '61, and was immediately put in charge of
the field work of reestablishing communication between the Capital and the
North, cut off by the Maryland mobs. A telegraph operator himself, he
inaugurated the system of cipher despatches for the War Department and
secured the trusted operators with whom the service was begun. A young man
of twenty-four at the time, he was one of the last to leave the
battlefield of Bull Run, and his duties of general superintendence over
the network of railroads and telegraph lines made him a witness of war's
cruelties on other fields until he with his chief left the government
service June 1, 1862. THE MILITARY FIELD TELEGRAPH

[Illustration: THE MILITARY TELEGRAPH IN THE FIELD]

"No orders ever had to be given to establish the telegraph." Thus wrote
General Grant in his memoirs. "The moment troops were in position to go
into camp, the men would put up their wires." Grant pays a glowing tribute
to "the organization and discipline of this body of brave and intelligent
men." [Illustration: THE ARMY SAVING THE NAVY IN MAY, 1864

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] [Illustration]

Here the army is saving the navy by a brilliant piece of engineering that
prevented the loss of a fleet worth $2,000,000. The Red River expedition
was one of the most humiliating ever undertaken by the Federals. Porter's
fleet, which had so boldly advanced above the falls at Alexandria, was
ordered back, only to find that the river was so low as to imprison twelve
vessels. Lieut.-Colonel Joseph Bailey, acting engineer of the Nineteenth
Corps, obtained permission to build a dam in order to make possible the
passage of the fleet. Begun on April 30, 1864, the work was finished on
the 8th of May, almost entirely by the soldiers, working incessantly day
and night, often up to their necks in water and under the broiling sun. Bailey succeeded in turning the whole current into one channel and the
squadron passed below to safety. Not often have inland lumbermen been the
means of saving a navy. [Illustration: COLONEL JOSEPH BAILEY IN 1864. THE MAN WHO SAVED THE FLEET.] The army engineers laughed at this wide-browed, unassuming man when he
suggested building a dam so as to release Admiral Porter's fleet
imprisoned by low water above the Falls at Alexandria at the close of the
futile Red River expedition in 1864. Bailey had been a lumberman in
Wisconsin and had there gained the practical experience which taught him
that the plan was feasible. He was Acting Chief Engineer of the Nineteenth
Army Corps at this time, and obtained permission to go ahead and build his
dam. In the undertaking he had the approval and earnest support of Admiral
Porter, who refused to consider for a moment the abandonment of any of his
vessels even though the Red River expedition had been ordered to return
and General Banks was chafing at delay and sending messages to Porter that
his troops must be got in motion at once. Bailey pushed on with his work and in eleven days he succeeded in so
raising the water in the channel that all the Federal vessels were able to
pass down below the Falls. "Words are inadequate," said Admiral Porter, in
his report, "to express the admiration I feel for the ability of Lieut. This is without doubt the best engineering feat ever
performed.... The highest honors the Government can bestow on Colonel
Bailey can never repay him for the service he has rendered the country." For this achievement Bailey was promoted to colonel, brevetted brigadier
general, voted the thanks of Congress, and presented with a sword and a
purse of $3,000 by the officers of Porter's fleet. He settled in Missouri
after the war and was a formidable enemy of the "Bushwhackers" till he was
shot by them on March 21, 1867. He was born at Salem, Ohio, April 28,
1827. [Illustration: READY FOR HER BAPTISM. COPYRIGHT BY REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] This powerful gunboat, the _Lafayette_, though accompanying Admiral Porter
on the Red River expedition, was not one of those entrapped at Alexandria. Her heavy draft precluded her being taken above the Falls. Here we see her
lying above Vicksburg in the spring of 1863. She and her sister ship, the
_Choctaw_, were side-wheel steamers altered into casemate ironclads with
rams. The _Lafayette_ had the stronger armament, carrying two 11-inch
Dahlgrens forward, four 9-inch guns in the broadside, and two 24-pound
howitzers, with two 100-pound Parrott guns astern. She and the _Choctaw_
were the most important acquisitions to Porter's fleet toward the end of
1862. The _Lafayette_ was built and armed for heavy fighting. She got her
first taste of it on the night of April 16, 1863, when Porter took part of
his fleet past the Vicksburg batteries to support Grant's crossing of the
river in an advance on Vicksburg from below. The Lafayette, with a barge
and a transport lashed to her, held her course with difficulty through the
tornado of shot and shell which poured from the Confederate batteries on
the river front in Vicksburg as soon as the movement was discovered. The
_Lafayette_ stood up to this fiery christening and successfully ran the
gantlet, as did all the other vessels save one transport. She was
commanded during the Red River expedition by Lieutenant-Commander J. P.
Foster. [Illustration: FARRAGUT AT THE PINNACLE OF HIS FAME

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] Leaning on the cannon, Commander David Glasgow Farragut and Captain
Percival Drayton, chief of staff, stand on the deck of the "Hartford,"
after the victory in Mobile Bay, of August, 1864. When Gustavus V. Fox,
Assistant Secretary of the Navy, proposed the capture of New Orleans from
the southward he was regarded as utterly foolhardy. All that was needed,
however, to make Fox's plan successful was the man with spirit enough to
undertake it and judgment sufficient to carry it out. Here on the deck of
the fine new sloop-of-war that had been assigned to him as flagship,
stands the man who had just accomplished a greater feat that made him a
world figure as famous as Nelson. The Confederacy had found its great
general among its own people, but the great admiral of the war, although
of Southern birth, had refused to fight against the flag for which, as a
boy in the War of 1812, he had seen men die. Full of the fighting spirit
of the old navy, he was able to achieve the first great victory that gave
new hope to the Federal cause. Percival Drayton was also a Southerner, a
South Carolinian, whose brothers and uncles were fighting for the South. [Illustration: "FAR BY GRAY MORGAN'S WALLS"--THE MOBILE BAY FORT, BATTERED
BY FARRAGUT'S GUNS

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] How formidable was Farragut's undertaking in forcing his way into Mobile
Bay is apparent from these photographs. For wooden vessels to pass Morgan
and Gaines, two of the strongest forts on the coast, was pronounced by
experts most foolhardy. Besides, the channel was planted with torpedoes
that might blow the ships to atoms, and within the bay was the Confederate
ram _Tennessee_, thought to be the most powerful ironclad ever put afloat. In the arrangements for the attack, Farragut's flagship, the _Hartford_,
was placed second, the _Brooklyn_ leading the line of battleships, which
were preceded by four monitors. At a quarter before six, on the morning of
August 5th, the fleet moved. Half an hour later it came within range of
Fort Morgan. The
monitor _Tecumseh_, eager to engage the Confederate ram _Tennessee_ behind
the line of torpedoes, ran straight ahead, struck a torpedo, and in a few
minutes went down with most of the crew. As the monitor sank, the
_Brooklyn_ recoiled. Farragut signaled: "What's the trouble?" "Torpedoes,"
was the answer. "Go ahead, Captain
Drayton. Finding that the smoke from the guns obstructed the
view from the deck, Farragut ascended to the rigging of the main mast,
where he was in great danger of being struck and of falling to the deck. The captain accordingly ordered a quartermaster to tie him in the shrouds. The _Hartford_, under a full head of steam, rushed over the torpedo ground
far in advance of the fleet. The Confederate
ram, invulnerable to the broadsides of the Union guns, steamed alone for
the ships, while the ramparts of the two forts were crowded with
spectators of the coming conflict. The ironclad monster made straight for
the flagship, attempting to ram it and paying no attention to the fire or
the ramming of the other vessels. Its first effort was unsuccessful, but a
second came near proving fatal. It then became a target for the whole
Union fleet; finally its rudder-chain was shot away and it became
unmanageable; in a few minutes it raised the white flag. No wonder
Americans call Farragut the greatest of naval commanders. [Illustration: WHERE BROADSIDES STRUCK]


[Illustration: THE "HARTFORD" JUST AFTER THE BATTLE OF MOBILE BAY

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] This vivid photograph, taken in Mobile Bay by a war-time photographer from
New Orleans, was presented by Captain Drayton of the "Hartford" to T. W.
Eastman, U. S. N., whose family has courteously allowed its reproduction
here. Never was exhibited a more superb morale than on the "Hartford" as
she steamed in line to the attack of Fort Morgan at Mobile Bay on the
morning of August 5, 1864. Every man was at his station thinking his own
thoughts in the suspense of that moment. On the quarterdeck stood Captain
Percival Drayton and his staff. Near them was the chief-quartermaster,
John H. Knowles, ready to hoist the signals that would convey Farragut's
orders to the fleet. The admiral himself was in the port main shrouds
twenty-five feet above the deck. All was silence aboard till the
"Hartford" was in easy range of the fort. Then the great broadsides of the
old ship began to take their part in the awful cannonade. During the early
part of the action Captain Drayton, fearing that some damage to the
rigging might pitch Farragut overboard, sent Knowles on his famous
mission. "I went up," said the old sailor, "with a piece of lead line and
made it fast to one of the forward shrouds, and then took it around the
admiral to the after shroud, making it fast there. The admiral said,
'Never mind, I'm all right,' but I went ahead and obeyed orders." Later
Farragut, undoing the lashing with his own hands, climbed higher still. [Illustration: QUARTERMASTER KNOWLES]


[Illustration: FORT MORGAN--A BOMBARDMENT BRAVELY ANSWERED

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] The battered walls of Fort Morgan, in 1864, tell of a terrific smashing by
the Federal navy. But the gallant Confederates returned the blows with
amazing courage and skill; the rapidity and accuracy of their fire was
rarely equalled in the war. In the terrible conflict the "Hartford" was
struck twenty times, the "Brooklyn" thirty, the "Octorora" seventeen, the
"Metacomet" eleven, the "Lackawanna" five, the "Ossipee" four, the
"Monongahela" five, the "Kennebec" two, and the "Galena" seven. Of the
monitors the "Chickasaw" was struck three times, the "Manhattan" nine, and
the "Winnebago" nineteen. The total loss in the Federal fleet was 52
killed and 170 wounded, while on the Confederate gunboats 12 were killed
and 20 wounded. The night after the battle the "Metacomet" was turned into
a hospital ship and the wounded of both sides were taken to Pensacola. The
pilot of the captured "Tennessee" guided the Federal ship through the
torpedoes, and as she was leaving Pensacola on her return trip Midshipman
Carter of the "Tennessee," who also was on the "Metacomet," called out
from the wharf: "Don't attempt to fire No. 2 gun (of the "Tennessee"), as
there is a shell jammed in the bore, and the gun will burst and kill some
one." [Illustration: COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] [Illustration: THE BRAVEST OF THE BRAVE--THE CONFEDERATE IRONCLAD RAM
"TENNESSEE"

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] Mobile Bay, on the morning of August 5, 1864, was the arena of more
conspicuous heroism than marked any naval battle-ground of the entire war. Among all the daring deeds of that day stands out superlatively the
gallant manner in which Admiral Franklin Buchanan, C. S. N., fought his
vessel, the "Tennessee." "You shall not have it to say when you leave this
vessel that you were not near enough to the enemy, for I will meet them,
and then you can fight them alongside of their own ships; and if I fall,
lay me on one side and go on with the fight." Thus Buchanan addressed his
men, and then, taking his station in the pilot-house, he took his vessel
into action. The Federal fleet carried more power for destruction than the
combined English, French, and Spanish fleets at Trafalgar, and yet
Buchanan made good his boast that he would fight alongside. No sooner had
Farragut crossed the torpedoes than Buchanan matched that deed, running
through the entire line of Federal vessels, braving their broadsides, and
coming to close quarters with most of them. Then the "Tennessee" ran under
the guns of Fort Morgan for a breathing space. In half an hour she was
steaming up the bay to fight the entire squadron single-handed. Such
boldness was scarce believable, for Buchanan had now not alone wooden
ships to contend with, as when in the "Merrimac" he had dismayed the
Federals in Hampton Roads. Three powerful monitors were to oppose him at
point-blank range. For nearly an hour the gunners in the "Tennessee"
fought, breathing powder-smoke amid an atmosphere superheated to 120
degrees. Buchanan was serving a gun himself when he was wounded and
carried to the surgeon's table below. Captain Johnston fought on for
another twenty minutes, and then the "Tennessee," with her rudder and
engines useless and unable to fire a gun, was surrendered, after a
reluctant consent had been wrung from Buchanan, as he lay on the operating
table. [Illustration]




[Illustration: BATTLE AT SPOTTSYLVANIA. _Painted by E. Packbauer._

  _Copyright, 1901, by Perrien-Keydel Co.,
  Detroit, Mich., U. S. A._]




THE BATTLE OF SPOTSYLVANIA COURT HOUSE

    But to Spotsylvania history will accord the palm, I am sure, for
    having furnished an unexampled muzzle-to-muzzle fire; the longest roll
    of incessant, unbroken musketry; the most splendid exhibition of
    individual heroism and personal daring by large numbers, who, standing
    in the freshly spilt blood of their fellows, faced for so long a
    period and at so short a range the flaming rifles as they heralded the
    decrees of death. It was
    exhibited by both armies, and in that hand-to-hand struggle for the
    possession of the breastworks it seemed almost universal. It would be
    commonplace truism to say that such examples will not be lost to the
    Republic.--_General John B. Gordon, C. S. A., in "Reminiscences of the
    Civil War. "_


Immediately after the cessation of hostilities on the 6th of May in the
Wilderness, Grant determined to move his army to Spotsylvania Court House,
and to start the wagon trains on the afternoon of the 7th. Grant's object
was, by a flank move, to get between Lee and Richmond. Lee foresaw Grant's
purpose and also moved his cavalry, under Stuart, across the opponent's
path. As an illustration of the exact science of war we see the two great
military leaders racing for position at Spotsylvania Court House. It was
revealed later that Lee had already made preparations on this field a year
before, in anticipation of its being a possible battle-ground. Apprised of the movement of the Federal trains, Lee, with his usual
sagacious foresight, surmised their destination. He therefore ordered
General R. H. Anderson, now in command of Longstreet's corps, to march to
Spotsylvania Court House at three o'clock on the morning of the 8th. But
the smoke and flames from the burning forests that surrounded Anderson's
camp in the Wilderness made the position untenable, and the march was
begun at eleven o'clock on the night of the 7th. This early start proved
of inestimable value to the Confederates. Anderson's right, in the
Wilderness, rested opposite Hancock's left, and the Confederates secured a
more direct line of march to Spotsylvania, several miles shorter than that
of the Federals. The same night General Ewell at the extreme Confederate
left was ordered to follow Anderson at daylight, if he found no large
force in his front. This order was followed out, there being no opposing
troops, and the corps took the longest route of any of Lee's troops. General Ewell found the march exhausting and distressing on account of the
intense heat and dust and smoke from the burning forests. The Federal move toward Spotsylvania Court House was begun after dark on
the 7th. Warren's corps, in the lead, took the Brock road behind Hancock's
position and was followed by Sedgwick, who marched by way of
Chancellorsville. Burnside came next, but he was halted to guard the
trains. Hancock, covering the move, did not start the head of his command
until some time after daylight. When Warren reached Todd's Tavern he found
the Union cavalry under Merritt in conflict with Fitzhugh Lee's division
of Stuart's cavalry. Warren sent Robinson's division ahead; it drove
Fitzhugh Lee back, and, advancing rapidly, met the head of Anderson's
troops. The leading brigades came to the assistance of the cavalry; Warren
was finally repulsed and began entrenching. The Confederates gained
Spotsylvania Court House. Throughout the day there was continual skirmishing between the troops, as
the Northerners attempted to break the line of the Confederates. Every advance of the blue was repulsed. Lee again
blocked the way of Grant's move. The Federal loss during the day had been
about thirteen hundred, while the Confederates lost fewer men than their
opponents. The work of both was now the construction of entrenchments, which
consisted of earthworks sloping to either side, with logs as a parapet,
and between these works and the opposing army were constructed what are
known as abatis, felled trees, with the branches cut off, the sharp ends
projecting toward the approaching forces. Lee's entrenchments were of such character as to increase the efficiency
of his force. They were formed in the shape of a huge V with the apex
flattened, forming a salient angle against the center of the Federal line. The Confederate lines were facing north, northwest, and northeast, the
corps commanded by Anderson on the left, Ewell in the center, and Early on
the right, the latter temporarily replacing A. P. Hill, who was ill. The
Federals confronting them were Burnside on the left, Sedgwick and Warren
in the center, and Hancock on the right. The day of the 9th was spent in placing the lines of troops, with no
fighting except skirmishing and some sharp-shooting. While placing some
field-pieces, General Sedgwick was hit by a sharpshooter's bullet and
instantly killed. He was a man of high character, a most competent
commander, of fearless courage, loved and lamented by the army. General
Horatio G. Wright succeeded to the command of the Sixth Corps. Early on the morning of the 10th, the Confederates discovered that Hancock
had crossed the Po River in front of his position of the day before and
was threatening their rear. Grant had suspected that Lee was about to move
north toward Fredericksburg, and Hancock had been ordered to make a
reconnaissance with a view to attacking and turning the Confederate left. But difficulties stood in the way of Hancock's performance, and before he
had accomplished much, Meade directed him to send two of his divisions to
assist Warren in making an attack on the Southern lines. The Second Corps
started to recross the Po. Before all were over Early made a vigorous
assault on the rear division, which did not escape without heavy loss. In
this engagement the corps lost the first gun in its most honorable career,
a misfortune deeply lamented by every man in the corps, since up to this
moment it had long been the only one in the entire army which could make
the proud claim of never having lost a gun or a color. But the great event of the 10th was the direct assault upon the
Confederate front. Meade had arranged for Hancock to take charge of this,
and the appointed hour was five in the afternoon. But Warren reported
earlier that the opportunity was most favorable, and he was ordered to
start at once. Wearing his full uniform, the leader of the Fifth Corps
advanced at a quarter to four with the greater portion of his troops. The
progress of the valiant Northerners was one of the greatest difficulty,
owing to the dense wood of low cedar-trees through which they had to make
their way. Longstreet's corps behind their entrenchments acknowledged the
advance with very heavy artillery and musket fire. But Warren's troops did
not falter or pause until some had reached the abatis and others the very
crest of the parapet. A few, indeed, were actually killed inside the
works. All, however, who survived the terrible ordeal were finally driven
back with heavy loss. General James C. Rice was mortally wounded. To the left of Warren, General Wright had observed what he believed to be
a vulnerable spot in the Confederate entrenchments. Behind this particular
place was stationed Doles' brigade of Georgia regiments, and Colonel Emory
Upton was ordered to charge Doles with a column of twelve regiments in
four lines. The ceasing of the Federal artillery at six o'clock was the
signal for the charge, and twenty minutes later, as Upton tells us, "at
command, the lines rose, moved noiselessly to the edge of the wood, and
then, with a wild cheer and faces averted, rushed for the works. Through a
terrible front and flank fire the column advanced quickly, gaining the
parapet. Here occurred a deadly hand-to-hand conflict. The enemy, sitting
in their pits with pieces upright, loaded, and with bayonets fixed ready
to impale the first who should leap over, absolutely refused to yield the
ground. The first of our men who tried to surmount the works fell, pierced
through the head by musket-balls. Others, seeing the fate of their
comrades, held their pieces at arm's length and fired downward, while
others, poising their pieces vertically, hurled them down upon their
enemy, pinning them to the ground.... The struggle lasted but a few
seconds. Numbers prevailed, and like a resistless wave, the column poured
over the works, quickly putting _hors de combat_ those who resisted and
sending to the rear those who surrendered. Pressing forward and expanding
to the right and left, the second line of entrenchments, its line of
battle, and a battery fell into our hands. The column of assault had
accomplished its task." The Confederate line had been shattered and an opening made for expected
support. General Mott, on the left, did
not bring his division forward as had been planned and as General Wright
had ordered. The Confederates were reenforced, and Upton could do no more
than hold the captured entrenchments until ordered to retire. He brought
twelve hundred prisoners and several stands of colors back to the Union
lines; but over a thousand of his own men were killed or wounded. For
gallantry displayed in this charge, Colonel Upton was made
brigadier-general. The losses to the Union army in this engagement at Spotsylvania were over
four thousand. The loss to the Confederates was probably two thousand. The two giant antagonists took a
breathing spell. It was on the morning of this date that Grant penned the
sentence, "I propose to fight it out on this line if it takes all summer,"
to his chief of staff, General Halleck. During this time Sheridan, who had brought the cavalry up to a state of
great efficiency, was making an expedition to the vicinity of Richmond. He
had said that if he were permitted to operate independently of the army he
would draw Stuart after him. Grant at once gave the order, and Sheridan
made a detour around Lee's army, engaging and defeating the Confederate
cavalry, which he greatly outnumbered, on the 11th of May, at Yellow
Tavern, where General Stuart, the brilliant commander of the Confederate
cavalry, was mortally wounded. Grant carefully went over the ground and decided upon another attack on
the 12th. About four hundred yards of clear ground lay in front of the
sharp angle, or salient, of Lee's lines. After the battle this point was
known as the "Bloody Angle," and also as "Hell's Hole." Here Hancock was
ordered to make an attack at daybreak on the 12th. Lee had been expecting
a move on the part of Grant. On the evening of the 10th he sent to Ewell
this message: "It will be necessary for you to reestablish your whole line
to-night.... Perhaps Grant will make a night attack, as it was a favorite
amusement of his at Vicksburg." Through rain and mud Hancock's force was gotten into position within a few
hundred yards of the Confederate breastworks. He was now between Burnside
and Wright. At the first approach of dawn the four divisions of the Second
Corps, under Birney, Mott, Barlow, and Gibbon (in reserve) moved
noiselessly to the designated point of attack. Without a shot being fired
they reached the Confederate entrenchments, and struck with fury and
impetuosity a mortal blow at the point where least expected, on the
salient, held by General Edward Johnson of Ewell's corps. The movement of
the Federals was so swift and the surprise so complete, that the
Confederates could make practically no resistance, and were forced to
surrender. The artillery had been withdrawn from the earthworks occupied by Johnson's
troops on the previous night, but developments had led to an order to
have it returned early in the morning. It was approaching as the attack
was made. Before the artillerymen could escape or turn the guns upon the
Federals, every cannon had been captured. General Johnson with almost his
whole division, numbering about three thousand, and General Steuart, were
captured, between twenty and thirty colors, and several thousand stands of
arms were taken. Hancock had already distinguished himself as a leader of
his soldiers, and from his magnificent appearance, noble bearing, and
courage had been called "Hancock the Superb," but this was the most
brilliant of his military achievements. Pressing onward across the first defensive line of the Confederates,
Hancock's men advanced against the second series of trenches, nearly half
a mile beyond. As the Federals pushed through the muddy fields they lost
all formation. The Southerners
were prepared for the attack. A volley poured into the throng of blue, and
General Gordon with his reserve division rushed forward, fighting
desperately to drive the Northerners back. As they did so General Lee rode
up, evidently intending to go forward with Gordon. His horse was seized by
one of the soldiers, and for the second time in the campaign the cry arose
from the ranks, "Lee to the rear!" The beloved commander was led back from
the range of fire, while the men, under the inspiration of his example,
rushed forward in a charge that drove the Federals back until they had
reached the outer line of works. Here they fought stubbornly at deadly
range. Neither side was able to force the other back. But Gordon was not
able to cope with the entire attack. Wright and Warren both sent some of
their divisions to reenforce Hancock, and Lee sent all the assistance
possible to the troops struggling so desperately to restore his line at
the salient. Many vivid and picturesque descriptions of this fighting at the angle have
been written, some by eye-witnesses, others by able historians, but no
printed page, no cold type can convey to the mind the realities of that
terrible conflict. The whole engagement was
practically a hand-to-hand contest. The dead lay beneath the feet of the
living, three and four layers deep. This hitherto quiet spot of earth was
devastated and covered with the slain, weltering in their own blood,
mangled and shattered into scarcely a semblance of human form. Dying men
were crushed by horses and many, buried beneath the mire and mud, still
lived. Some artillery was posted on high ground not far from the apex of
the salient, and an incessant fire was poured into the Confederate works
over the Union lines, while other guns kept up an enfilade of canister
along the west of the salient. The contest from the right of the Sixth to the left of the Second Corps
was kept up throughout the day along the whole line. Repeatedly the
trenches had to be cleared of the dead. An oak tree twenty-two inches in
diameter was cut down by musket-balls. Men leaped upon the breastworks,
firing until shot down. The battle of the "angle" is said to have been the most awful in duration
and intensity in modern times. Battle-line after battle-line, bravely
obeying orders, was annihilated. The entrenchments were shivered and
shattered, trunks of trees carved into split brooms. Sometimes the
contestants came so close together that their muskets met, muzzle to
muzzle, and their flags almost intertwined with each other as they waved
in the breeze. As they fought with the desperation of madmen, the living
would stand on the bodies of the dead to reach over the breastworks with
their weapons of slaughter. Lee hurled his army with unparalleled vigor
against his opponent five times during the day, but each time was
repulsed. Until three o'clock the next morning the slaughter continued,
when the Confederates sank back into their second line of entrenchments,
leaving their opponents where they had stood in the morning. All the
fighting on the 12th was not done at the "Bloody Angle." Burnside on the
left of Hancock engaged Early's troops and was defeated, while on the
other side of the salient Wright succeeded in driving Anderson back. The question has naturally arisen why that "salient" was regarded of such
vital importance as to induce the two chief commanders to force their
armies into such a hand-to-hand contest that must inevitably result in
unparalleled and wholesale slaughter. It was manifest, however, that Grant
had shown generalship in finding the weak point in Lee's line for attack. It was imperative that he hold the gain made by his troops. Lee could ill
afford the loss resistance would entail, but he could not withdraw his
army during the day without disaster. The men on both sides seemed to comprehend the gravity of the situation,
that it was a battle to the death for that little point of entrenchment. Without urging by officers, and sometimes without officers, they fell into
line and fought and bled and died in myriads as though inspired by some
unseen power. Here men rushed to their doom with shouts of courage and
eagerness. The pity of it all was manifested by the shocking scene on that
battlefield the next day. Piles of dead lay around the "Bloody Angle," a
veritable "Hell's Hole" on both sides of the entrenchments, four layers
deep in places, shattered and torn by bullets and hoofs and clubbed
muskets, while beneath the layers of dead, it is said, there could be seen
quivering limbs of those who still lived. General Grant was deeply moved at the terrible loss of life. When he
expressed his regret for the heavy sacrifice of men to General Meade, the
latter replied, "General, we can't do these little tricks without heavy
losses." The total loss to the Union army in killed, wounded, and missing
at Spotsylvania was nearly eighteen thousand. The Confederate losses have
never been positively known, but from the best available sources of
information the number has been placed at not less than nine thousand men. Lee's loss in high officers was very severe, the killed including General
Daniel and General Perrin, while Generals Walker, Ramseur, R. D. Johnston,
and McGowan were severely wounded. In addition to the loss of these
important commanders, Lee was further crippled in efficient commanders by
the capture of Generals Edward Johnson and Steuart. The Union loss in high
officers was light, excepting General Sedgwick on the 9th. General Webb
was wounded, and Colonel <DW53>, of the Second Corps, was killed. Lee's forces had been handled with such consummate skill as to make them
count one almost for two, and there was the spirit of devotion for Lee
among his soldiers which was indeed practically hero-worship. All in all,
he had an army, though shattered and worn, that was almost unconquerable. Grant found that ordinary methods of war, even such as he had experienced
in the West, were not applicable to the Army of Northern Virginia. The
only hope for the Union army was a long-drawn-out process, and with larger
numbers, better kept, and more often relieved, Grant's army would
ultimately make that of Lee's succumb, from sheer exhaustion and
disintegration. The battle was not terminated on the 12th. During the next five days there
was a continuous movement of the Union corps to the east which was met by
a corresponding readjustment of the Confederate lines. After various
maneuvers, Hancock was ordered to the point where the battle was fought on
the 12th, and on the 18th and 19th, the last effort was made to break the
lines of the Confederates. Ewell, however, drove the Federals back and the
next day he had a severe engagement with the Union left wing, while
endeavoring to find out something of Grant's plans. Twelve days of active effort were thus spent in skirmishing, fighting, and
countermarching. In the last two engagements the Union losses were nearly
two thousand, which are included in those before stated. It was decided to
abandon the attempt to dislodge Lee from his entrenchments, and to move
to the North Anna River. On the 20th of May the march was resumed. The men
had suffered great hardships from hunger, exposure, and incessant action,
and many would fall asleep on the line of march. On the day after the start, Hancock crossed the Mattapony River at one
point and Warren at another. Hancock was ordered to take position on the
right bank and, if practicable, to attack the Confederates wherever found. By the 22d, Wright and Burnside came up and the march proceeded. But the
vigilant Lee had again detected the plans of his adversary. Meade's army had barely started in its purpose to turn the Confederates'
flank when the Southern forces were on the way to block the army of the
North. As on the march from the Wilderness to Spotsylvania, Lee's troops
took the shorter route, along main roads, and reached the North Anna ahead
of the Federals. Warren's corps was the first of Meade's army to arrive at
the north bank of the river, which it did on the afternoon of May 23d. Lee
was already on the south bank, but Warren crossed without opposition. No
sooner had he gotten over, however, than he was attacked by the
Confederates and a severe but undecisive engagement followed. The next
morning (the 24th) Hancock and Wright put their troops across at places
some miles apart, and before these two wings of the army could be joined,
Lee made a brilliant stroke by marching in between them, forming a wedge
whose point rested on the bank, opposite the Union center, under Burnside,
which had not yet crossed the river. The Army of the Potomac was now in three badly separated parts. Burnside
could not get over in sufficient strength to reenforce the wings, and all
attempts by the latter to aid him in so doing met with considerable
disaster. The loss in these engagements approximated two thousand on each
side. On the 25th, Sheridan and his cavalry rejoined the army. They had been
gone since the 9th and their raid was most successful. Besides the
decisive victory over the Confederate cavalry at Yellow Tavern, they had
destroyed several depots of supplies, four trains of cars, and many miles
of railroad track. Nearly four hundred Federal prisoners on their way to
Richmond had been rescued from their captors. The dashing cavalrymen had
even carried the first line of work around Richmond, and had made a detour
down the James to communicate with General Butler. Grant was highly
satisfied with Sheridan's performance. It had been of the greatest
assistance to him, as it had drawn off the whole of the Confederate
cavalry, and made the guarding of the wagon trains an easy matter. But here, on the banks of the North Anna, Grant had been completely
checkmated by Lee. He realized this and decided on a new move, although he
still clung to his idea of turning the Confederate right. The Federal
wings were withdrawn to the north side of the river during the night of
May 26th and the whole set in motion for the Pamunkey River at
Hanovertown. Two divisions of Sheridan's cavalry and Warren's corps were
in advance. Lee lost no time in pursuing his great antagonist, but for the
first time the latter was able to hold his lead. Along the Totopotomoy, on
the afternoon of May 28th, infantry and cavalry of both armies met in a
severe engagement in which the strong position of Lee's troops again
foiled Grant's purpose. The Union would have to try at some other point,
and on the 31st Sheridan's cavalry took possession of Cold Harbor. This
was to be the next battle-ground. [Illustration: IN THE AUTUMN OF 1863--GRANT'S CHANGING EXPRESSIONS]

Although secure in his fame as the conqueror of Vicksburg, Grant still has
the greater part of his destiny to fulfil as he faces the camera. Before
him lie the Wilderness, Spotsylvania, Cold Harbor, and the slow investment
of Petersburg. This series forms a particularly interesting study in
expression. At the left hand, the face looks almost amused. In the next
the expression is graver, the mouth close set. The third picture looks
plainly obstinate, and in the last the stern fighter might have been
declaring, as in the following spring: "I propose to fight it out on this
line if it takes all summer." The eyes, first unveiled fully in this
fourth view, are the unmistakable index to Grant's stern inflexibility,
once his decision was made. [Illustration: IN THE AUTUMN OF 1864--AFTER THE STRAIN OF THE WILDERNESS
CAMPAIGN]

Here is a furrowed brow above eyes worn by pain. In the pictures of the
previous year the forehead is more smooth, the expression grave yet
confident. Here the expression is that of a man who has won, but won at a
bitter cost. It is the memory of the 50,000 men whom he left in the
Wilderness campaign and at Cold Harbor that has lined this brow, and
closed still tighter this inflexible mouth. Again, as in the series above,
the eyes are not revealed until the last picture. Then again flashes the
determination of a hero. The great general's biographers say that Grant
was a man of sympathy and infinite pity. It was the more difficult for
him, spurred on to the duty by grim necessity, to order forward the lines
in blue that withered, again and again, before the Confederate fire, but
each time weakened the attenuated line which confronted them. [Illustration: MEADE AND SEDGWICK--BEFORE THE ADVANCE THAT BROUGHT
SEDGWICK'S DEATH AT SPOTSYLVANIA

COPYRIGHT 1911, PATRIOT PUB. To the right of General Meade, his chief and friend, stands Major-General
John Sedgwick, commanding the Sixth Army Corps. He wears his familiar
round hat and is smiling. He was a great tease; evidently the performances
of the civilian who had brought his new-fangled photographic apparatus
into camp suggested a joke. A couple of months later, on the 9th of May,
Sedgwick again was jesting--before Spotsylvania Court House. McMahon of
his staff had begged him to avoid passing some artillery exposed to the
Confederate fire, to which Sedgwick had playfully replied, "McMahon, I
would like to know who commands this corps, you or I?" Then he ordered
some infantry before him to shift toward the right. Their movement drew
the fire of the Confederates. The lines were close together; the situation
tense. A sharpshooter's bullet whistled--Sedgwick fell. He was taken to
Meade's headquarters. The Army of the Potomac had lost another corps
commander, and the Union a brilliant and courageous soldier. [Illustration: SPOTSYLVANIA COURT HOUSE

WHERE GRANT WANTED TO "FIGHT IT OUT"

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] For miles around this quaint old village-pump surged the lines of two vast
contending armies, May 8-12, 1864. In this picture of only a few months
later, the inhabitants have returned to their accustomed quiet, although
the reverberations of battle have hardly died away. But on May 7th
Generals Grant and Meade, with their staffs, had started toward the little
courthouse. As they passed along the Brock Road in the rear of Hancock's
lines, the men broke into loud hurrahs. They saw that the movement was
still to be southward. But chance had caused Lee to choose the same
objective. Misinterpreting Grant's movement as a retreat upon
Fredericksburg, he sent Longstreet's corps, now commanded by Anderson, to
Spotsylvania. Chance again, in the form of a forest fire, drove Anderson
to make, on the night of May 7th, the march from the Wilderness that he
had been ordered to commence on the morning of the 8th. On that day, while
Warren was contending with the forces of Anderson, Lee's whole army was
entrenching on a ridge around Spotsylvania Court House. "Accident," says
Grant, "often decides the fate of battle." But this "accident" was one of
Lee's master moves. [Illustration: THE APEX OF THE BATTLEFIELD

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] McCool's house, within the "Bloody Angle." The photographs were taken in
1864, shortly after the struggle of Spotsylvania Court House, and show the
old dwelling as it was on May 12th, when the fighting was at flood tide
all round it; and below, the Confederate entrenchments near that
blood-drenched spot. At a point in these Confederate lines in advance of
the McCool house, the entrenchments had been thrown forward like the
salient of a fort, and the wedge-shaped space within them was destined to
become renowned as the "Bloody Angle." The position was defended by the
famous "Stonewall Division" of the Confederates under command of General
Edward Johnson. It was near the scene of Upton's gallant charge on the
10th. Here at daybreak on May 12th the divisions of the intrepid Barlow
and Birney, sent forward by Hancock, stole a march upon the unsuspecting
Confederates. Leaping over the breastworks the Federals were upon them and
the first of the terrific hand-to-hand conflicts that marked the day
began. It ended in victory for Hancock's men, into whose hands fell 20
cannon, 30 standards and 4,000 prisoners, "the best division in the
Confederate army." [Illustration: CONFEDERATE ENTRENCHMENTS NEAR "BLOODY ANGLE"]

Flushed with success, the Federals pressed on to Lee's second line of
works, where Wilcox's division of the Confederates held them until
reenforcements sent by Lee from Hill and Anderson drove them back. On the
Federal side the Sixth Corps, with Upton's brigade in the advance, was
hurried forward to hold the advantage gained. But Lee himself was on the
scene, and the men of the gallant Gordon's division, pausing long enough
to seize and turn his horse, with shouts of "General Lee in the rear,"
hurtled forward into the conflict. In five separate charges by the
Confederates the fighting came to close quarters. With bayonets, clubbed
muskets, swords and pistols, men fought within two feet of one another on
either side of the entrenchments at "Bloody Angle" till night at last left
it in possession of the Federals. None of the fighting near Spotsylvania
Court House was inglorious. On the 10th, after a day of strengthening
positions on both sides, young Colonel Emory Upton of the 121st New York,
led a storming party of twelve regiments into the strongest of the
Confederate entrenchments. For his bravery Grant made him a
brigadier-general on the field. [Illustration: UNION ARTILLERY MASSING FOR THE ADVANCE THAT EWELL'S ATTACK
DELAYED THAT SAME AFTERNOON

BEVERLY HOUSE, MAY 18, 1864

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. The artillery massing in the meadow gives to this view the interest of an
impending tragedy. In the foreground the officers, servants, and orderlies
of the headquarters mess camp are waiting for the command to strike their
tents, pack the wagons, and move on. But at the very time this photograph
was taken they should have been miles away. Grant had issued orders the
day before that should have set these troops in motion. However, the
Confederate General Ewell had chosen the 18th to make an attack on the
right flank. It not only delayed the departure but forced a change in the
intended positions of the division as they had been contemplated by the
commander-in-chief. Beverly House is where General Warren pitched his
headquarters after Spotsylvania, and the spectator is looking toward the
battlefield that lies beyond the distant woods. After Ewell's attack,
Warren again found himself on the right flank, and at this very moment the
main body of the Federal army is passing in the rear of him. The costly
check at Spotsylvania, with its wonderful display of fighting on both
sides, had in its apparently fruitless results called for the display of
all Grant's gifts as a military leader. It takes but little imagination to
supply color to this photograph; it is full of it--full of the movement
and detail of war also. It is springtime; blossoms have just left the
trees and the whole country is green and smiling, but the earth is scarred
by thousands of trampling feet and hoof-prints. Ugly ditches cross the
landscape; the debris of an army marks its onsweep from one battlefield to
another. [Illustration: THE ONES WHO NEVER CAME BACK

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. These are some of the men for whom waiting women wept--the ones who never
came back. They belonged to Ewell's Corps, who attacked the Federal lines
so gallantly on May 18th. There may be some who will turn from this
picture with a shudder of horror, but it is no morbid curiosity that will
cause them to study it closely. If pictures such as this were familiar
everywhere there would soon be an end of war. We can realize money by
seeing it expressed in figures; we can realize distances by miles, but
some things in their true meaning can only be grasped and impressions
formed with the seeing eye. Visualizing only this small item of the awful
cost--the cost beside which money cuts no figure--an idea can be gained of
what war is. Here is a sermon in the cause of universal peace. The
handsome lad lying with outstretched arms and clinched fingers is a mute
plea. Death has not disfigured him--he lies in an attitude of relaxation
and composure. Perhaps in some Southern home this same face is pictured in
the old family album, alert and full of life and hope, and here is the
end. Does there not come to the mind the insistent question, "Why?" The
Federal soldiers standing in the picture are not thinking of all this, it
may be true, but had they meditated in the way that some may, as they gaze
at this record of death, it would be worth their while. One of the men is
apparently holding a sprig of blossoms in his hand. [Illustration: IN ONE LONG BURIAL TRENCH

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. It fell to the duty of the First Massachusetts Heavy Artillery of General
Tyler's division to put under ground the men they slew in the sharp battle
of May 18th, and here they are near Mrs. Allsop's barn digging the trench
to hide the dreadful work of bullet and shot and shell. No feeling of
bitterness exists in moments such as these. What soldier in the party
knows but what it may be his turn next to lie beside other lumps of clay
and join his earth-mother in this same fashion in his turn. But men become
used to work of any kind, and these men digging up the warm spring soil,
when their labor is concluded, are neither oppressed nor nerve-shattered
by what they have seen and done. They have lost the power of experiencing
sensation. Senses become numbed in a measure; the value of life itself
from close and constant association with death is minimized almost to the
vanishing point. In half an hour these very men may be singing and
laughing as if war and death were only things to be expected, not reasoned
over in the least. [Illustration: ONE OF THE FEARLESS CONFEDERATES]


[Illustration: THE REDOUBT THAT LEE LET GO

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. This redoubt covered Taylor's Bridge, but its flanks were swept by
artillery and an enfilading fire from rifle-pits across the river. Late in
the evening of the 23d, Hancock's corps, arriving before the redoubt, had
assaulted it with two brigades and easily carried it. During the night the
Confederates from the other side made two attacks upon the bridge and
finally succeeded in setting it afire. The flames were extinguished by the
Federals, and on the 24th Hancock's troops crossed over without
opposition. The easy crossing of the Federals here was but another example
of Lee's favorite rule to let his antagonist attack him on the further
side of a stream. Taylor's Bridge could easily have been held by Lee for a
much longer time, but its ready abandonment was part of the tactics by
which Grant was being led into a military dilemma. In the picture the
Federal soldiers confidently hold the captured redoubt, convinced that the
possession of it meant that they had driven Lee to his last corner. [Illustration: "WALK YOUR HORSES"

ONE OF THE GRIM JOKES OF WAR AS PLAYED AT CHESTERFIELD BRIDGE, NORTH ANNA

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] The sign posted by the local authorities at Taylor's bridge, where the
Telegraph Road crosses the North Anna, was "Walk your horses." The wooden
structure was referred to by the military as Chesterfield bridge. Here
Hancock's Corps arrived toward evening of May 23d, and the Confederate
entrenchments, showing in the foreground, were seized by the old "Berry
Brigade." In the heat of the charge the Ninety-third New York carried
their colors to the middle of the bridge, driving off the Confederates
before they could destroy it. When the Federals began crossing next day
they had to run the gantlet of musketry and artillery fire from the
opposite bank. Several regiments of New York heavy artillery poured across
the structure at the double-quick with the hostile shells bursting about
their heads. When Captain Sleeper's Eighteenth Massachusetts battery began
crossing, the Confederate cannoneers redoubled their efforts to blow up
the ammunition by well-aimed shots. Sleeper passed over only one piece at
a time in order to diminish the target and enforce the observance of the
local law by walking his horses! The Second Corps got no further than the
ridge beyond, where Lee's strong V formation held it from further
advance. [Illustration: A SANITARY-COMMISSION NURSE AND HER PATIENTS AT
FREDERICKSBURG, MAY, 1864

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. More of the awful toll of 36,000 taken from the Union army during the
terrible Wilderness campaign. The Sanitary Commission is visiting the
field hospital established near the Rappahannock River, a mile or so from
the heights, where lay at the same time the wounded from these terrific
conflicts. Although the work of this Commission was only supplementary
after 1862, they continued to supply many delicacies, and luxuries such as
crutches, which did not form part of the regular medical corps
paraphernalia. The effect of their work can be seen here, and also the
appearance of men after the shock of gunshot wounds. All injuries during
the war practically fell under three headings: incised and punctured
wounds, comprising saber cuts, bayonet stabs, and sword thrusts;
miscellaneous, from falls, blows from blunt weapons, and various
accidents; lastly, and chiefly, gunshot wounds. The war came prior to the
demonstration of the fact that the causes of disease and suppurative
conditions are living organisms of microscopic size. Septicemia,
erysipelas, lockjaw, and gangrene were variously attributed to dampness
and a multitude of other conditions. [Illustration: A CHANGE OF BASE--THE CAVALRY SCREEN

COPYRIGHT 1911 PATRIOT PUB. This photograph of May 30, 1864, shows the Federal cavalry in actual
operation of a most important function--the "screening" of the army's
movements. The troopers are guarding the evacuation of Port Royal on the
Rappahannock, May 30, 1864. After the reverse to the Union arms at
Spottsylvania, Grant ordered the change of base from the Rappahannock to
McClellan's former starting-point, White House on the Pamunkey. The
control of the waterways, combined with Sheridan's efficient use of the
cavalry, made this an easy matter. Torbert's division encountered Gordon's
brigade of Confederate cavalry at Hanovertown and drove it in the
direction of Hanover Court House. Gregg's division moved up to this line;
Russell's division of infantry encamped near the river-crossing in
support, and behind the mask thus formed the Army of the Potomac crossed
the Pamunkey on May 28th unimpeded. Gregg was then ordered to reconnoiter
towards Mechanicsville, and after a severe fight at Hawes' shop he
succeeded (with the assistance of Custer's brigade) in driving Hampton's
and Fitzhugh Lee's cavalry divisions and Butler's brigade from the field. Although the battle took place immediately in front of the Federal
infantry, General Meade declined to put the latter into action, and the
battle was won by the cavalry alone. COLD HARBOR

    Cold Harbor is, I think, the only battle I ever fought that I would
    not fight over again under the circumstances. I have always regretted
    that the last assault at Cold Harbor was ever made.--_General U. S.
    Grant in his "Memoirs. "_


According to Grant's well-made plans of march, the various corps of the
Army of the Potomac set out from the banks of the North Anna on the night
of May 26, 1864, at the times and by the routes assigned to them. Early on
the morning of May 27th Lee set his force in motion by the Telegraph road
and such others as were available, across the Little and South Anna rivers
toward Ashland and Atlee's Station on the Virginia Central Railroad. Thus the armies were stretched like two live wires along the swampy
bottom-lands of eastern Virginia, and as they came in contact, here and
there along the line, there were the inevitable sputterings of flame and
considerable destruction wrought. The advance Federal infantry crossed the
Pamunkey, after the cavalry, at Hanoverstown, early on May 28th. The
Second Corps was close behind the Sixth; the Fifth was over by noon, while
the Ninth, now an integral portion of the Army of the Potomac, passed the
river by midnight. On the 31st General Sheridan reached Cold Harbor, which Meade had ordered
him to hold at all hazards. This place, probably named after the old home
of some English settler, was not a town but the meeting-place of several
roads of great strategic importance to the Federal army. They led not only
toward Richmond by the way of the upper Chickahominy bridges, but in the
direction of White House Landing, on the Pamunkey River. Both Lee and Meade had received reenforcements--the former by
Breckinridge, and the scattered forces in western Virginia, and by Pickett
and Hoke from North Carolina. From Bermuda Hundred where General Butler
was "bottled up"--to use a phrase which Grant employed and afterward
regretted--General W. F. Smith was ordered to bring the Eighteenth Corps
of the Army of the James to the assistance of Meade, since Butler could
defend his position perfectly well with a small force, and could make no
headway against Beauregard with a large one. Grant had now nearly one
hundred and fourteen thousand troops and Lee about eighty thousand. Sheridan's appearance at Cold Harbor was resented in vain by Fitzhugh Lee,
and the next morning, June 1st, the Sixth Corps arrived, followed by
General Smith and ten thousand men of the Eighteenth, who had hastened
from the landing-place at White House. These took position on the right of
the Sixth, and the Federal line was promptly faced by Longstreet's corps,
a part of A. P. Hill's, and the divisions of Hoke and Breckinridge. At six
o'clock in the afternoon Wright and Smith advanced to the attack, which
Hoke and Kershaw received with courage and determination. The Confederate
line was broken in several places, but before night checked the struggle
the Southerners had in some degree regained their position. The short
contest was a severe one for the Federal side. Wright lost about twelve
hundred men and Smith one thousand. The following day the final dispositions were made for the mighty struggle
that would decide Grant's last chance to interpose between Lee and
Richmond. Hancock and the Second Corps arrived at Cold Harbor and took
position on the left of General Wright. Burnside, with the Ninth Corps,
was placed near Bethesda Church on the road to Mechanicsville, while
Warren, with the Fifth, came to his left and connected with Smith's right. Sheridan was sent to hold the lower Chickahominy bridges and to cover the
road to White House, which was now the base of supplies. On the Southern
side Ewell's corps, now commanded by General Early, faced Burnside's and
Warren's. Longstreet's corps, still under Anderson, was opposite Wright
and Smith, while A. P. Hill, on the extreme right, confronted Hancock. There was sharp fighting during the entire day, but Early did not succeed
in getting upon the Federal right flank, as he attempted to do. Both armies lay very close to each other and were well entrenched. Lee was
naturally strong on his right, and his left was difficult of access, since
it must be approached through wooded swamps. Well-placed batteries made
artillery fire from front and both flanks possible, but Grant decided to
attack the whole Confederate front, and word was sent to the corps
commanders to assault at half-past four the following morning. The hot sultry weather of the preceding days had brought much suffering. The movement of troops and wagons raised clouds of dust which settled down
upon the sweltering men and beasts. But five o'clock on the afternoon of
June 2d brought the grateful rain, and this continued during the night,
giving great relief to the exhausted troops. At the hour designated the Federal lines moved promptly from their shallow
rifle-pits toward the Confederate works. The main assault was made by the
Second, Sixth, and Eighteenth corps. With determined and firm step they
started to cross the space between the opposing entrenchments. The silence
of the dawning summer morning was broken by the screams of musket-ball and
canister and shell. That move of the Federal battle-line opened the fiery
furnace across the intervening space, which was, in the next instant, a
Vesuvius, pouring tons and tons of steel and lead into the moving human
mass. From front, from right and left, artillery crashed and swept the
field, musketry and grape hewed and mangled and mowed down the line of
blue as it moved on its approach. Meade issued orders for the suspension of all further offensive
operations. A word remains to be said as to fortunes of Burnside's and Warren's
forces, which were on the Federal right. Generals Potter and Willcox of
the Ninth Corps made a quick capture of Early's advanced rifle-pits and
were waiting for the order to advance on his main entrenchments, when the
order of suspension arrived. Early fell upon him later in the day but was
repulsed. Warren, on the left of Burnside, drove Rodes' division back and
repulsed Gordon's brigade, which had attacked him. The commander of the
Fifth Corps reported that his line was too extended for further operations
and Birney's division was sent from the Second Corps to his left. But by
the time this got into position the battle of Cold Harbor was practically
over. The losses to the Federal army in this battle and the engagements which
preceded it were over seventeen thousand, while the Confederate loss did
not exceed one-fifth of that number. Grant had failed in his plan to
destroy Lee north of the James River, and saw that he must now cross it. Thirty days had passed in the campaign since the Wilderness and the grand
total in losses to Grant's army in killed, wounded, and missing was
54,929. The losses in Lee's army were never accurately given, but they
were very much less in proportion to the numerical strength of the two
armies. If Grant had inflicted punishment upon his foe equal to that
suffered by the Federal forces, Lee's army would have been practically
annihilated. The Federal general-in-chief had decided to secure Petersburg and confront
Lee once more. General Gillmore was sent by Butler, with cavalry and
infantry, on June 10th to make the capture, but was unsuccessful. Thereupon General Smith and the Eighteenth Corps were despatched to White
House Landing to go forward by water and reach Petersburg before Lee had
time to reenforce it. [Illustration: READY FOR THE ADVANCE THAT LEE DROVE BACK

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. Between these luxuriant banks stretch the pontoons and bridges to
facilitate the rapid crossing of the North Anna by Hancock's Corps on May
24th. Thus was completed the passage to the south of the stream of the two
wings of the Army of the Potomac. But when the center under Burnside was
driven back and severely handled at Ox Ford, Grant immediately detached a
brigade each from Hancock and Warren to attack the apex of Lee's wedge on
the south bank of the river, but the position was too strong to justify
the attempt. Then it dawned upon the Federal general-in-chief that Lee had
cleaved the Army of the Potomac into two separated bodies. To reenforce
either wing would require two crossings of the river, while Lee could
quickly march troops from one side to the other within his impregnable
wedge. As Grant put it in his report, "To make a direct attack from either
wing would cause a slaughter of our men that even success would not
justify." [Illustration: IMPROVISED BREASTWORKS

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] The End of the Gray Line at Cold Harbor. Here at the extreme left of the
Confederate lines at Cold Harbor is an example of the crude protection
resorted to by the soldiers on both sides in advance or retreat. A
momentary lull in the battle was invariably employed in strengthening each
position. Trees were felled under fire, and fence rails gathered quickly
were piled up to make possible another stand. The space between the lines
at Cold Harbor was so narrow at many points as to resemble a road,
encumbered with the dead and wounded. This extraordinary proximity induced
a nervous alertness which made the troops peculiarly sensitive to night
alarms; even small parties searching quietly for wounded comrades might
begin a panic. A few scattering shots were often enough to start a heavy
and continuous musketry fire and a roar of artillery along the entire
line. It was a favorite ruse of the Federal soldiers to aim their muskets
carefully to clear the top of the Confederate breastworks and then set up
a great shout. The Confederates, deceived into the belief that an attack
was coming, would spring up and expose themselves to the well-directed
volley which thinned their ranks. COLD HARBOR

[Illustration: WHERE TEN THOUSAND FELL

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. The battle of Cold Harbor on June 3d was the third tremendous engagement
of Grant's campaign against Richmond within a month. It was also his
costliest onset on Lee's veteran army. Grant had risked much in his change
of base to the James in order to bring him nearer to Richmond and to the
friendly hand which Butler with the Army of the James was in a position to
reach out to him. Lee had again confronted him, entrenching himself but
six miles from the outworks of Richmond, while the Chickahominy cut off
any further flanking movement. There was nothing to do but fight it out,
and Grant ordered an attack all along the line. On June 3d he hurled the
Army of the Potomac against the inferior numbers of Lee, and in a brave
assault upon the Confederate entrenchments, lost ten thousand men in
twenty minutes. [Illustration: FEDERAL CAMP AT COLD HARBOR AFTER THE BATTLE

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. Grant's assault at Cold Harbor was marked by the gallantry of General
Hancock's division and of the brigades of Gibbon and Barlow, who on the
left of the Federal line charged up the ascent in their front upon the
concentrated artillery of the Confederates; they took the position and
held it for a moment under a galling fire, which finally drove them back,
but not until they had captured a flag and three hundred prisoners. The
battle was substantially over by half-past seven in the morning, but
sullen fighting continued throughout the day. About noontime General
Grant, who had visited all the corps commanders to see for himself the
positions gained and what could be done, concluded that the Confederates
were too strongly entrenched to be dislodged and ordered that further
offensive action should cease. All the next day the dead and wounded lay
on the field uncared for while both armies warily watched each other. The
lower picture was taken during this weary wait. Not till the 7th was a
satisfactory truce arranged, and then all but two of the wounded Federals
had died. No wonder that Grant wrote, "I have always regretted that the
last assault at Cold Harbor was ever made." [Illustration: THE BUSIEST PLACE IN DIXIE

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] City Point, just after its capture by Butler. From June, 1864, until
April, 1865, City Point, at the juncture of the Appomattox and the James,
was a point of entry and departure for more vessels than any city of the
South including even New Orleans in times of peace. Here landed supplies
that kept an army numbering, with fighting force and supernumeraries,
nearly one hundred and twenty thousand well-supplied, well-fed,
well-contented, and well-munitioned men in the field. This was the
marvelous base--safe from attack, secure from molestation. It was meals
and money that won at Petersburg, the bravery of full stomachs and
warm-clothed bodies against the desperation of starved and shivering
outnumbered men. There is no
need of rehearsing charges, countercharges, mines, and counter-mines. Here
lies the reason--Petersburg had to fall. As we look back with a
retrospective eye on this scene of plenty and abundance, well may the
American heart be proud that only a few miles away were men of their own
blood enduring the hardships that the defenders of Petersburg suffered in
the last campaign of starvation against numbers and plenty. [Illustration: THE FORCES AT LAST JOIN HANDS

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. Charles City Court House on the James River, June 14, 1864. It was with
infinite relief that Grant saw the advance of the Army of the Potomac
reach this point on June 14th. His last flanking movement was an extremely
hazardous one. More than fifty miles intervened between him and Butler by
the roads he would have to travel, and he had to cross both the
Chickahominy and the James, which were unbridged. The paramount difficulty
was to get the Army of the Potomac out of its position before Lee, who
confronted it at Cold Harbor. Lee had the shorter line and better roads to
move over and meet Grant at the Chickahominy, or he might, if he chose,
descend rapidly on Butler and crush him before Grant could unite with him. "But," says Grant, "the move had to be made, and I relied upon Lee's not
seeing my danger as I saw it." Near the old Charles City Court House the
crossing of the James was successfully accomplished, and on the 14th Grant
took steamer and ran up the river to Bermuda Hundred to see General Butler
and direct the movement against Petersburg, that began the final
investment of that city. [Illustration: THE MONITOR IN A STORM. _Painted by Robert Hopkin._

  _Copyright, 1901, by Perrien-Keydel Co.,
  Detroit, Mich., U. S. A._]




TO ATLANTA

    Johnston was an officer who, by the common consent of the military men
    of both sides, was reckoned second only to Lee, if second, in the
    qualities which fit an officer for the responsibility of great
    commands.... He practised a lynx-eyed watchfulness of his adversary,
    tempting him constantly to assault his entrenchments, holding his
    fortified positions to the last moment, but choosing that last moment
    so well as to save nearly every gun and wagon in the final withdrawal,
    and always presenting a front covered by such defenses that one man in
    the line was, by all sound military rules, equal to three or four in
    the attack. In this way he constantly neutralized the superiority of
    force his opponent wielded, and made his campaign from Dalton to the
    Chattahoochee a model of defensive warfare. It is Sherman's glory
    that, with a totally different temperament, he accepted his
    adversary's game, and played it with a skill that was finally
    successful, as we shall see.--_Major-General Jacob D. Cox, U. S. V.,
    in "Atlanta. "_


The two leading Federal generals of the war, Grant and Sherman, met at
Nashville, Tennessee, on March 17, 1864, and arranged for a great
concerted double movement against the two main Southern armies, the Army
of Northern Virginia and the Army of Tennessee. Grant, who had been made
commander of all the Federal armies, was to take personal charge of the
Army of the Potomac and move against Lee, while to Sherman, whom, at
Grant's request, President Lincoln had placed at the head of the Military
Division of the Mississippi, he turned over the Western army, which was to
proceed against Johnston. It was decided, moreover, that the two movements were to be simultaneous
and that they were to begin early in May. Sherman concentrated his forces
around Chattanooga on the Tennessee River, where the Army of the
Cumberland had spent the winter, and where a decisive battle had been
fought some months before, in the autumn of 1863. His army was composed of
three parts, or, more properly, of three armies operating in concert. These were the Army of the Tennessee, led by General James B. McPherson;
the Army of Ohio, under General John M. Schofield, and the Army of the
Cumberland, commanded by General George H. Thomas. The last named was much
larger than the other two combined. The triple army aggregated the grand
total of ninety-nine thousand men, six thousand of whom were cavalrymen,
while four thousand four hundred and sixty belonged to the artillery. There were two hundred and fifty-four heavy guns. Soon to be pitted against Sherman's army was that of General Joseph E.
Johnston, which had spent the winter at Dalton, in the State of Georgia,
some thirty miles southeast of Chattanooga. It was by chance that Dalton
became the winter quarters of the Confederate army. In the preceding
autumn, when General Bragg had been defeated on Missionary Ridge and
driven from the vicinity of Chattanooga, he retreated to Dalton and
stopped for a night's rest. Discovering the next morning that he was not
pursued, he there remained. Some time later he was superseded by General
Johnston. By telegraph, General Sherman was apprised of the time when Grant was to
move upon Lee on the banks of the Rapidan, in Virginia, and he prepared to
move his own army at the same time. But he was two days behind Grant, who
began his Virginia campaign on May 4th. Sherman broke camp on the 6th and
led his legions across hill and valley, forest and stream, toward the
Confederate stronghold. Nature was all abloom with the opening of a
Southern spring and the soldiers, who had long chafed under their enforced
idleness, now rejoiced at the exhilarating journey before them, though
their mission was to be one of strife and bloodshed. Johnston's army numbered about fifty-three thousand, and was divided into
two corps, under the respective commands of Generals John B. Hood and
William J. Hardee. But General Polk was on his way to join them, and in a
few days Johnston had in the neighborhood of seventy thousand men. His
position at Dalton was too strong to be carried by a front attack, and
Sherman was too wise to attempt it. Leaving Thomas and Schofield to make a
feint at Johnston's front, Sherman sent McPherson on a flanking movement
by the right to occupy Snake Creek Gap, a mountain pass near Resaca, which
is about eighteen miles below Dalton. Sherman, with the main part of the army, soon occupied Tunnel Hill, which
faces Rocky Face Ridge, an eastern range of the Cumberland Mountains,
north of Dalton, on which a large part of Johnston's army was posted. The
Federal leader had little or no hope of dislodging his great antagonist
from this impregnable position, fortified by rocks and cliffs which no
army could scale while under fire. But he ordered that demonstrations be
made at several places, especially at a pass known as Rocky Face Gap. This
was done with great spirit and bravery, the men clambering over rocks and
across ravines in the face of showers of bullets and even of masses of
stone hurled down from the heights above them. On the whole they won but
little advantage. During the 8th and 9th of May, these operations were continued, the
Federals making but little impression on the Confederate stronghold. Meanwhile, on the Dalton road there was a sharp cavalry fight, the Federal
commander, General E. M. McCook, having encountered General Wheeler. McCook's advance brigade under Colonel La Grange was defeated and La
Grange was made prisoner. Sherman's chief object in these demonstrations, it will be seen, was so to
engage Johnston as to prevent his intercepting McPherson in the latter's
movement upon Resaca. In this Sherman was successful, and by the 11th he
was giving his whole energy to moving the remainder of his forces by the
right flank, as McPherson had done, to Resaca, leaving a detachment of
General O. O. Howard's Fourth Corps to occupy Dalton when evacuated. When
Johnston discovered this, he was quick to see that he must abandon his
entrenchments and intercept Sherman. Moving by the only two good roads,
Johnston beat Sherman in the race to Resaca. The town had been fortified,
owing to Johnston's foresight, and McPherson had failed to dislodge the
garrison and capture it. The Confederate army was now settled behind its
entrenchments, occupying a semicircle of low wooded hills, both flanks of
the army resting on the banks of the Oostenaula River. On the morning of May 14th, the Confederate works were invested by the
greater part of Sherman's army and it was evident that a battle was
imminent. The attack was begun about noon, chiefly by the Fourteenth Army
Corps under Palmer, of Thomas' army, and Judah's division of Schofield's. General Hindman's division of Hood's corps bore the brunt of this attack
and there was heavy loss on both sides. Later in the day, a portion of
Hood's corps was massed in a heavy column and hurled against the Federal
left, driving it back. But at this point the Twentieth Army Corps under
Hooker, of Thomas' army, dashed against the advancing Confederates and
pushed them back to their former lines. The forenoon of the next day was spent in heavy skirmishing, which grew to
the dignity of a battle. During the day's operations a hard fight for a
Confederate lunette on the top of a low hill occurred. At length, General
Butterfield, in the face of a galling fire, succeeded in capturing the
position. But so deadly was the fire from Hardee's corps that Butterfield
was unable to hold it or to remove the four guns the lunette contained. With the coming of night, General Johnston determined to withdraw his army
from Resaca. The battle had cost each army nearly three thousand men. While it was in progress, McPherson, sent by Sherman, had deftly marched
around Johnston's left with the view of cutting off his retreat south by
seizing the bridges across the Oostenaula, and at the same time the
Federal cavalry was threatening the railroad to Atlanta which ran beyond
the river. It was the knowledge of these facts that determined the
Confederate commander to abandon Resaca. Withdrawing during the night, he
led his army southward to the banks of the Etowah River. Sherman followed
but a few miles behind him. At the same time Sherman sent a division of
the Army of the Cumberland, under General Jeff. C. Davis, to Rome, at the
junction of the Etowah and the Oostenaula, where there were important
machine-shops and factories. Davis captured the town and several heavy
guns, destroyed the factories, and left a garrison to hold it. Sherman was eager for a battle in the open with Johnston and on the 17th,
near the town of Adairsville, it seemed as if the latter would gratify
him. Johnston chose a good position, posted his cavalry, deployed his
infantry, and awaited combat. The skirmishing
for some hours almost amounted to a battle. But suddenly Johnston decided
to defer a conclusive contest to another time. Again at Cassville, a few days later, Johnston drew up the Confederate
legions in battle array, evidently having decided on a general engagement
at this point. He issued a spirited address to the army: "By your courage
and skill you have repulsed every assault of the enemy.... You will now
turn and march to meet his advancing columns.... I lead you to battle." But, when his right flank had been turned by a Federal attack, and when
two of his corps commanders, Hood and Polk, advised against a general
battle, Johnston again decided on postponement. He retreated in the night
across the Etowah, destroyed the bridges, and took a strong position among
the rugged hills about Allatoona Pass, extending south to Kenesaw
Mountain. Johnston's decision to fight and then not to fight was a cause for
grumbling both on the part of his army and of the inhabitants of the
region through which he was passing. His men were eager to defend their
country, and they could not understand this Fabian policy. They would have
preferred defeat to these repeated retreats with no opportunity to show
what they could do. Johnston, however, was wiser than his critics. The Union army was larger
by far and better equipped than his own, and Sherman was a
master-strategist. His hopes rested on two or three contingencies that he
might catch a portion of Sherman's army separated from the rest; that
Sherman would be so weakened by the necessity of guarding the long line of
railroad to his base of supplies at Chattanooga, Nashville, and even
far-away Louisville, as to make it possible to defeat him in open battle,
or, finally, that Sherman might fall into the trap of making a direct
attack while Johnston was in an impregnable position, and in such a
situation he now was. Not yet, however, was Sherman inclined to fall into such a trap, and when
Johnston took his strong position at and beyond Allatoona Pass, the
Northern commander decided, after resting his army for a few days, to move
toward Atlanta by way of Dallas, southwest of the pass. Rations for a
twenty days' absence from direct railroad communication were issued to the
Federal army. In fact, Sherman's railroad connection with the North was
the one delicate problem of the whole movement. The Confederates had
destroyed the iron way as they moved southward; but the Federal engineers,
following the army, repaired the line and rebuilt the bridges almost as
fast as the army could march. Sherman's movement toward Dallas drew Johnston from the <DW72>s of the
Allatoona Hills. From Kingston, the Federal leader wrote on May 23d, "I am
already within fifty miles of Atlanta." But he was not to enter that city
for many weeks, not before he had measured swords again and again with his
great antagonist. On the 25th of May, the two great armies were facing
each other near New Hope Church, about four miles north of Dallas. Here,
for three or four days, there was almost incessant fighting, though there
was not what might be called a pitched battle. Late in the afternoon of the first day, Hooker made a vicious attack on
Stewart's division of Hood's corps. For two hours the battle raged without
a moment's cessation, Hooker being pressed back with heavy loss. During
those two hours he had held his ground against sixteen field-pieces and
five thousand infantry at close range. The name "Hell Hole" was applied to
this spot by the Union soldiers. On the next day there was considerable skirmishing in different places
along the line that divided the two armies. But the chief labor of the day
was throwing up entrenchments, preparatory to a general engagement. The
country, however, was ill fitted for such a contest. The continuous
succession of hills, covered with primeval forests, presented little
opportunity for two great armies, stretched out almost from Dallas to
Marietta, a distance of about ten miles, to come together simultaneously
at all points. A severe contest occurred on the 27th, near the center of the
battle-lines, between General O. O. Howard on the Federal side and General
Patrick Cleburne on the part of the South. Dense and almost impenetrable
was the undergrowth through which Howard led his troops to make the
attack. The fight was at close range and was fierce and bloody, the
Confederates gaining the greater advantage. The next day Johnston made a terrific attack on the Union right, under
McPherson, near Dallas. But McPherson was well entrenched and the
Confederates were repulsed with a serious loss. In the three or four days'
fighting the Federal loss was probably twenty-four hundred men and the
Confederate somewhat greater. In the early days of June, Sherman took possession of the town of
Allatoona and made it a second base of supplies, after repairing the
railroad bridge across the Etowah River. Johnston swung his left around to
Lost Mountain and his right extended beyond the railroad--a line ten miles
in length and much too long for its numbers. Johnston's army, however, had
been reenforced, and it now numbered about seventy-five thousand men. Sherman, on June 1st, had nearly one hundred and thirteen thousand men and
on the 8th he received the addition of a cavalry brigade and two divisions
of the Seventeenth Corps, under General Frank P. Blair, which had marched
from Alabama. So multifarious were the movements of the two great armies among the hills
and forests of that part of Georgia that it is impossible for us to follow
them all. On the 14th of June, Generals Johnston, Hardee, and Polk rode up
the <DW72> of Pine Mountain to reconnoiter. As they were standing, making
observations, a Federal battery in the distance opened on them and General
Polk was struck in the chest with a Parrot shell. General Polk was greatly beloved, and his death caused a shock to the
whole Confederate army. He was a graduate of West Point; but after being
graduated he took orders in the church and for twenty years before the war
was Episcopal Bishop of Louisiana. At the outbreak of the war he entered
the field and served with distinction to the moment of his death. During the next two weeks there was almost incessant fighting, heavy
skirmishing, sparring for position. It was a wonderful game of military
strategy, played among the hills and mountains and forests by two masters
in the art of war. On June 23d, Sherman wrote, "The whole country is one
vast fort, and Johnston must have full fifty miles of connected
trenches.... Our lines are now in close contact, and the fighting
incessant.... As fast as we gain one position, the enemy has another all
ready." Sherman, conscious of superior strength, was now anxious for a real
battle, a fight to the finish with his antagonist. But Johnston was too
wily to be thus caught. He made no false move on the great chessboard of
war. At length, the impatient Sherman decided to make a general front
attack, even though Johnston, at that moment, was impregnably entrenched
on the <DW72>s of Kenesaw Mountain. This was precisely what the Confederate
commander was hoping for. The desperate battle of Kenesaw Mountain occurred on the 27th of June. In
the early morning hours, the boom of Federal cannon announced the opening
of a bloody day's struggle. It was soon answered by the Confederate
batteries in the entrenchments along the mountain side, and the deafening
roar of the giant conflict reverberated from the surrounding hills. About
nine o'clock the Union infantry advance began. On the left was McPherson,
who sent the Fifteenth Army Corps, led by General John A. Logan, directly
against the mountain. The artillery from the Confederate trenches in front
of Logan cut down his men by hundreds. The Federals charged courageously
and captured the lower works, but failed to take the higher ridges. The chief assault of the day was by the Army of the Cumberland, under
Thomas. Most conspicuous in the attack were the divisions of Newton and
Davis, advancing against General Loring, successor of the lamented Polk. Far up on a ridge at one point, General Cleburne held a line of
breastworks, supported by the flanking fire of artillery. Against this a
vain and costly assault was made. When the word was given to charge, the Federals sprang forward and, in the
face of a deadly hail of musket-balls and shells, they dashed up the
<DW72>, firing as they went. Stunned and bleeding, they were checked again
and again by the withering fire from the mountain <DW72>; but they
re-formed and pressed on with dauntless valor. Some of them reached the
parapets and were instantly shot down, their bodies rolling into the
Confederate trenches among the men who had slain them, or back down the
hill whence they had come. General Harker, leading a charge against
Cleburne, was mortally wounded. His men were swept back by a galling fire,
though many fell with their brave leader. This assault on Kenesaw Mountain cost Sherman three thousand men and won
him nothing. The battle
continued but two and a half hours. It was one of the most recklessly
daring assaults during the whole war period, but did not greatly affect
the final result of the campaign. Under a flag of truce, on the day after the battle, the men of the North
and of the South met on the gory field to bury their dead and to minister
to the wounded. They met as friends for the moment, and not as foes. It
was said that there were instances of father and son, one in blue and the
other in gray, and brothers on opposite sides, meeting one another on the
bloody <DW72>s of Kenesaw. Tennessee and Kentucky had sent thousands of men
to each side in the fratricidal struggle and not infrequently families had
been divided. Three weeks of almost incessant rain fell upon the struggling armies
during this time, rendering their operations disagreeable and
unsatisfactory. The camp equipage, the men's uniforms and accouterments
were thoroughly saturated with rain and mud. Still the warriors of the
North and of the South lived and fought on the <DW72>s of the mountain
range, intent on destroying each other. Sherman was convinced by his drastic repulse at Kenesaw Mountain that
success lay not in attacking his great antagonist in a strong position,
and he resumed his old tactics. He would flank Johnston from Kenesaw as he
had flanked him out of Dalton and Allatoona Pass. He thereupon turned upon
Johnston's line of communication with Atlanta, whence the latter received
his supplies. The movement was successful, and in a few days Kenesaw
Mountain was deserted. Johnston moved to the banks of the Chattahoochee, Sherman following in
the hope of catching him while crossing the river. But the wary
Confederate had again, as at Resaca, prepared entrenchments in advance,
and these were on the north bank of the river. He hastened to them, then
turned on the approaching Federals and defiantly awaited attack. But
Sherman remembered Kenesaw and there was no battle. The feints, the sparring, the flanking movements among the hills and
forests continued day after day. The immediate aim in the early days of
July was to cross the Chattahoochee. On the 8th, Sherman sent Schofield
and McPherson across, ten miles or more above the Confederate position. It is true he had, in the
space of two months, pressed his antagonist back inch by inch for more
than a hundred miles and was now almost within sight of the goal of the
campaign--the city of Atlanta. But the single line of railroad that
connected him with the North and brought supplies from Louisville, five
hundred miles away, for a hundred thousand men and twenty-three thousand
animals, might at any moment be destroyed by Confederate raiders. The necessity of guarding the Western and Atlantic Railroad was an
ever-present concern with Sherman. Forrest and his cavalry force were in
northern Mississippi waiting for him to get far enough on the way to
Atlanta for them to pounce upon the iron way and tear it to ruins. To
prevent this General Samuel D. Sturgis, with eight thousand troops, was
sent from Memphis against Forrest. He met him on the 10th of June near
Guntown, Mississippi, but was sadly beaten and driven back to Memphis, one
hundred miles away. The affair, nevertheless, delayed Forrest in his
operations against the railroad, and meanwhile General Smith's troops
returned to Memphis from the Red River expedition, somewhat late according
to the schedule but eager to join Sherman in the advance on Atlanta. Smith, however, was directed to take the offensive against Forrest, and
with fourteen thousand troops, and in a three days' fight, demoralized him
badly at Tupelo, Mississippi, July 14th-17th. Smith returned to Memphis
and made another start for Sherman, when he was suddenly turned back and
sent to Missouri, where the Confederate General Price was extremely
active, to help Rosecrans. To avoid final defeat and to win the ground he had gained had taxed
Sherman's powers to the last degree and was made possible only through his
superior numbers. Even this degree of success could not be expected to
continue if the railroad to the North should be destroyed. But Sherman
must do more than he had done; he must capture Atlanta, this Richmond of
the far South, with its cannon foundries and its great machine-shops, its
military factories, and extensive army supplies. He must divide the
Confederacy north and south as Grant's capture of Vicksburg had split it
east and west. Sherman must have Atlanta, for political reasons as well as for military
purposes. The country was in the midst of a presidential campaign. The
opposition to Lincoln's reelection was strong, and for many weeks it was
believed on all sides that his defeat was inevitable. At least, the
success of the Union arms in the field was deemed essential to Lincoln's
success at the polls. Grant had made little progress in Virginia and his
terrible repulse at Cold Harbor, in June, had cast a gloom over every
Northern State. Farragut was operating in Mobile Bay; but his success was
still in the future. The eyes of the supporters of the great war-president turned longingly,
expectantly, toward General Sherman and his hundred thousand men before
Atlanta. "Do something--something spectacular--save the party and save the
country thereby from permanent disruption!" This was the cry of the
millions, and Sherman understood it. But withal, the capture of the
Georgia city may have been doubtful but for the fact that at the critical
moment the Confederate President made a decision that resulted,
unconsciously, in a decided service to the Union cause. He dismissed
General Johnston and put another in his place, one who was less strategic
and more impulsive. Jefferson Davis did not agree with General Johnston's military judgment,
and he seized on the fact that Johnston had so steadily retreated before
the Northern army as an excuse for his removal. On the 18th of July, Davis
turned the Confederate Army of Tennessee over to General John B. Hood. A
graduate of West Point of the class of 1853, a classmate of McPherson,
Schofield, and Sheridan, Hood had faithfully served the cause of the South
since the opening of the war. He was known as a fighter, and it was
believed that he would change the policy of Johnston to one of open battle
with Sherman's army. Johnston had lost, since the opening of the campaign at Dalton, about
fifteen thousand men, and the army that he now delivered to Hood consisted
of about sixty thousand in all. While Hood was no match for Sherman as a strategist, he was not a
weakling. His policy of aggression, however, was not suited to the
circumstances--to the nature of the country--in view of the fact that
Sherman's army was far stronger than his own. Two days after Hood took command of the Confederate army he offered
battle. Sherman's forces had crossed Peach Tree Creek, a small stream
flowing into the Chattahoochee, but a few miles from Atlanta, and were
approaching the city. They had thrown up slight breastworks, as was their
custom, but were not expecting an attack. Suddenly, however, about four
o'clock in the afternoon of July 20th, an imposing column of Confederates
burst from the woods near the position of the Union right center, under
Thomas. The battle was short,
fierce, and bloody. The Confederates made a gallant assault, but were
pressed back to their entrenchments, leaving the ground covered with dead
and wounded. The Federal loss in the battle of Peach Tree Creek was
placed at over seventeen hundred, the Confederate loss being much greater. This battle had been planned by Johnston before his removal, but he had
been waiting for the strategic moment to fight it. Two days later, July 22d, occurred the greatest engagement of the entire
campaign--the battle of Atlanta. The Federal army was closing in on the
entrenchments of Atlanta, and was now within two or three miles of the
city. On the night of the 21st, General Blair, of McPherson's army, had
gained possession of a high hill on the left, which commanded a view of
the heart of the city. Hood thereupon planned to recapture this hill, and
make a general attack on the morning of the 22d. He sent General Hardee on
a long night march around the extreme flank of McPherson's army, the
attack to be made at daybreak. Meantime, General Cheatham, who had
succeeded to the command of Hood's former corps, and General A. P.
Stewart, who now had Polk's corps, were to engage Thomas and Schofield in
front and thus prevent them from sending aid to McPherson. Hardee was delayed in his fifteen-mile night march, and it was noon before
he attacked. At about that hour Generals Sherman and McPherson sat talking
near the Howard house, which was the Federal headquarters, when the sudden
boom of artillery from beyond the hill that Blair had captured announced
the opening of the coming battle. McPherson quickly leaped upon his horse
and galloped away toward the sound of the guns. Meeting Logan and Blair
near the railroad, he conferred with them for a moment, when they
separated, and each hastened to his place in the battle-line. McPherson
sent aides and orderlies in various directions with despatches, until but
two were still with him. He then rode into a forest and was suddenly
confronted by a portion of the Confederate army under General Cheatham. "Surrender," was the call that rang out. But he wheeled his horse as if to
flee, when he was instantly shot dead, and the horse galloped back
riderless. The death of the brilliant, dashing young leader, James B. McPherson, was
a great blow to the Union army. But thirty-six years of age, one of the
most promising men in the country, and already the commander of a military
department, McPherson was the only man in all the Western armies whom
Grant, on going to the East, placed in the same military class with
Sherman. Logan succeeded the fallen commander, and the battle raged on. The
Confederates were gaining headway. Cheatham
was pressing on, pouring volley after volley into the ranks of the Army of
the Tennessee, which seemed about to be cut in twain. General Sherman was present and saw
the danger. Calling for Schofield to send several batteries, he placed
them and poured a concentrated artillery fire through the gap and mowed
down the advancing men in swaths. At the same time, Logan pressed forward
and Schofield's infantry was called up. The Confederates were hurled back
with great loss. The shadows of night fell--and the battle of Atlanta was
over. Hood's losses exceeded eight thousand of his brave men, whom he
could ill spare. The Confederate army recuperated within the defenses of Atlanta--behind an
almost impregnable barricade. Sherman had no hope of carrying the city by
assault, while to surround and invest it was impossible with his numbers. He determined, therefore, to strike Hood's lines of supplies. On July
28th, Hood again sent Hardee out from his entrenchments to attack the Army
of the Tennessee, now under the command of General Howard. A fierce battle
at Ezra Church on the west side of the city ensued, and again the
Confederates were defeated with heavy loss. A month passed and Sherman had made little progress toward capturing
Atlanta. Two cavalry raids which he organized resulted in defeat, but the
two railroads from the south into Atlanta were considerably damaged. But,
late in August, the Northern commander made a daring move that proved
successful. Leaving his base of supplies, as Grant had done before
Vicksburg, and marching toward Jonesboro, Sherman destroyed the Macon and
Western Railroad, the only remaining line of supplies to the Confederate
army. Hood attempted to block the march on Jonesboro, and Hardee was sent with
his and S. D. Lee's Corps to attack the Federals, while he himself sought
an opportunity to move upon Sherman's right flank. Hardee's attack failed,
and this necessitated the evacuation of Atlanta. After blowing up his
magazines and destroying the supplies which his men could not carry with
them, Hood abandoned the city, and the next day, September 2d, General
Slocum, having succeeded Hooker, led the Twentieth Corps of the Federal
army within its earthen walls. Hood had made his escape, saving his army
from capture. His chief desire would have been to march directly north on
Marietta and destroy the depots of Federal supplies, but a matter of more
importance prevented. Thirty-four thousand Union prisoners were confined
at Andersonville, and a small body of cavalry could have released them. So
Hood placed himself between Andersonville and Sherman. In the early days of September the Federal hosts occupied the city toward
which they had toiled all the summer long. At East Point, Atlanta, and
Decatur, the three armies settled for a brief rest, while the cavalry,
stretched for many miles along the Chattahoochee, protected their flanks
and rear. Since May their ranks had been depleted by some twenty-eight
thousand killed and wounded, while nearly four thousand had fallen
prisoners, into the Confederates' hands. It was a great price, but whatever else the capture of Atlanta did, it
ensured the reelection of Abraham Lincoln to the presidency of the United
States. The total Confederate losses were in the neighborhood of
thirty-five thousand, of which thirteen thousand were prisoners. [Illustration: SHERMAN IN 1865

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] If Sherman was deemed merciless in war, he was superbly generous when the
fighting was over. To Joseph E. Johnston he offered most liberal terms of
surrender for the Southern armies. Their acceptance would have gone far to
prevent the worst of the reconstruction enormities. Unfortunately his
first convention with Johnston was disapproved. The death of Lincoln had
removed the guiding hand that would have meant so much to the nation. To
those who have read his published correspondence and his memoirs Sherman
appears in a very human light. He was fluent and frequently reckless in
speech and writing, but his kindly humanity is seen in both. [Illustration: BUZZARD'S ROOST, GEORGIA, MAY 7, 1864]

In the upper picture rises the precipitous height of Rocky Face as Sherman
saw it on May 7, 1864. His troops under Thomas had moved forward along the
line of the railroad, opening the great Atlanta campaign on schedule time. Looking down into the gorge called Buzzard's Roost, through which the
railroad passes, Sherman could see swarms of Confederate troops, the road
filled with obstructions, and hostile batteries crowning the cliffs on
either side. He knew that his antagonist, Joe Johnston, here confronted
him in force. But it was to be a campaign of brilliant flanking movements,
and Sherman sat quietly down to wait till the trusty McPherson should
execute the first one. In the lower picture, drawn up on dress parade, stands one of the finest
fighting organizations in the Atlanta campaign. This regiment won its
spurs in the first Union victory in the West at Mill Springs, Kentucky,
January 19, 1862. There, according to the muster-out roll, "William Blake,
musician, threw away his drum and took a gun." The spirit of this drummer
boy of Company F was the spirit of all the troops from Minnesota. A
Georgian noticed an unusually fine body of men marching by, and when told
that they were a Minnesota regiment, said, "I didn't know they had any
troops up there." But the world was to learn the superlative fighting
qualities of the men from the Northwest. Sherman was glad to have all he
could get of them in this great army of one hundred thousand veterans. [Illustration: THE SECOND MINNESOTA INFANTRY--ENGAGED AT ROCKY FACE RIDGE,
MAY 8-11, 1864

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] [Illustration: IN THE FOREFRONT--GENERAL RICHARD W. JOHNSON AT GRAYSVILLE

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] On the balcony of this little cottage at Graysville, Georgia, stands
General Richard W. Johnson, ready to advance with his cavalry division in
the vanguard of the direct movement upon the Confederates strongly posted
at Dalton. Sherman's cavalry forces under Stoneman and Garrard were not
yet fully equipped and joined the army after the campaign had opened. General Richard W. Johnson's division of Thomas' command, with General
Palmer's division, was given the honor of heading the line of march when
the Federals got in motion on May 5th. The same troops (Palmer's division)
had made the same march in February, sent by Grant to engage Johnston at
Dalton during Sherman's Meridian campaign. Johnson was a West Pointer; he
had gained his cavalry training in the Mexican War, and had fought the
Indians on the Texas border. He distinguished himself at Corinth, and
rapidly rose to the command of a division in Buell's army. Fresh from a
Confederate prison, he joined the Army of the Cumberland in the summer of
1862 to win new laurels at Stone's River, Chickamauga, and Missionary
Ridge. His sabers were conspicuously active in the Atlanta campaign; and
at the battle of New Hope Church on May 28th Johnson himself was wounded,
but recovered in time to join Schofield after the fall of Atlanta and to
assist him in driving Hood and Forrest out of Tennessee. For his bravery
at the battle of Nashville he was brevetted brigadier-general, U. S. A.,
December 16, 1864, and after the war he was retired with the brevet of
major-general. [Illustration: RESACA--FIELD OF THE FIRST HEAVY FIGHTING

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] The chips are still bright and the earth fresh turned, in the foreground
where are the Confederate earthworks such at General Joseph E. Johnston
had caused to be thrown up by the <DW64> laborers all along his line of
possible retreat. McPherson, sent by Sherman to strike the railroad in
Johnston's rear, got his head of column through Snake Creek Gap on May
9th, and drove off a Confederate cavalry brigade which retreated toward
Dalton, bringing to Johnston the first news that a heavy force of Federals
was already in his rear. McPherson, within a mile and a half of Resaca,
could have walked into the town with his twenty-three thousand men, but
concluded that the Confederate entrenchments were too strongly held to
assault. When Sherman arrived he found that Johnston, having the shorter
route, was there ahead of him with his entire army strongly posted. On May
15th, "without attempting to assault the fortified works," says Sherman,
"we pressed at all points, and the sound of cannon and musketry rose all
day to the dignity of a battle." Its havoc is seen in the shattered trees
and torn ground in the lower picture. [Illustration: THE WORK OF THE FIRING AT RESACA

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] [Illustration: ANOTHER RETROGRADE MOVEMENT OVER THE ETOWAH BRIDGE

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] The strong works in the pictures, commanding the railroad bridge over the
Etowah River, were the fourth fortified position to be abandoned by
Johnston within a month. Pursued by Thomas from Resaca, he had made a
brief stand at Kingston and then fallen back steadily and in superb order
into Cassville. There he issued an address to his army announcing his
purpose to retreat no more but to accept battle. His troops were all drawn
up in preparation for a struggle, but that night at supper with Generals
Hood and Polk he was convinced by them that the ground occupied by their
troops was untenable, being enfiladed by the Federal artillery. Johnston,
therefore, gave up his purpose of battle, and on the night of May 20th put
the Etowah River between himself and Sherman and retreated to Allatoona
Pass, shown in the lower picture. [Illustration: ALLATOONA PASS IN THE DISTANCE]

In taking this the camera was planted inside the breastworks seen on the
eminence in the upper picture. Sherman's army now rested after its rapid
advance and waited a few days for the railroad to be repaired in their
rear so that supplies could be brought up. Meanwhile Johnston was being
severely criticized at the South for his continual falling back without
risking a battle. His friends stoutly maintained that it was all
strategic, while some of the Southern newspapers quoted the Federal
General Scott's remark, "Beware of Lee advancing, and watch Johnston at a
stand; for the devil himself would be defeated in the attempt to whip him
retreating." But General Jeff C. Davis, sent by Sherman, took Rome on May
17th and destroyed valuable mills and foundries. Thus began the
accomplishment of one of the main objects of Sherman's march. [Illustration: PINE MOUNTAIN, WHERE POLK, THE FIGHTING BISHOP OF THE
CONFEDERACY, WAS KILLED

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. The blasted pine rears its gaunt height above the mountain <DW72>, covered
with trees slashed down to hold the Federals at bay; and here, on June 14,
1864, the Confederacy lost a commander, a bishop, and a hero. Lieut.-General Leonidas Polk, commanding one of Johnston's army corps,
with Johnston himself and Hardee, another corps commander, was studying
Sherman's position at a tense moment of the latter's advance around Pine
Mountain. The three Confederates stood upon the rolling height, where the
center of Johnston's army awaited the Federal attack. They could see the
columns in blue pushing east of them; the smoke and rattle of musketry as
the pickets were driven in; and the bustle with which the Federal advance
guard felled trees and constructed trenches at their very feet. On the
lonely height the three figures stood conspicuous. A Federal order was
given the artillery to open upon any men in gray who looked like officers
reconnoitering the new position. So, while Hardee was pointing to his
comrade and his chief the danger of one of his divisions which the Federal
advance was cutting off, the bishop-general was struck in the chest by a
cannon shot. Thus the Confederacy lost a leader of unusual influence. Although a bishop of the Episcopal Church, Polk was educated at West
Point. When he threw in his lot with the Confederacy, thousands of his
fellow-Louisianians followed him. A few days before the battle of Pine
Mountain, as he and General Hood were riding together, the bishop was told
by his companion that he had never been received into the communion of a
church and was begged that the rite might be performed. At Hood's headquarters, by the light of a tallow
candle, with a tin basin on the mess table for a baptismal font, and with
Hood's staff present as witnesses, all was ready. Hood, "with a face like
that of an old crusader," stood before the bishop. Crippled by wounds at
Gaines' Mill, Gettysburg, and Chickamauga, he could not kneel, but bent
forward on his crutches. The bishop, in full uniform of the Confederate
army, administered the rite. A few days later, by a strange coincidence,
he was approached by General Johnston on the same errand, and the man whom
Hood was soon to succeed was baptized in the same simple manner. Polk, as
Bishop, had administered his last baptism, and as soldier had fought his
last battle; for Pine Mountain was near. [Illustration: LIEUT.-GEN. LEONIDAS POLK, C. S. [Illustration: IN THE HARDEST FIGHT OF THE CAMPAIGN--THE
ONE-HUNDRED-AND-TWENTY-FIFTH OHIO

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] During the dark days before Kenesaw it rained continually, and Sherman
speaks of the peculiarly depressing effect that the weather had upon his
troops in the wooded country. Nevertheless he must either assault
Johnston's strong position on the mountain or begin again his flanking
tactics. He decided upon the former, and on June 27th, after three days'
preparation, the assault was made. At nine in the morning along the
Federal lines the furious fire of musketry and artillery was begun, but at
all points the Confederates met it with determined courage and in great
force. McPherson's attacking column, under General Blair, fought its way
up the face of little Kenesaw but could not reach the summit. Then the
courageous troops of Thomas charged up the face of the mountain and
planted their colors on the very parapet of the Confederate works. Here
General Harker, commanding the brigade in which fought the 125th Ohio,
fell mortally wounded, as did Brigadier-General Daniel McCook, and also
General Wagner. [Illustration: FEDERAL ENTRENCHMENTS AT THE FOOT OF KENESAW MOUNTAIN

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] [Illustration: A VETERAN BATTERY FROM ILLINOIS, NEAR MARIETTA IN THE
ATLANTA CAMPAIGN

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] Battery B of the First Illinois Light Artillery followed Sherman in the
Atlanta campaign. It took part in the demonstrations against Resaca,
Georgia, May 8 to 15, 1864, and in the battle of Resaca on the 14th and
15th. It was in the battles about Dallas from May 25th to June 5th, and
took part in the operations about Marietta and against Kenesaw Mountain in
June and July. The
battery did not go into this campaign without previous experience. It had
already fought as one of the eight batteries at Fort Henry and Fort
Donelson, heard the roar of the battle of Shiloh, and participated in the
sieges of Corinth and Vicksburg. The artillery in the West was not a whit
less necessary to the armies than that in the East. Pope's brilliant feat
of arms in the capture of Island No. 10 added to the growing respect in
which the artillery was held by the other arms of the service. The
effective fire of the massed batteries at Murfreesboro turned the tide of
battle. At Chickamauga the Union artillery inflicted fearful losses upon
the Confederates. At Atlanta again they counted their dead by the
hundreds, and at Franklin and Nashville the guns maintained the best
traditions of the Western armies. They played no small part in winning
battles. [Illustration: THOMAS' HEADQUARTERS NEAR MARIETTA DURING THE FIGHTING OF
THE FOURTH OF JULY

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] This is a photograph of Independence Day, 1864. As the sentries and staff
officers stand outside the sheltered tents, General Thomas, commanding the
Army of the Cumberland, is busy; for the fighting is fierce to-day. Johnston has been outflanked from Kenesaw and has fallen back eastward
until he is actually farther from Atlanta than Sherman's right flank. Who
will reach the Chattahoochee first? There, if anywhere, Johnston must make
his stand; he must hold the fords and ferries, and the fortifications
that, with the wisdom of a far-seeing commander, he has for a long time
been preparing. The rustic work in the photograph, which embowers the
tents of the commanding general and his staff, is the sort of thing that
Civil War soldiers had learned to throw up within an hour after pitching
camp. [Illustration: PALISADES AND _CHEVAUX-DE-FRISE_ GUARDING ATLANTA

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] The photograph shows one of the
keypoints in the Confederate defense, the fort at the head of Marietta
Street, toward which the Federal lines were advancing from the northwest. The old Potter house in the background, once a quiet, handsome country
seat, is now surrounded by bristling fortifications, palisades, and double
lines of _chevaux-de-frise_. Atlanta was engaged in the final grapple with
the force that was to overcome her. Sherman has fought his way past
Kenesaw and across the Chattahoochee, through a country which he describes
as "one vast fort," saying that "Johnston must have at least fifty miles
of connected trenches with abatis and finished batteries." Anticipating
that Sherman might drive him back upon Atlanta, Johnston had constructed,
during the winter, heavily fortified positions all the way from Dalton. During his two months in retreat the fortifications at Atlanta had been
strengthened to the utmost. What he might have done behind them was never
to be known. [Illustration: THE CHATTAHOOCHEE BRIDGE]

"One of the strongest pieces of field fortification I ever saw"--this was
Sherman's characterization of the entrenchments that guarded the railroad
bridge over the Chattahoochee on July 5th. A glimpse of the bridge and the
freshly-turned earth in 1864 is given by the upper picture. At this river
Johnston made his final effort to hold back Sherman from a direct attack
upon Atlanta. If Sherman could get successfully across that river, the
Confederates would be compelled to fall back behind the defenses of the
city, which was the objective of the campaign. Sherman perceived at once
the futility of trying to carry by assault this strongly garrisoned
position. Instead, he made a feint at crossing the river lower down, and
simultaneously went to work in earnest eight miles north of the bridge. The lower picture shows the canvas pontoon boats as perfected by Union
engineers in 1864. A number of these were stealthily set up and launched
by Sherman's Twenty-third Corps near the mouth of Soap Creek, behind a
ridge. Byrd's brigade took the defenders of the southern bank completely
by surprise. It was short work for the Federals to throw pontoon bridges
across and to occupy the coveted spot in force. [Illustration: INFANTRY AND ARTILLERY CROSSING ON BOATS MADE OF PONTOONS

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] Johnston's parrying of Sherman's mighty strokes was "a model of defensive
warfare," declares one of Sherman's own division commanders, Jacob D. Cox. There was not a man in the Federal army from Sherman down that did not
rejoice to hear that Johnston had been superseded by Hood on July 18th. Johnston, whose mother was a niece of Patrick Henry, was fifty-seven years
old, cold in manner, measured and accurate in speech. His dark firm face,
surmounted by a splendidly intellectual forehead, betokened the
experienced and cautious soldier. His dismissal was one of the political
mistakes which too often hampered capable leaders on both sides. His
Fabian policy in Georgia was precisely the same as that which was winning
fame against heavy odds for Lee in Virginia. [Illustration: GENERAL JOSEPH EGGLESTON JOHNSTON, C. S. A.

BORN 1809; WEST POINT 1829; DIED 1891]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: LIEUTENANT-GENERAL JOHN B. HOOD, C. S. A.

BORN 1831; WEST POINT 1853; DIED 1879]

The countenance of Hood, on the other hand, indicates an eager, restless
energy, an impetuosity that lacked the poise of Sherman, whose every
gesture showed the alertness of mind and soundness of judgment that in him
were so exactly balanced. Both Schofield and McPherson were classmates of
Hood at West Point, and characterized him to Sherman as "bold even to
rashness and courageous in the extreme." He struck the first offensive
blow at Sherman advancing on Atlanta, and wisely adhered to the plan of
the battle as it had been worked out by Johnston just before his removal. But the policy of attacking was certain to be finally disastrous to the
Confederates. [Illustration: PEACH-TREE CREEK, WHERE HOOD HIT HARD

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] Counting these closely clustered Federal graves gives one an idea of the
overwhelming onset with Hood become the aggressor on July 20th. Beyond the
graves are some of the trenches from which the Federals were at first
irresistibly driven. In the background flows Peach-Tree Creek, the little
stream that gives its name to the battlefield. Hood, impatient to
signalize his new responsibility by a stroke that would at once dispel the
gloom at Richmond, had posted his troops behind strongly fortified works
on a ridge commanding the valley of Peach-Tree Creek about five miles to
the north of Atlanta. As the
Federals were disposing their lines and entrenching before this position,
Hood's eager eyes detected a gap in their formation and at four o'clock in
the afternoon hurled a heavy force against it. Thus he proved his
reputation for courage, but the outcome showed the mistake. For a brief
interval Sherman's forces were in great peril. But the Federals under
Newton and Geary rallied and held their ground, till Ward's division in a
brave counter-charge drove the Confederates back. He abandoned his entrenchments that night, leaving on the field
five hundred dead, one thousand wounded, and many prisoners. Sherman
estimated the total Confederate loss at no less than five thousand. That
of the Federals was fifteen hundred. [Illustration: THE ARMY'S FINGER-TIPS--PICKETS BEFORE ATLANTA

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. A Federal picket post on the lines before Atlanta. This picture was taken
shortly before the battle of July 22d. The soldiers are idling about
unconcerned at exposing themselves; this is on the "reserve post." Somewhat in advance of this lay the outer line of pickets, and it would be
time enough to seek cover if they were driven in. Thus armies feel for
each other, stretching out first their sensitive fingers--the pickets. If
these recoil, the skirmishers are sent forward while the strong arm, the
line of battle, gathers itself to meet the foe. As this was an inner line,
it was more strongly fortified than was customary with the pickets. But
the men of both sides had become very expert in improvising field-works at
this stage of the war. Hard campaigning had taught the veterans the
importance to themselves of providing such protection, and no orders had
to be given for their construction. As soon as a regiment gained a
position desirable to hold, the soldiers would throw up a strong parapet
of dirt and logs in a single night. In order to spare the men as much as
possible, Sherman ordered his division commanders to organize pioneer
detachments out of the <DW64>s that escaped to the Federals. [Illustration: THE FINAL BLOW TO THE CONFEDERACY'S SOUTHERN STRONGHOLD

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. It was Sherman's experienced railroad wreckers that finally drove Hood out
of Atlanta. In the picture the rails heating red-hot amid the flaming
bonfires of the ties, and the piles of twisted debris show vividly what
Sherman meant when he said their "work was done with a will." Sherman saw
that in order to take Atlanta without terrific loss he must cut off all
its rail communications. This he did by "taking the field with our main
force and using it against the communications of Atlanta instead of
against its intrenchments." On the night of August 25th he moved with
practically his entire army and wagon-trains loaded with fifteen days'
rations. By the morning of the 27th the whole front of the city was
deserted. The Confederates concluded that Sherman was in retreat. Next day
they found out their mistake, for the Federal army lay across the West
Point Railroad while the soldiers began wrecking it. Next day they were in
motion toward the railroad to Macon, and General Hood began to understand
that a colossal raid was in progress. After the occupation, when this
picture was taken, Sherman's men completed the work of destruction. [Illustration: THE RUIN OF HOOD'S RETREAT--DEMOLISHED CARS AND
ROLLING-MILL

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] On the night of August 31st, in his headquarters near Jonesboro, Sherman
could not sleep. That day he had defeated the force sent against him at
Jonesboro and cut them off from returning to Atlanta. This was Hood's last
effort to save his communications. About midnight sounds of exploding
shells and what seemed like volleys of musketry arose in the direction of
Atlanta. Supplies and ammunition
that Hood could carry with him were being removed; large quantities of
provisions were being distributed among the citizens, and as the troops
marched out they were allowed to take what they could from the public
stores. The noise that Sherman heard that
night was the blowing up of the rolling-mill and of about a hundred cars
and six engines loaded with Hood's abandoned ammunition. The picture shows
the Georgia Central Railroad east of the town. REPRESENTATIVE SOLDIERS FROM A DOZEN STATES

[Illustration]

BLAIR, OF MISSOURI

Although remaining politically neutral throughout the war, Missouri
contributed four hundred and forty-seven separate military organizations
to the Federal armies, and over one hundred to the Confederacy. The Union
sentiment in the State is said to have been due to Frank P. Blair, who,
early in 1861, began organizing home guards. Blair subsequently joined
Grant's command and served with that leader until Sherman took the helm in
the West. With Sherman Major-General Blair fought in Georgia and through
the Carolinas. [Illustration]

BAKER, OF CALIFORNIA

California contributed twelve military organizations to the Federal
forces, but none of them took part in the campaigns east of the
Mississippi. Its Senator, Edward D. Baker, was in his place in Washington
when the war broke out, and, being a close friend of Lincoln, promptly
organized a regiment of Pennsylvanians which was best known by its synonym
"First California." Colonel Baker was killed at the head of it at the
battle of Ball's Bluff, Virginia, October 21, 1861. Baker had been
appointed brigadier-general but declined. [Illustration]

KELLEY, OF WEST VIRGINIA

West Virginia counties had already supplied soldiers for the Confederates
when the new State was organized in 1861. As early as May, 1861, Colonel
B. F. Kelley was in the field with the First West Virginia Infantry
marshalled under the Stars and Stripes. He served to the end of the war
and was brevetted major-general. West Virginia furnished thirty-seven
organizations of all arms to the Federal armies, chiefly for local defense
and for service in contiguous territory. General Kelley was prominent in
the Shenandoah campaigns. [Illustration]

SMYTH, OF DELAWARE

Little Delaware furnished to the Federal armies fifteen separate military
organizations. First in the field was Colonel Thomas A. Smyth, with the
First Delaware Infantry. Early promoted to the command of a brigade, he
led it at Gettysburg, where it received the full force of Pickett's charge
on Cemetery Ridge, July 3, 1863. He was brevetted major-general and fell
at Farmville, on Appomattox River, Va., April 7, 1865, two days before the
surrender at Appomattox. General Smyth was a noted leader in the Second
Corps. [Illustration]

MITCHELL, OF KANSAS

The virgin State of Kansas sent fifty regiments, battalions, and batteries
into the Federal camps. Its Second Infantry was organized and led to the
field by Colonel R. B. Mitchell, a veteran of the Mexican War. At the
first battle in the West, Wilson's Creek, Mo. (August 10, 1861), he was
wounded. At the battle of Perryville, Brigadier-General Mitchell commanded
a division in McCook's Corps and fought desperately to hold the Federal
left flank against a sudden and desperate assault by General Bragg's
Confederates. [Illustration]

CROSS, OF NEW HAMPSHIRE

New Hampshire supplied twenty-nine military organizations to the Federal
armies. To the Granite State belongs the grim distinction of furnishing
the regiment which had the heaviest mortality roll of any infantry
organization in the army. This was the Fifth New Hampshire, commanded by
Colonel E. E. Cross. The Fifth served in the Army of the Potomac. At
Gettysburg, Colonel Cross commanded a brigade, which included the Fifth
New Hampshire, and was killed at the head of it near Devil's Den, on July
2, 1863. LEADERS IN SECURING VOLUNTEERS FOR NORTH AND SOUTH

[Illustration]

PEARCE, OF ARKANSAS

Arkansas entered into the war with enthusiasm, and had a large contingent
of Confederate troops ready for the field in the summer of 1861. At
Wilson's Creek, Missouri, August 10, 1861, there were four regiments and
two batteries of Arkansans under command of Brigadier-General N. B.
Pearce. Arkansas furnished seventy separate military organizations to the
Confederate armies and seventeen to the Federals. The State was gallantly
represented in the Army of Northern Virginia, notably at Antietam and
Gettysburg. [Illustration]

STEUART, OF MARYLAND

Maryland quickly responded to the Southern call to arms, and among its
first contribution of soldiers was George H. Steuart, who led a battalion
across the Potomac early in 1861. These Marylanders fought at First Bull
Run, or Manassas, and Lee's army at Petersburg included Maryland troops
under Brigadier-General Steuart. During the war this little border State,
politically neutral, sent six separate organizations to the Confederates
in Virginia, and mustered thirty-five for the Federal camps and for local
defense. [Illustration]

CRITTENDEN, THE CONFEDERATE

Kentucky is notable as a State which sent brothers to both the Federal and
Confederate armies. Major-General George B. Crittenden, C. S. A., was the
brother of Major-General Thomas L. Crittenden, U. S. A. Although remaining
politically neutral throughout the war, the Blue Grass State sent
forty-nine regiments, battalions, and batteries across the border to
uphold the Stars and Bars, and mustered eighty of all arms to battle
around the Stars and Stripes and protect the State from Confederate
incursions. [Illustration]

RANSOM, OF NORTH CAROLINA

The last of the Southern States to cast its fortunes in with the
Confederacy, North Carolina vied with the pioneers in the spirit with
which it entered the war. With the First North Carolina, Lieut.-Col. Matt
W. Ransom was on the firing-line early in 1861. Under his leadership as
brigadier-general, North Carolinians carried the Stars and Bars on all the
great battlefields of the Army of Northern Virginia. The State furnished
ninety organizations for the Confederate armies, and sent eight to the
Federal camps. [Illustration]

FINEGAN, OF FLORIDA

Florida was one of the first to follow South Carolina's example in
dissolving the Federal compact. It furnished twenty-one military
organizations to the Confederate forces, and throughout the war maintained
a vigorous home defense. Its foremost soldier to take the field when the
State was menaced by a strong Federal expedition in February, 1864, was
Brigadier-General Joseph Finegan. Hastily gathering scattered detachments,
he defeated and checked the expedition at the battle of Olustee, or Ocean
Pond, on February 20. [Illustration]

CLEBURNE, OF TENNESSEE

Cleburne was of foreign birth, but before the war was one year old he
became the leader of Tennesseeans, fighting heroically on Tennessee soil. At Shiloh, Cleburne's brigade, and at Murfreesboro, Chattanooga, and
Franklin, Major-General P. R. Cleburne's division found the post of honor. At Franklin this gallant Irishman "The 'Stonewall' Jackson of the West,"
led Tennesseeans for the last time and fell close to the breastworks. Tennessee sent the Confederate armies 129 organizations, and the Federal
fifty-six. [Illustration: THE LAST OF THE FRIGATE. _Painted by E. Packbauer._

  _Copyright, 1901, by Perrien-Keydel Co. Detroit, Mich., U. S. A._]




THE LAST CONFLICTS IN THE SHENANDOAH

    Sheridan's operations were characterized not so much, as has been
    supposed, by any originality of method, as by a just appreciation of
    the proper manner of combining the two arms of infantry and cavalry. He constantly used his powerful body of horse, which under his
    disciplined hand attained a high degree of perfection, as an
    impenetrable mask behind which he screened the execution of maneuvers
    of infantry columns hurled with a mighty momentum on one of the
    enemy's flanks.--_William Swinton, in "Campaigns of the Army of the
    Potomac. "_


On July 12, 1864, in the streets of Washington, there could be distinctly
heard the boom of cannon and the sharp firing of musketry. The old specter "threaten Washington," that for
three years had been a standing menace to the Federal authorities and a
"very present help" to the Confederates, now seemed to have come in the
flesh. The hopes of the South and the fears of the North were apparently
about to be realized. The occasion of this demonstration before the very gates of the city was
the result of General Lee's project to relieve the pressure on his own
army, by an invasion of the border States and a threatening attitude
toward the Union capital. The plan had worked well before, and Lee
believed it again would be effective. Grant was pushing him hard in front
of Petersburg. Accordingly, Lee despatched the daring soldier, General
Jubal A. Early, to carry the war again to the northward. He was to go by
the beautiful and fertile Shenandoah valley, that highway of the
Confederates along which the legions of the South had marched and
countermarched. On the 9th of July, the advance lines of the Confederate
force came to the banks of the Monocacy, where they found General Lew
Wallace posted, with eight thousand men, half of Early's numbers, on the
eastern side of that stream, to contest the approach of the Southern
troops. The battle was brief but bloody; the Confederates, crossing the stream and
climbing its slippery banks, hurled their lines of gray against the
compact ranks of blue. The attack was impetuous; the repulse was stubborn. A wail of musketry rent the air and the Northern soldiers fell back to
their second position. Between the opposing forces was a narrow ravine
through which flowed a small brook. Across this stream the tide of battle
rose and fell. Its limpid current was soon crimsoned by the blood of the
dead and wounded. Wallace's columns, as did those of Early, bled, but they
stood. The result of the battle for a time hung in the balance. The retreat began, some of the troops in
order but the greater portion in confusion, and the victorious
Confederates found again an open way to Washington. Now within half a dozen miles of the city, with the dome of the Capitol in
full view, the Southern general pushed his lines so close to Fort Stevens
that he was ready to train his forty pieces of artillery upon its walls. General Augur, in command of the capital's defenses, hastily collected
what strength in men and guns he could. Heavy artillery, militia, sailors
from the navy yard, convalescents, Government employees of all kinds were
rushed to the forts around the city. General Wright, with two divisions of
the Sixth Corps, arrived from the camp at Petersburg, and Emory's division
of the Nineteenth Corps came just in time from New Orleans. This was on
July 11th, the very day on which Early appeared in front of Fort Stevens. The Confederate had determined to make an assault, but the knowledge of
the arrival of Wright and Emory caused him to change his mind. He realized
that, if unsuccessful, his whole force would be lost, and he concluded to
return. Nevertheless, he spent the 12th of July in threatening the city. In the middle of the afternoon General Wright sent out General Wheaton
with Bidwell's brigade of Getty's division, and Early's pickets and
skirmishers were driven back a mile. Pond in "The
Shenandoah Valley" thus describes the scene: "On the parapet of Fort
Stevens stood the tall form of Abraham Lincoln by the side of General
Wright, who in vain warned the eager President that his position was swept
by the bullets of sharpshooters, until an officer was shot down within
three feet of him, when he reluctantly stepped below. Sheltered from the
line of fire, Cabinet officers and a group of citizens and ladies,
breathless with excitement, watched the fortunes of the flight." Under cover of night the Confederates began to retrace their steps and
made their way to the Shenandoah, with General Wright in pursuit. As the
Confederate army was crossing that stream, at Snicker's Ferry, on the
18th, the pursuing Federals came upon them. Early turned, repulsed them,
and continued on his way to Winchester, where General Averell, from
Hunter's forces, now at Harper's Ferry, attacked them with his cavalry and
took several hundred prisoners. The Federal authorities were looking for a "man of the hour"--one whom
they might pit against the able and strategic Early. Such a one was found
in General Philip Henry Sheridan, whom some have called the "Marshal Ney
of America." He was selected by General Grant, and his instructions were
to drive the Confederates out of the Valley once for all. The middle of September found the Confederate forces centered about
Winchester, and the Union army was ten miles distant, with the Opequon
between them. At two o'clock on the morning of September 19th, the Union
camp was in motion, preparing for marching orders. At three o'clock the
forward movement was begun, and by daylight the Federal advance had driven
in the Confederate pickets. Emptying into the Opequon from the west are
two converging streams, forming a triangle with the Winchester and
Martinsburg pike as a base. The town of Winchester is situated on this road, and was therefore at the
bottom of the triangle. Before the town, the Confederate army stretched
its lines between the two streams. The Union army would have to advance
from the apex of the triangle, through a narrow ravine, shut in by thickly
wooded hills and gradually emerging into an undulating valley. At the end
of the gorge was a Confederate outwork, guarding the approach to
Winchester. Both generals had the same plan of battle in mind. Sheridan
would strike the Confederate center and right. Early was willing he should
do this, for he planned to strike the Union right, double it back, get
between Sheridan's army and the gorge, and thus cut off its retreat. It took time for the Union troops to pass through the ravine, and it was
late in the forenoon before the line of battle was formed. The attack and
defense were alike obstinate. Upon the Sixth Corps and Grover's division
of the Nineteenth Corps fell the brunt of the battle, since they were to
hold the center while the Army of West Virginia, under General Crook,
would sweep around them and turn the position of the opposing forces. The
Confederate General Ramseur, with his troops, drove back the Federal
center, held his ground for two hours, while the opposing lines were swept
by musketry and artillery from the front, and enfiladed by artillery. By this time, Russell's division of the Sixth Corps emerged from the
ravine. Forming in two lines, it marched quickly to the front. About the
same time the Confederates were also being reenforced. General Rodes
plunged into the fight, making a gallant attack and losing his life. General Gordon, with his columns of gray, swept across the summit of the
hills and through the murky clouds of smoke saw the steady advance of the
lines of blue. One of Russell's brigades struck the Confederate flank, and
the Federal line was reestablished. As the division moved forward to do
this General Russell fell, pierced through the heart by a piece of shell. The Fifth Maine battery, galloping into the field, unlimbered and with an
enfilading storm of canister aided in turning the tide. Piece by piece the
shattered Union line was picked up and reunited. Early sent the last of
his reserves into the conflict to turn the Union right. Now ensued the
fiercest fighting of the day. Regiment after regiment advanced to the wood
only to be hurled back again. Here it was that the One hundred and
fourteenth New York left its dreadful toll of men. Its position after the
battle could be told by the long, straight line of one hundred and
eighty-five of its dead and wounded. It was three o'clock in the afternoon; the hour of Early's repulse had
struck. To the right of the Union lines could be heard a mighty yell. The
Confederates seemed to redouble their fire. The shivering lightning bolts
shot through the air and the volleys of musketry increased in intensity. Then, across the shell-plowed field, came the reserves under General
Crook. Breasting the Confederate torrent of lead, which cut down nine
hundred of the reserves while crossing the open space, they rushed toward
the embattled lines of the South. At the same moment, coming out of the woods in the rear of the Federals,
were seen the men of the Nineteenth Corps under General Emory, who had for
three hours been lying in the grass awaiting their opportunity. The
Confederate bullets had been falling thick in their midst with fatal
certainty. Rushing into the contest like
madmen, they stopped at nothing. From two sides of the wood the men of
Emory and Crook charged simultaneously. The Union line overlapped the
Confederate at every point and doubled around the unprotected flanks. The
day for the Southerners was irretrievably lost. They fell back toward
Winchester in confusion. As they did so, a great uproar was heard on the
pike road. It was the Federal cavalry under General Torbert sweeping up
the road, driving the Confederate troopers before them. The surprised mass
was pressed into its own lines. The infantry was charged and many
prisoners and battle-flags captured. The sun was now sinking upon the horizon, and on the ascending <DW72>s in
the direction of the town could be seen the long, dark lines of men
following at the heels of the routed army. Along the crest of the
embattled summit galloped a force of cavalrymen, which, falling upon the
disorganized regiments of Early, aided, in the language of Sheridan, "to
send them whirling through Winchester." The Union pursuit continued until
the twilight had come and the shadows of night screened the scattered
forces of Early from the pursuing cavalrymen. The battle of Winchester, or
the Opequon, had been a bloody one--a loss of five thousand on the Federal
side, and about four thousand on the Confederate. By daylight of the following morning the victorious army was again in
pursuit. On the afternoon of that day, it caught up with the Confederates,
who now turned at bay at Fisher's Hill to resist the further approach of
their pursuers. The position selected by General Early was a strong one,
and his antagonist at once recognized it as such. The valley of the
Shenandoah at this point is about four miles wide, lying between Fisher's
Hill and Little North Mountain. General Early's line extended across the
entire valley, and he had greatly increased his already naturally strong
position. From the summit of Three Top
Mountain, his signal corps informed him of every movement of the Union
army in the valley below. General Sheridan's actions indicated a purpose
to assault the center of the Confederate line. For two days he continued
massing his regiments in that direction, at times even skirmishing for
position. General Wright pushed his men to within seven hundred yards of
the Southern battle-line. While this was going on in full view of the
Confederate general and his army, another movement was being executed
which even the vigilant signal officers on Three Top Mountain had not
observed. On the night of September 20th, the troops of General Crook were moved
into the timber on the north bank of Cedar Creek. All during the next day,
they lay concealed. That night they crossed the stream and the next
morning were again hidden by the woods and ravines. At five o'clock on the
morning of the 22d, Crook's men were nearly opposite the Confederate
center. Marching his men in perfect silence, by one o'clock he had arrived
at the left and front of the unsuspecting Early. By four o'clock he had
reached the east face of Little North Mountain, to the left and rear of
the Confederates. While the movement was being made, the main body of the
Federal army was engaging the attention of the Confederates in front. Just
before sundown, Crook's men plunged down the mountain side, from out of
the timbered cover. The Confederates were quick to see that they had been
trapped. They had been caught in a pocket and there was nothing for them
to do except to retreat or surrender. They preferred the former, which
was, according to General Gordon, "first stubborn and slow, then rapid,
then--a rout." After the battle of Fisher's Hill the pursuit still continued. The
Confederate regiments re-formed, and at times would stop and contest the
approach of the advancing cavalrymen. By the time the Union infantry would
reach the place, the retreating army would have vanished. Torbert had been
sent down Luray Valley in pursuit of the Confederate cavalry, with the
hope of scattering it and seizing New Market in time to cut off the
Confederate retreat from Fisher's Hill. But at Milford, in a narrow gorge,
General Wickham held Torbert and prevented the fulfilment of his plan; and
General Early's whole force was able to escape. Day after day this
continued until Early had taken refuge in the Blue Ridge in front of
Brown's Gap. Sheridan in the mean time
had gone into camp at Harrisonburg, and for some time the two armies lay
watching each other. The Federals were having difficulty in holding their
lines of supply. With the Valley practically given up by Early, Sheridan was anxious to
stop here. He wrote to Grant, "I think the best policy will be to let the
burning of the crops in the Valley be the end of the campaign, and let
some of this army go somewhere else." Grant's consent to this plan reached him on October 5th, and the following
day he started on his return march down the Shenandoah. His cavalry
extended across the entire valley. With the unsparing severity of war, his
men began to make a barren waste of the region. The October sky was
overcast with clouds of smoke and sheets of flame from the burning barns
and mills. As the army of Sheridan proceeded down the Valley, the undaunted cavaliers
of Early came in pursuit. His horsemen kept close to the rear of the Union
columns. On the morning of October 9th, the cavalry leader, Rosser, who
had succeeded Wickham, found himself confronted by General Custer's
division, at Tom's Brook. At the same time the Federal general, Wesley
Merritt, fell upon the cavalry of Lomax and Johnson on an adjacent road. The two Union forces were soon united and a mounted battle ensued. The
ground being level, the maneuvering of the squadrons was easy. The clink
of the sabers rang out in the morning air. The Confederate center held together, but its flanks gave way. The Federals charged along the whole front, with a momentum that forced
the Southern cavalrymen to flee from the field. They left in the hands of
the Federal troopers over three hundred prisoners, all their artillery,
except one piece, and nearly every wagon the Confederate cavalry had with
them. The Northern army continued its retrograde movement, and on the 10th
crossed to the north side of Cedar Creek. Early's army in the mean time
had taken a position at the wooded base of Fisher's Hill, four miles
away. The Sixth Corps started for Washington, but the news of Early at
Fisher's Hill led to its recall. The Union forces occupied ground that was
considered practically unassailable, especially on the left, where the
deep gorge of the Shenandoah, along whose front rose the bold Massanutten
Mountain, gave it natural protection. The movements of the Confederate army were screened by the wooded ravines
in front of Fisher's Hill, while, from the summit of the neighboring Three
Top Mountain, its officers could view, as in a panorama, the entire Union
camp. Seemingly secure, the corps of Crook on the left of the Union line
was not well protected. The keen-eyed Gordon saw the weak point in the
Union position. Ingenious plans to break it down were quickly made. Meanwhile, Sheridan was summoned to Washington to consult with Secretary
Stanton. He did not believe that Early proposed an immediate attack, and
started on the 15th, escorted by the cavalry, and leaving General Wright
in command. At Front Royal the next day word came from Wright enclosing a
message taken for the Confederate signal-flag on Three Top Mountain. It
was from Longstreet, advising Early that he would join him and crush
Sheridan. The latter sent the cavalry back to Wright, and continued on to
Washington, whence he returned at once by special train, reaching
Winchester on the evening of the 18th. Just after dark on October 18th, a part of Early's army under the command
of General John B. Gordon, with noiseless steps, moved out from their
camp, through the misty, autumn night. The men had been stripped of their
canteens, in fear that the striking of them against some object might
reveal their movements. Their path
followed along the base of the mountain--a dim and narrow trail, upon
which but one man might pass at a time. For seven miles this sinuous line
made its way through the dark gorge, crossing the Shenandoah, and at
times passing within four hundred yards of the Union pickets. It arrived at the appointed place, opposite Crook's camp on the Federal
right, an hour before the attack was to be made. In the shivering air of
the early morning, the men crouched on the river bank, waiting for the
coming of the order to move forward. At last, at five o'clock, it came. They plunged into the frosty water of the river, emerged on the other
side, marched in "double quick," and were soon sounding a reveille to the
sleeping troops of Sheridan. The minie balls whizzed and sang through the
tents. In the gray mists of the dawn the legions of the South looked like
phantom warriors, as they poured through the unmanned gaps. The
Northerners sprang to arms. Their eyes saw the flames from the Southern muskets; the men felt the
breath of the hot muzzles in their faces, while the Confederate bayonets
were at their breasts. There was a brief struggle, then panic and
disorganization. Only a quarter of an hour of this yelling and struggling,
and two-thirds of the Union army broke like a mill-dam and poured across
the fields, leaving their accouterments of war and the stiffening bodies
of their comrades. Rosser, with the cavalry, attacked Custer and assisted
Gordon. Meanwhile, during these same early morning hours, General Early had
himself advanced to Cedar Creek by a more direct route. At half-past three
o'clock his men had come in sight of the Union camp-fires. They waited
under cover for the approach of day. At the first blush of dawn and before
the charge of Gordon, Early hurled his men across the stream, swept over
the breastworks, captured the batteries and turned them upon the
unsuspecting Northerners. The Federal generals tried to stem the impending
disaster. From the east of the battlefield the solid lines of Gordon were
now driving the fugitives of Crook's corps by the mere force of momentum. Aides were darting hither and thither, trying to reassemble the crumbling
lines. The Nineteenth Corps, under Emory, tried to hold its ground; for a
time it fought alone, but after a desperate effort to hold its own, it,
too, melted away under the scorching fire. The fields to the rear of the
army were covered with wagons, ambulances, stragglers, and fleeing
soldiers. As it slowly fell to the rear it
would, at times, turn to fight. At last it found a place where it again
stood at bay. The men hastily gathered rails and constructed rude
field-works. At the same time the Confederates paused in their advance. There was scarcely any firing except for
the occasional roar of a long-range artillery gun. The Southerners seemed
willing to rest on their well-earned laurels of the morning. In the
language of the successful commander, it was "glory enough for one day." But the brilliant morning victory was about to be changed to a singular
afternoon defeat. During the morning's fight, when the Union troops were
being rapidly overwhelmed with panic, Rienzi, the beautiful jet-black
war-charger, was bearing his master, the commander of the Federal army, to
the field of disaster. Along the broad valley highway that leads from
Winchester, General Sheridan had galloped to where his embattled lines had
been reduced to a flying mob. While riding leisurely away from Winchester
about nine o'clock he had heard unmistakable thunder-peals of artillery. Realizing that a battle was on in the front, he hastened forward, soon to
be met, as he crossed Mill Creek, by the trains and men of his routed
army, coming to the rear with appalling rapidity. News from the field told him of the crushing defeat of his hitherto
invincible regiments. The road was blocked by the retreating crowds as
they pressed toward the rear. The commander was forced to take to the
fields, and as his steed, flecked with foam, bore him onward, the
disheartened refugees greeted him with cheers. Taking off his hat as he
rode, he cried, "We will go back and recover our camps." The words seemed
to inspire the demoralized soldiers. Stragglers fell into line behind him;
men turned to follow their magnetic leader back to the fight. Vaulting his horse over the low barricade of rails, he dashed to the crest
of the field. There was a flutter along the battle-line. The men from
behind their protecting wall broke into thunderous cheers. From the rear
of the soldiers there suddenly arose, as from the earth, a line of the
regimental flags, which waved recognition to their leader. Early made another assault
after one o'clock, but was easily repulsed. It was nearly four o'clock when the order for the Federal advance was
given. General Sheridan, hat in hand, rode in front of his infantry line
that his men might see him. The Confederate forces now occupied a series
of wooded crests. From out of the shadow of one of these timbered coverts,
a column of gray was emerging. The Union lines stood waiting for the
impending crash. It came in a devouring succession of volleys that
reverberated into a deep and sullen roar. The Union infantry rose as one
man and passed in among the trees. Then, suddenly,
there came a screaming, humming rush of shell, a roar of musketry mingling
with the yells of a successful charge. Again the firing ceased, except for
occasional outbursts. The Confederates had taken a new position and
reopened with a galling fire. General Sheridan dashed along the front of
his lines in personal charge of the attack. Again his men moved toward the
lines of Early's fast thinning ranks. The Union
cavalry swept in behind the fleeing troops of Early and sent, again, his
veteran army "whirling up the Valley." The battle of Cedar Creek was ended; the tumult died away. The Federal
loss had been about fifty-seven hundred; the Confederate over three
thousand. Fourteen hundred Union prisoners were sent to Richmond. Never
again would the gaunt specter of war hover over Washington. [Illustration: GENERAL JUBAL A. EARLY, THE CONFEDERATE RAIDER WHO
THREATENED WASHINGTON

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] "My bad old man," as General Lee playfully called him, was forty-eight
years of age when he made the brilliant Valley campaign of the summer of
1864, which was halted only by the superior forces of Sheridan. A West
Point graduate and a veteran of the Mexican War, Early became, after the
death of Jackson, one of Lee's most efficient subordinates. He was alert,
aggressive, resourceful. His very eccentricities, perhaps, made him all
the more successful as a commander of troops in the field. "Old Jube's"
caustic wit and austere ways made him a terror to stragglers, and who
shall say that his fluent, forcible profanity did not endear him to men
who were accustomed to like roughness of speech? [Illustration: THE CAPITOL AT WASHINGTON IN 1863

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] When the Capitol at Washington was threatened by the Confederate armies,
it was still an unfinished structure, betraying its incompleteness to
every beholder. This picture shows the derrick on the dome. It is a view
of the east front of the building and was taken on July 11, 1863. Washington society had not been wholly free from occasional "war scares"
since the withdrawal of most of the troops whose duty it had been to guard
the city. Early's approach in July, 1864, found the Nation's capital
entirely unprotected. Naturally there was a flutter throughout the
peaceable groups of non-combatants that made up the population of
Washington at that time, as well as in official circles. There were less
than seventy thousand people living in the city in 1864, a large
proportion of whom were in some way connected with the Government. [Illustration: PROTECTING LOCOMOTIVES FROM THE CONFEDERATE RAIDER

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] The United States railroad photographer, Captain A. J. Russell, labeled
this picture of 1864: "Engines stored in Washington to prevent their
falling into Rebel hands in case of a raid on Alexandria." Here they are,
almost under the shadow of the Capitol dome (which had just been
completed). This was one of the precautions taken by the authorities at
Washington, of which the general public knew little or nothing at the
time. These photographs are only now revealing official secrets recorded
fifty years ago. [Illustration: ONE OF WASHINGTON'S DEFENDERS

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. Heavy artillery like this was of comparatively little use in repulsing
such an attack as Early might be expected to make. Not only were these
guns hard to move to points of danger, but in the summer of '64 there were
no trained artillerists to man them. Big as they were, they gave Early no
occasion for alarm. [Illustration: ENTRANCE TO WASHINGTON FROM THE SOUTH--THE FAMOUS "CHAIN
BRIDGE"

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. The sentry and vedette guarding the approach to Washington suggest one
reason why Early did not make his approach to the capital from the
Virginia side of the Potomac. A chain of more than twenty forts protected
the roads to Long Bridge (shown below), and there was no way of marching
troops into the city from the south, excepting over such exposed passages. Most of the troops left for the defense of the city were on the Virginia
side. Therefore Early wisely picked out the northern outposts as the more
vulnerable. Long Bridge was closely guarded at all times, like Chain
Bridge and the other approaches, and at night the planks of its floor were
removed. [Illustration: LONG BRIDGE AND THE CAPITOL ACROSS THE BROAD POTOMAC

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] [Illustration]

INSIDE FORT TOTTEN--THREE SHIFTING SCENES IN A BIG-GUN DRILL

Constant drill at the guns went on in the defenses of Washington
throughout the war. At its close in April, 1865, there were 68 enclosed
forts and batteries, whose aggregate perimeter was thirteen miles, 807
guns and 98 mortars mounted, and emplacements for 1,120 guns, ninety-three
unarmed batteries for field-guns, 35,711 yards of rifle-trenches, and
three block-houses encircling the Northern capital. The entire extent of
front of the lines was thirty-seven miles; and thirty-two miles of
military roads, besides those previously existing in the District of
Columbia, formed the means of interior communication. In all these forts
constant preparation was made for a possible onslaught of the
Confederates, and many of the troops were trained which later went to take
part in the siege of Petersburg where the heavy artillery fought bravely
as infantry. [Illustration]

[Illustration]


[Illustration: WHERE LINCOLN WAS UNDER FIRE

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. This is Fort Stevens (originally known as Fort Massachusetts), north of
Washington, near the Soldiers' Home, where President Lincoln had his
summer residence. It was to this outpost that Early's troops advanced on
July 12, 1864. In the fighting of that day Lincoln himself stood on the
ramparts, and a surgeon who stood by his side was wounded. These works
were feebly garrisoned, and General Gordon declared in his memoirs that
when the Confederate troops reached Fort Stevens they found it untenanted. This photograph was taken after the occupation of the fort by Company F of
the Third Massachusetts Artillery. [Illustration: MEN OF THE THIRD MASSACHUSETTS HEAVY ARTILLERY IN FORT
STEVENS

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. Fort Stevens, on the north line of the defenses of Washington, bore the
brunt of the Confederate attack in the action of July 12, 1864, when Early
threatened Washington. The smooth-bore guns in its armament were two
8-inch siege-howitzers _en embrasure_, six 24-pounder siege-guns _en
embrasure_, two 24-pounder sea-coast guns _en barbette_. It was also armed
with five 30-pounder Parrott rifled guns, one 10-inch siege-mortar and one
24-pounder Coehorn mortar. Three of the platforms for siege-guns remained
vacant. [Illustration: COMPANY K, THIRD MASSACHUSETTS HEAVY ARTILLERY, IN FORT
STEVENS, 1865

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. Washington was no longer in danger when this photograph was taken, and the
company is taking its ease with small arms stacked--three rifles held
together by engaging the shanks of the bayonets. This is the usual way of
disposing of rifles when the company is temporarily dismissed for any
purpose. If the men are to leave the immediate vicinity of the stacks, a
sentinel is detailed to guard the arms. The Third Massachusetts Heavy
Artillery was organized for one year in August, 1864, and remained in the
defenses of Washington throughout their service, except for Company I,
which went to the siege of Petersburg and maintained the pontoon bridges. [Illustration: A HOUSE NEAR WASHINGTON STRUCK BY ONE OF EARLY'S SHELLS

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. The arrival of Grant's trained veterans in July, 1864, restored security
to the capital city after a week of fright. The fact that shells had been
thrown into the outskirts of the city gave the inhabitants for the first
time a realizing sense of immediate danger. This scene is the neighborhood
of Fort Stevens, on the Seventh Street road, not far from the Soldiers'
Home, where President Lincoln was spending the summer. The campaign for
his reelection had begun and the outlook for his success and that of his
party seemed at this moment as dubious as that for the conclusion of the
war. Grant had weakened his lines about Richmond in order to protect
Washington, while Lee had been able to detach Early's Corps for the
brilliant Valley Campaign, which saved his Shenandoah supplies. [Illustration: GENERAL SHERIDAN'S "WINCHESTER"

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] "Winchester" wore no such gaudy trappings when he sprang "up from the
South, at break of day" on that famous ride of October 19, 1864, which has
been immortalized in Thomas Buchanan Read's poem. The silver-mounted
saddle was presented later by admiring friends of his owner. The sleek
neck then was dark with sweat, and the quivering nostrils were flecked
with foam at the end of the twenty-mile dash that brought hope and courage
to an army and turned defeat into the overwhelming victory of Cedar Creek. Sheridan himself was as careful of his appearance as Custer was irregular
in his field dress. He was always careful of his horse, but in the field
decked him in nothing more elaborate than a plain McClellan saddle and
army blanket. [Illustration: GENERAL PHILIP H. SHERIDAN IN THE SHENANDOAH CAMPAIGN

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] Two generations of schoolboys in the Northern States have learned the
lines beginning, "Up from the south at break of day." This picture
represents Sheridan in 1864, wearing the same hat that he waved to rally
his soldiers on that famous ride from "Winchester, twenty miles away." As
he reined up his panting horse on the turnpike at Cedar Creek, he received
salutes from two future Presidents of the United States. The position on
the left of the road was held by Colonel Rutherford B. Hayes, who had
succeeded, after the rout of the Eighth Corps in the darkness of the early
morning, in rallying some fighting groups of his own brigade; while on the
right stood Major William McKinley, gallantly commanding the remnant of
his fighting regiment--the Twenty-third Ohio. FROM THE ARMY TO THE WHITE HOUSE

War-time portraits of six soldiers whose military records assisted them to
the Presidential Chair. [Illustration: Garfield in '63--(left to right) Thomas, Wiles, Tyler,
Simmons, Drillard, Ducat, Barnett, Goddard, Rosecrans, Garfield, Porter,
Bond, Thompson, Sheridan.] [Illustration: General Ulysses S. Grant, President, 1869-77.] Rutherford B. Hayes, President, 1877-81.] James A. Garfield, President, March to September,
1881.] [Illustration: Brevet Major William McKinley, President, 1897-1901.] THE INVESTMENT OF PETERSBURG


After the disastrous clash of the two armies at Cold Harbor, Grant
remained a few days in his entrenchments trying in vain to find a weak
place in Lee's lines. The combatants were now due east of Richmond, and
the Federal general realized that it would be impossible at this time to
attain the object for which he had struggled ever since he crossed the
Rapidan on the 4th of May--to turn Lee's right flank and interpose his
forces between the Army of Northern Virginia and the capital of the
Confederacy. His opponent, one of the very greatest military leaders the
Anglo-Saxon race has produced, with an army of but little more than half
the number of the Federal host, had successfully blocked the attempts to
carry out this plan in three great battles and by a remarkable maneuver on
the southern bank of the North Anna, which had forced Grant to recross the
river and which will always remain a subject of curious interest to
students of the art of war. In one month the Union army had lost fifty-five thousand men, while the
Confederate losses had been comparatively small. The cost to the North had
been too great; Lee could not be cut off from his capital, and the most
feasible project was now to join in the move which heretofore had been the
special object of General Butler and the Army of the James, and attack
Richmond itself. South of the city, at a distance of twenty-one miles, was
the town of Petersburg. Its defenses were not strong, although General
Gillmore of Butler's army had failed in an attempt to seize them on the
10th of June. Three railroads converged here and these were main arteries
of Lee's supply. He sent
General W. F. Smith, who had come to his aid at Cold Harbor with the
flower of the Army of the James, back to Bermuda Hundred by water, as he
had come, with instructions to hasten to Petersburg before Lee could get
there. Smith arrived on the 15th and was joined by Hancock with the first
troops of the Army of the Potomac to appear, but the attack was not
pressed and Beauregard who, with only two thousand men, was in desperate
straits until Lee should reach him, managed to hold the inner line of
trenches. The last of Grant's forces were across the James by midnight of June 16th,
while Lee took a more westerly and shorter route to Petersburg. The
fighting there was continued as the two armies came up, but each Union
attack was successfully repulsed. At the close of day on the 18th both
opponents were in full strength and the greatest struggle of modern times
was begun. Impregnable bastioned works began to show themselves around
Petersburg. More than thirty miles of frowning redoubts connected
extensive breastworks and were strengthened by mortar batteries and
field-works which lined the fields near the Appomattox River. It was a
vast net of fortifications, but there was no formal siege of Lee's
position, which was a new entrenched line selected by Beauregard some
distance behind the rifle-pits where he had held out at such great odds
against Hancock and Smith. Grant, as soon as the army was safely protected, started to extend his
lines on the west and south, in order to envelop the Confederate right
flank. He also bent his energies to destroying the railroads upon which
Lee depended for supplies. Attempts to do this were made without delay. On
June 22d two corps of the Union army set out for the Weldon Railroad, but
they became separated and were put to flight by A. P. Hill. The Federal
cavalry also joined in the work, but the vigilant Confederate horsemen
under W. H. F. Lee prevented any serious damage to the iron way, and by
July 2d the last of the raiders were back in the Federal lines, much the
worse for the rough treatment they had received. Now ensued some weeks of quiet during which both armies were
strengthening their fortifications. On June 25th Sheridan returned from
his cavalry raid on the Virginia Central Railroad running north from
Richmond. He had encountered Hampton and Fitzhugh Lee at Trevilian Station
on June 11th, and turned back after doing great damage to the railway. Ammunition was running short and he did not dare risk another engagement. Sheridan was destined not to remain long with the army in front of
Petersburg. Lee had detached a corps from his forces and, under Early, it
had been doing great damage in Maryland and Pennsylvania. So Grant's
cavalry leader was put at the head of an army and sent to the Shenandoah
valley to drive Early's troops from the base of their operations. Meanwhile the Federals were covertly engaged in an undertaking which was
fated to result in conspicuous failure. Some skilled miners from the upper
Schuylkill coal regions in the Forty-eighth Pennsylvania attached to the
Ninth Corps were boring a tunnel from the rear of the Union works
underneath the Confederate fortifications. Eight thousand pounds of
gunpowder were placed in lateral galleries at the end of the tunnel. At
twenty minutes to five on the morning of July 30th, the mine was exploded. A solid mass of earth and all manner of material shot two hundred feet
into the air. Three hundred human beings were buried in the debris as it
fell back into the gaping crater. The smoke had barely cleared away when
General Ledlie led his waiting troops into the vast opening. The horror of
the sight sickened the assailants, and in crowding into the pit they
became completely demoralized. In the confusion officers lost power to
reorganize, much less to control, their troops. The stunned and paralyzed Confederates were not long in recovering their
wits. Batteries opened upon the approach to the crater, and presently a
stream of fire was poured into the pit itself. General Mahone hastened up
with his Georgia and Virginia troops, and there were several desperate
charges before the Federals withdrew at Burnside's order. Grant had had
great expectations that the mine would result in his capturing Petersburg
and he was much disappointed. In order to get a part of Lee's army away
from the scene of what he hoped would be the final struggle, Hancock's
troops and a large force of cavalry had been sent north of the James, as
if a move on Richmond had been planned. In the mine fiasco on that fatal
July 30th, thirty-nine hundred men (nearly all from Burnside's corps) were
lost to the Union side. In the torrid days of mid-August Grant renewed his attacks upon the Weldon
Railroad, and General Warren was sent to capture it. He reached Globe
Tavern, about four miles from Petersburg, when he encountered General
Heth, who drove him back. Warren did not return to the Federal lines but
entrenched along the iron way. The next day he was fiercely attacked by
the Confederate force now strongly reenforced by Mahone. Mahone forced his way through the skirmish line and then
turned and fought his opponents from their rear. Another of his divisions
struck the Union right wing. In this extremity two thousand of Warren's
troops were captured and all would have been lost but for the timely
arrival of Burnside's men. Two days later the Southerners renewed the battle and now thirty cannon
poured volley after volley upon the Fifth and Ninth corps. The dashing
Mahone again came forward with his usual impetuousness, but the blue line
finally drove Lee's men back. And so the Weldon Railroad fell into the
hands of General Grant. Hancock, with the Second Corps, returned from the
north bank of the James and set to work to assist in destroying the
railway, whose loss was a hard blow to General Lee. It was not to be
expected that the latter would permit this work to continue unmolested and
on the 25th of August, A. P. Hill suddenly confronted Hancock, who
entrenched himself in haste at Ream's Station. This did not save the
Second Corps, which for the first time in its glorious career was put to
rout. Their very guns were captured and turned upon them. In the following weeks there were no actions of importance except that in
the last days of September Generals Ord and Birney, with the Army of the
James, captured Fort Harrison, on the north bank of that river, from
Generals Ewell and Anderson. The Federals were anxious to have it, since
it was an excellent vantage point from which to threaten Richmond. Meanwhile Grant was constantly extending his line to the west and by the
end of October it was very close to the South Side Railroad. On the 27th
there was a hard fight at Hatcher's Run, but the Confederates saved the
railway and the Federals returned to their entrenchments in front of
Petersburg. The active struggle now ceased, but Lee found himself each day in more
desperate straits. Sheridan had played sad havoc with such sources of
supply as existed in the rich country to the northwest. The Weldon
Railroad was gone and the South Side line was in imminent danger. Many went home for the winter on a promise
to return when the spring planting was done. Lee was loath to let them go,
but he could ill afford to maintain them, and the very life of their
families depended upon it. Those who remained at Petersburg suffered
cruelly from hunger and cold. They looked forward to the spring, although
it meant renewal of the mighty struggle. The Confederate line had been
stretched to oppose Grant's westward progress until it had become the
thinnest of screens. A man lost to Lee was almost impossible to replace,
while the bounties offered in the North kept Grant's ranks full. [Illustration: MAHONE, "THE HERO OF THE CRATER"

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] General William Mahone, C. S. A. It was through the promptness and valor
of General Mahone that the Southerners, on July 30, 1864, were enabled to
turn back upon the Federals the disaster threatened by the hidden mine. On
the morning of the explosion there were but eighteen thousand Confederates
left to hold the ten miles of lines about Petersburg. Everything seemed to
favor Grant's plans for the crushing of this force. Immediately after the
mine was sprung, a terrific cannonade was opened from one hundred and
fifty guns and mortars to drive back the Confederates from the breach,
while fifty thousand Federals stood ready to charge upon the
panic-stricken foe. But the foe was not panic-stricken long. Colonel
McMaster, of the Seventeenth South Carolina, gathered the remnants of
General Elliott's brigade and held back the Federals massing at the Crater
until General Mahone arrived at the head of three brigades. At once he
prepared to attack the Federals, who at that moment were advancing to the
left of the Crater. In his inspiring
presence it swept with such vigor that the Federals were driven back and
dared not risk another assault. At the Crater, Lee had what Grant
lacked--a man able to direct the entire engagement. [Illustration: WHAT EIGHT THOUSAND POUNDS OF POWDER DID

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] The Crater, torn by the mine within Elliott's Salient. At dawn of July 30,
1864, the fifty thousand Federal troops waiting to make a charge saw a
great mass of earth hurled skyward like a water-spout. As it spread out
into an immense cloud, scattering guns, carriages, timbers, and what were
once human beings, the front ranks broke in panic; it looked as if the
mass were descending upon their own heads. The men were quickly rallied;
across the narrow plain they charged, through the awful breach, and up the
heights beyond to gain Cemetery Ridge. But there were brave fighters on
the other side still left, and delay among the Federals enabled the
Confederates to rally and re-form in time to drive the Federals back down
the steep sides of the Crater. There, as they struggled amidst the
horrible debris, one disaster after another fell upon them. Huddled
together, the mass of men was cut to pieces by the canister poured upon
them from well-planted Confederate batteries. At last, as a forlorn hope,
the <DW52> troops were sent forward; and they, too, were hurled back into
the Crater and piled upon their white comrades. [Illustration: FORT MAHONE--"FORT DAMNATION"

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. [Illustration: RIVES' SALIENT]

[Illustration: TRAVERSES AGAINST CROSS-FIRE]

[Illustration: GRACIE'S SALIENT, AND OTHER FORTS ALONG THE TEN MILES OF
DEFENSES

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. Dotted with formidable fortifications such as these, Confederate works
stretched for ten miles around Petersburg. Fort Mahone was situated
opposite the Federal Fort Sedgwick at the point where the hostile lines
converged most closely after the battle of the Crater. Owing to the
constant cannonade which it kept up, the Federals named it Fort Damnation,
while Fort Sedgwick, which was no less active in reply, was known to the
Confederates as Fort Hell. Gracie's salient, further north on the
Confederate line, is notable as the point in front of which General John
B. Gordon's gallant troops moved to the attack on Fort Stedman, the last
desperate effort of the Confederates to break through the Federal cordon. The views of Gracie's salient show the French form of chevaux-de-frise, a
favorite protection against attack much employed by the Confederates. [Illustration: AN AFTERNOON CONCERT AT THE OFFICERS' QUARTERS, HAREWOOD
HOSPITAL, NEAR WASHINGTON

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. Hospital life for those well enough to enjoy it was far from dull. Witness
the white-clad nurse with her prim apron and hoopskirt on the right of the
photograph, and the band on the left. Most hospitals had excellent
libraries and a full supply of current newspapers and periodicals, usually
presented gratuitously. Many of the larger ones organized and maintained
bands for the amusement of the patients; they also provided lectures,
concerts, and theatrical and other entertainments. A hospital near the
front receiving cases of the most severe character might have a death-rate
as high as twelve per cent., while those farther in the rear might have a
very much lower death-rate of but six, four, or even two per cent. The
portrait accompanying shows Louisa M. Alcott, the author of "Little Men,"
"Little Women," "An Old Fashioned Girl," and the other books that have
endeared her to millions of readers. Her diary of 1862 contains this
characteristic note: "November. Decided to go to
Washington as a nurse if I could find a place. Help needed, and I love
nursing and must let out my pent-up energy in some new way." She had not
yet attained fame as a writer, but it was during this time that she wrote
for a newspaper the letters afterwards collected as "Hospital Sketches." It is due to the courtesy of Messrs. Little, Brown & Company of Boston
that the war-time portrait is here reproduced. [Illustration: LOUISA M. ALCOTT, THE AUTHOR OF "LITTLE WOMEN," AS A NURSE
IN 1862]




[Illustration: SINKING OF THE ALABAMA BY THE KEARSARGE. _Painted by Robert Hopkin._

  _Copyright, 1901, by Perrien-Keydel Co.,
  Detroit, Mich., U. S. A._]




SHERMAN'S FINAL CAMPAIGNS

    I only regarded the march from Atlanta to Savannah as a "shift of
    base," as the transfer of a strong army, which had no opponent, and
    had finished its then work, from the interior to a point on the sea
    coast, from which it could achieve other important results. I
    considered this march as a means to an end, and not as an essential
    act of war. Still, then as now, the march to the sea was generally
    regarded as something extraordinary, something anomalous, something
    out of the usual order of events; whereas, in fact, I simply moved
    from Atlanta to Savannah, as one step in the direction of Richmond, a
    movement that had to be met and defeated, or the war was necessarily
    at an end.--_General W. T. Sherman, in his "Memoirs. "_


The march to the sea, in which General William T. Sherman won undying fame
in the Civil War, is one of the greatest pageants in the world's
warfare--as fearful in its destruction as it is historic in its import. But this was not Sherman's chief achievement; it was an easy task compared
with the great campaign between Chattanooga and Atlanta through which he
had just passed. "As a military accomplishment it was little more than a
grand picnic," declared one of his division commanders, in speaking of the
march through Georgia and the Carolinas. Almost immediately after the capture of Atlanta, Sherman, deciding to
remain there for some time and to make it a Federal military center,
ordered all the inhabitants to be removed. General Hood pronounced the act
one of ingenious cruelty, transcending any that had ever before come to
his notice in the dark history of the war. Sherman insisted that his act
was one of kindness, and that Johnston and Hood themselves had done the
same--removed families from their homes--in other places. Many of the people of Atlanta chose to go southward,
others to the north, the latter being transported free, by Sherman's
order, as far as Chattanooga. Shortly after the middle of September, Hood moved his army from Lovejoy's
Station, just south of Atlanta, to the vicinity of Macon. Here Jefferson
Davis visited the encampment, and on the 22d he made a speech to the
homesick Army of Tennessee, which, reported in the Southern newspapers,
disclosed to Sherman the new plans of the Confederate leaders. These
involved nothing less than a fresh invasion of Tennessee, which, in the
opinion of President Davis, would put Sherman in a predicament worse than
that in which Napoleon found himself at Moscow. But, forewarned, the
Federal leader prepared to thwart his antagonists. The line of the Western
and Atlantic Railroad was more closely guarded. Divisions were sent to
Rome and to Chattanooga. Thomas was ordered to Nashville, and Schofield to
Knoxville. Recruits were hastened from the North to these points, in order
that Sherman himself might not be weakened by the return of too many
troops to these places. Hood, in the hope of leading Sherman away from Atlanta, crossed the
Chattahoochee on the 1st of October, destroyed the railroad above Marietta
and sent General French against Allatoona. It was the brave defense of
this place by General John M. Corse that brought forth Sherman's famous
message, "Hold out; relief is coming," sent by his signal officers from
the heights of Kenesaw Mountain, and which thrilled the North and inspired
its poets to eulogize Corse's bravery in verse. Corse had been ordered
from Rome to Allatoona by signals from mountain to mountain, over the
heads of the Confederate troops, who occupied the valley between. Reaching
the mountain pass soon after midnight, on October 5th, Corse added his
thousand men to the nine hundred already there, and soon after daylight
the battle began. General French, in command of the Confederates, first
summoned Corse to surrender, and, receiving a defiant answer, opened with
his guns. Nearly all the day the fire was terrific from besieged and
besiegers, and the losses on both sides were very heavy. During the battle Sherman was on Kenesaw Mountain, eighteen miles away,
from which he could see the cloud of smoke and hear the faint
reverberation of the cannons' boom. When he learned by signal that Corse
was there and in command, he said, "If Corse is there, he will hold out; I
know the man." And he did hold out, and saved the stores at Allatoona, at
a loss of seven hundred of his men, he himself being among the wounded,
while French lost about eight hundred. General Hood continued to move northward to Resaca and Dalton, passing
over the same ground on which the two great armies had fought during the
spring and summer. He destroyed the railroads, burned the ties, and
twisted the rails, leaving greater havoc, if possible, in a country that
was already a wilderness of desolation. For some weeks Sherman followed
Hood in the hope that a general engagement would result. He went on to the banks of the Tennessee opposite
Florence, Alabama. His army was lightly equipped, and Sherman, with his
heavily burdened troops, was unable to catch him. Sherman halted at
Gaylesville and ordered Schofield, with the Twenty-third Corps, and
Stanley, with the Fourth Corps, to Thomas at Nashville. Sherman thereupon determined to return to Atlanta, leaving General Thomas
to meet Hood's appearance in Tennessee. It was about this time that
Sherman fully decided to march to the sea. Some time before this he had
telegraphed to Grant: "Hood... can constantly break my roads. I would
infinitely prefer to make a wreck of the road... send back all my wounded
and worthless, and, with my effective army, move through Georgia, smashing
things to the sea." Grant thought it best for Sherman to destroy Hood's
army first, but Sherman insisted that his plan would put him on the
offensive rather than the defensive. He also believed that Hood would be
forced to follow him. Grant was finally won to the view that if Hood moved
on Tennessee, Thomas would be able to check him. He had, on the 11th of
October, given permission for the march. Now, on the 2d of November, he
telegraphed Sherman at Rome: "I do not really see that you can withdraw
from where you are to follow Hood without giving up all we have gained in
territory. I say, then, go on as you propose." It was Sherman, and not
Grant or Lincoln, that conceived the great march, and while the march
itself was not seriously opposed or difficult to carry out, the conception
and purpose were masterly. Sherman moved his army by slow and easy stages back to Atlanta. He sent
the vast army stores that had collected at Atlanta, which he could not
take with him, as well as his sick and wounded, to Chattanooga, destroyed
the railroad to that place, also the machine-shops at Rome and other
places, and on November 12th, after receiving a final despatch from Thomas
and answering simply, "Despatch received--all right," the last telegraph
line was severed, and Sherman had deliberately cut himself off from all
communication with the Northern States. There is no incident like it in
the annals of war. A strange event it was, as Sherman observes in his
memoirs. "Two hostile armies marching in opposite directions, each in the
full belief that it was achieving a final and conclusive result in a great
war." For the next two days all was astir in Atlanta. The great depot,
round-house, and machine-shops were destroyed. Walls were battered down;
chimneys pulled over; machinery smashed to pieces, and boilers punched
full of holes. Heaps of rubbish covered the spots where these fine
buildings had stood, and on the night of November 15th the vast debris was
set on fire. The torch was also applied to many places in the business
part of the city, in defiance of the strict orders of Captain Poe, who
had the work of destruction in charge. The court-house and a large part of
the dwellings escaped the flames. Preparations for the great march were made with extreme care. Defective
wagons and horses were discarded; the number of heavy guns to be carried
along was sixty-five, the remainder having been sent to Chattanooga. The
marching army numbered about sixty thousand, five thousand of whom
belonged to the cavalry and eighteen hundred to the artillery. The army
was divided into two immense wings, the Right, the Army of the Tennessee,
commanded by General O. O. Howard, and consisting of the Fifteenth and
Seventeenth corps, and the Left, the Army of Georgia, by General Henry W.
Slocum, composed the Fourteenth and Twentieth corps. There were twenty-five hundred wagons, each drawn by
six mules; six hundred ambulances, with two horses each, while the heavy
guns, caissons, and forges were each drawn by eight horses. A twenty days'
supply of bread, forty of coffee, sugar, and salt was carried with the
army, and a large herd of cattle was driven on foot. In Sherman's general instructions it was provided that the army should
march by four roads as nearly parallel as possible, except the cavalry,
which remained under the direct control of the general commanding. The
army was directed "to forage liberally on the country," but, except along
the roadside, this was to be done by organized foraging parties appointed
by the brigade commanders. Orders were issued forbidding soldiers to enter
private dwellings or to commit any trespass. The corps commanders were
given the option of destroying mills, cotton-gins, and the like, and where
the army was molested in its march by the burning of bridges, obstructing
the roads, and so forth, the devastation should be made "more or less
relentless, according to the measure of such hostility." The cavalry and
artillery and the foraging parties were permitted to take horses, mules,
and wagons from the inhabitants without limit, except that they were to
discriminate in favor of the poor. It was a remarkable military
undertaking, in which it was intended to remove restrictions only to a
sufficient extent to meet the requirements of the march. The cavalry was
commanded by General Judson Kilpatrick, who, after receiving a severe
wound at Resaca, in May, had gone to his home on the banks of the Hudson,
in New York, to recuperate, and, against the advice of his physician, had
joined the army again at Atlanta. On November 15th, most of the great army was started on its march, Sherman
himself riding out from the city next morning. As he rode near the spot
where General McPherson had fallen, he paused and looked back at the
receding city with its smoking ruins, its blackened walls, and its lonely,
tenantless houses. The vision of the desperate battles, of the hope and
fear of the past few months, rose before him, as he tells us, "like the
memory of a dream." The day was as perfect as Nature ever gives. They sang and shouted and waved their banners in the
autumn breeze. Most of them supposed they were going directly toward
Richmond, nearly a thousand miles away. As Sherman rode past them they
would call out, "Uncle Billy, I guess Grant is waiting for us at
Richmond." Only the commanders of the wings and Kilpatrick were entrusted
with the secret of Sherman's intentions. But even Sherman was not fully
decided as to his objective--Savannah, Georgia, or Port Royal, South
Carolina--until well on the march. There was one certainty, however--he was fully decided to keep the
Confederates in suspense as to his intentions. To do this the more
effectually he divided his army at the start, Howard leading his wing to
Gordon by way of McDonough as if to threaten Macon, while Slocum proceeded
to Covington and Madison, with Milledgeville as his goal. Both were
secretly instructed to halt, seven days after starting, at Gordon and
Milledgeville, the latter the capital of Georgia, about a hundred miles to
the southeast. General Hood and General Beauregard, who had come from the East to assist
him, were in Tennessee, and it was some days after Sherman had left
Atlanta that they heard of his movements. They realized that to follow him
would now be futile. He was nearly three hundred miles away, and not only
were the railroads destroyed, but a large part of the intervening country
was utterly laid waste and incapable of supporting an army. The
Confederates thereupon turned their attention to Thomas, who was also in
Tennessee, and was the barrier between Hood and the Northern States. General Sherman accompanied first one corps of his army and then another. The first few days he spent with Davis' corps of Slocum's wing. When they
reached Covington, the <DW64>s met the troops in great numbers, shouting
and thanking the Lord that "deliverance" had come at last. As Sherman rode
along the streets they would gather around his horse and exhibit every
evidence of adoration. The foraging parties consisted of companies of fifty men. Their route for
the day in which they obtained supplies was usually parallel to that of
the army, five or six miles from it. They would start out before daylight
in the morning, many of them on foot; but when they rejoined the column in
the evening they were no longer afoot. They were astride mules, horses, in
family carriages, farm wagons, and mule carts, which they packed with
hams, bacon, vegetables, chickens, ducks, and every imaginable product of
a Southern farm that could be useful to an army. In the general orders, Sherman had forbidden the soldiers to enter private
houses; but the order was not strictly adhered to, as many Southern people
have since testified. Sherman declares in his memoirs that these acts of
pillage and violence were exceptional and incidental. On one occasion
Sherman saw a man with a ham on his musket, a jug of molasses under his
arm, and a big piece of honey in his hand. As the man saw that he was
observed by the commander, he quoted audibly to a comrade, from the
general order, "forage liberally on the country." But the general reproved
him and explained that foraging must be carried on only by regularly
designated parties. It is a part of military history that Sherman's sole purpose was to weaken
the Confederacy by recognized means of honorable warfare; but it cannot be
denied that there were a great many instances, unknown to him,
undoubtedly, of cowardly hold-ups of the helpless inhabitants, or
ransacking of private boxes and drawers in search of jewelry and other
family treasure. This is one of the misfortunes of war--one of war's
injustices. Such practices always exist even under the most rigid
discipline in great armies, and the jubilation of this march was such that
human nature asserted itself in the license of warfare more than on most
other occasions. General Washington met with similar situations in the
American Revolution. The practice is never confined to either army in
warfare. Opposed to Sherman were Wheeler's cavalry, and a large portion of the
Georgia State troops which were turned over by General G. W. Smith to
General Howell Cobb. Kilpatrick and his horsemen, proceeding toward Macon,
were confronted by Wheeler and Cobb, but the Federal troopers drove them
back into the town. However, they issued forth again, and on November 21st
there was a sharp engagement with Kilpatrick at Griswoldville. The
following day the Confederates were definitely checked and retreated. The night of November 22d, Sherman spent in the home of General Cobb, who
had been a member of the United States Congress and of Buchanan's Cabinet. Thousands of soldiers encamped that night on Cobb's plantation, using his
fences for camp-fire fuel. By Sherman's order, everything on the
plantation movable or destructible was carried away next day, or
destroyed. By the next night both corps of the Left Wing were at Milledgeville, and
on the 24th started for Sandersville. Howard's wing was at Gordon, and it
left there on the day that Slocum moved from Milledgeville for Irwin's
Crossroads. A hundred miles below Milledgeville was a place called Millen,
and here were many Federal prisoners which Sherman greatly desired to
release. With this in view he sent Kilpatrick toward Augusta to give the
impression that the army was marching thither, lest the Confederates
should remove the prisoners from Millen. Kilpatrick had reached Waynesboro
when he learned that the prisoners had been taken away. Here he again
encountered the Confederate cavalry under General Wheeler. A sharp fight
ensued and Kilpatrick drove Wheeler through the town toward Augusta. As
there was no further need of making a feint on Augusta, Kilpatrick turned
back toward the Left Wing. Wheeler quickly followed and at Thomas' Station
nearly surrounded him, but Kilpatrick cut his way out. Wheeler still
pressed on and Kilpatrick chose a good position at Buck Head Creek,
dismounted, and threw up breastworks. Wheeler attacked desperately, but
was repulsed, and Kilpatrick, after being reenforced by a brigade from
Davis' corps, joined the Left Wing at Louisville. On the whole, the great march was but little disturbed by the
Confederates. The Georgia militia, probably ten thousand in all, did what
they could to defend their homes and their firesides; but their endeavors
were futile against the vast hosts that were sweeping through the country. In the skirmishes that took place between Atlanta and the sea the militia
was soon brushed aside. Even their destroying of bridges and supplies in
front of the invading army checked its progress but for a moment, as it
was prepared for every such emergency. Wheeler, with his cavalry, caused
more trouble, and engaged Kilpatrick's attention a large part of the time. But even he did not seriously <DW44> the irresistible progress of the
legions of the North. The great army kept on its way by various routes, covering about fifteen
miles a day, and leaving a swath of destruction, from forty to sixty miles
wide, in its wake. Among the details attendant upon the march to the sea
was that of scientifically destroying the railroads that traversed the
region. Battalions of engineers had received special instruction in the
art, together with the necessary implements to facilitate rapid work. But
the infantry soon entered this service, too, and it was a common sight to
see a thousand soldiers in blue standing beside a stretch of railway, and,
when commanded, bend as one man and grasp the rail, and at a second
command to raise in unison, which brought a thousand railroad ties up on
end. Then the men fell upon them, ripping rail and tie apart, the rails to
be heated to a white heat and bent in fantastic shapes about some
convenient tree or other upright column, the ties being used as the fuel
with which to make the fires. All public buildings that might have a
military use were burned, together with a great number of private
dwellings and barns, some by accident, others wantonly. This fertile and
prosperous region, after the army had passed, was a scene of ruin and
desolation. As the army progressed, throngs of escaped slaves followed in its trail,
"from the baby in arms to the old <DW64> hobbling painfully along," says
General Howard, "<DW64>s of all sizes, in all sorts of patched costumes,
with carts and broken-down horses and mules to match." Many of the old
<DW64>s found it impossible to keep pace with the army for many days, and
having abandoned their homes and masters who could have cared for them,
they were left to die of hunger and exposure in that naked land. After the Ogeechee River was crossed, the character of the country was
greatly changed from that of central Georgia. No longer were there fertile
farms, laden with their Southern harvests of corn and vegetables, but
rather rice plantations and great pine forests, the solemn stillness of
which was broken by the tread of thousands of troops, the rumbling of
wagon-trains, and by the shouts and music of the marching men and of the
motley crowd of <DW64>s that followed. Day by day Sherman issued orders for the progress of the wings, but on
December 2d they contained the decisive words, "Savannah." What a tempting
prize was this fine Southern city, and how the Northern commander would
add to his laurels could he effect its capture! The memories clinging
about the historic old town, with its beautiful parks and its
magnolia-lined streets, are part of the inheritance of not only the South,
but of all America. Here Oglethorpe had bartered with the wild men of the
forest, and here, in the days of the Revolution, Count Pulaski and
Sergeant Jasper had given up their lives in the cause of liberty. Sherman had partially invested the city before the middle of December; but
it was well fortified and he refrained from assault. General Hardee, sent
by Hood from Tennessee, had command of the defenses, with about eighteen
thousand men. And there was Fort McAllister on the Ogeechee, protecting
the city on the south. But this obstruction to the Federals was soon
removed. General Hazen's division of the Fifteenth Corps was sent to
capture the fort. At five o'clock in the afternoon of the 13th Hazen's men
rushed through a shower of grape, over abatis and hidden torpedoes, scaled
the parapet and captured the garrison. That night Sherman boarded the
_Dandelion_, a Union vessel, in the river, and sent a message to the
outside world, the first since he had left Atlanta. Henceforth there was communication between the army and the Federal
squadron, under the command of Admiral Dahlgren. Among the vessels that
came up the river there was one that was received with great enthusiasm by
the soldiers. It brought mail, tons of it, for Sherman's army, the
accumulation of two months. One can imagine the eagerness with which
these war-stained veterans opened the longed-for letters and sought the
answer to the ever-recurring question, "How are things at home?" Sherman had set his heart on capturing Savannah; but, on December 15th, he
received a letter from Grant which greatly disturbed him. Grant ordered
him to leave his artillery and cavalry, with infantry enough to support
them, and with the remainder of his army to come by sea to Virginia and
join the forces before Richmond. Sherman prepared to obey, but hoped that
he would be able to capture the city before the transports would be ready
to carry him northward. He first called on Hardee to surrender the city, with a threat of
bombardment. Sherman hesitated to open with his guns
because of the bloodshed it would occasion, and on December 21st he was
greatly relieved to discover that Hardee had decided not to defend the
city, that he had escaped with his army the night before, by the one road
that was still open to him, which led across the Savannah River into the
Carolinas. The stream had been spanned by an improvised pontoon bridge,
consisting of river-boats, with planks from city wharves for flooring and
with old car-wheels for anchors. Sherman immediately took possession of
the city, and on December 22d he sent to President Lincoln this message:
"I beg to present to you, as a Christmas gift, the city of Savannah, with
one hundred and fifty heavy guns and plenty of ammunition, and also about
twenty-five thousand bales of cotton." As a matter of fact, over two
hundred and fifty guns were captured, and thirty-one thousand bales of
cotton. Events in the West now changed Grant's views as to Sherman's joining him
immediately in Virginia. On the 16th of December, General Thomas
accomplished the defeat and utter rout of Hood's army at Nashville. In
addition, it was found that, owing to lack of transports, it would take at
least two months to transfer Sherman's whole army by sea. Therefore, it
was decided that Sherman should march through the Carolinas, destroying
the railroads in both States as he went. A little more than a month
Sherman remained in Savannah. Then he began another great march, compared
with which, as Sherman himself declared, the march to the sea was as
child's play. The size of his army on leaving Savannah was practically the
same as when he left Atlanta--sixty thousand. It was divided into two
wings, under the same commanders, Howard and Slocum, and was to be
governed by the same rules. The
march from Savannah averaged ten miles a day, which, in view of the
conditions, was a very high average. The weather in the early part of the
journey was exceedingly wet and the roads were well-nigh impassable. Where
they were not actually under water the mud rendered them impassable until
corduroyed. Moreover, the troops had to wade streams, to drag themselves
through swamps and quagmires, and to remove great trees that had been
felled across their pathway. The city of Savannah was left under the control of General J. G. Foster,
and the Left Wing of Sherman's army under Slocum moved up the Savannah
River, accompanied by Kilpatrick, and crossed it at Sister's Ferry. The
river was overflowing its banks and the crossing, by means of a pontoon
bridge, was effected with the greatest difficulty. The Right Wing, under
Howard, embarked for Beaufort, South Carolina, and moved thence to
Pocotaligo, near the Broad River, whither Sherman had preceded it, and the
great march northward was fairly begun by February 1, 1865. Sherman had given out the word that he expected to go to Charleston or
Augusta, his purpose being to deceive the Confederates, since he had made
up his mind to march straight to Columbia, the capital of South Carolina. The two wings of the army were soon united and they continued their great
march from one end of the State of South Carolina to the other. The men
felt less restraint in devastating the country and despoiling the people
than they had felt in Georgia. The reason for this, given by Sherman and
others, was that there was a feeling of bitterness against South Carolina
as against no other State. It was this State that had led the procession
of seceding States and that had fired on Fort Sumter and brought on the
great war. No doubt this feeling, which pervaded the army, will account in
part for the reckless dealing with the inhabitants by the Federal
soldiery. The superior officers, however, made a sincere effort to
restrain lawlessness. On February 17th, Sherman entered Columbia, the mayor having come out and
surrendered the city. The Fifteenth Corps marched through the city and out
on the Camden road, the remainder of the army not having come within two
miles of the city. The conflagration
spread and ere the coming of the morning the best part of the city had
been laid in ashes. Before Sherman left Columbia he destroyed the machine-shops and everything
else which might aid the Confederacy. He left with the mayor one hundred
stand of arms with which to keep order, and five hundred head of cattle
for the destitute. As Columbia was approached by the Federals, the occupation of Charleston
by the Confederates became more and more untenable. In vain had the
governor of South Carolina pleaded with President Davis to reenforce
General Hardee, who occupied the city. Hardee thereupon evacuated the
historic old city--much of which was burned, whether by design or accident
is not known--and its defenses, including Fort Sumter, the bombardment of
which, nearly four years before, had precipitated the mighty conflict,
were occupied by Colonel Bennett, who came over from Morris Island. On March 11th, Sherman reached Fayetteville, North Carolina, where he
destroyed a fine arsenal. Hitherto, Sherman's march, except for the
annoyance of Wheeler's cavalry, had been but slightly impeded by the
Confederates. General Joseph B.
Johnston, his old foe of Resaca and Kenesaw Mountain, had been recalled
and was now in command of the troops in the Carolinas. No longer would the
streams and the swamps furnish the only resistance to the progress of the
Union army. The first engagement came at Averysboro on March 16th. General Hardee,
having taken a strong position, made a determined stand; but a division of
Slocum's wing, aided by Kilpatrick, soon put him to flight, with the loss
of several guns and over two hundred prisoners. The battle of Bentonville, which took place three days after that of
Averysboro, was more serious. Johnston had placed his whole army, probably
thirty-five thousand men, in the form of a V, the sides embracing the
village of Bentonville. Slocum engaged the Confederates while Howard was
hurried to the scene. On two days, the 19th and 20th of March, Sherman's
army fought its last battle in the Civil War. But Johnston, after making
several attacks, resulting in considerable losses on both sides, withdrew
his army during the night, and the Union army moved to Goldsboro. The
losses at Bentonville were: Federal, 1,527; Confederate, 2,606. At Goldsboro the Union army was reenforced by its junction with Schofield,
who had come out of the West with over twenty-two thousand men from the
army of Thomas in Tennessee. As to the relative
importance of the second and third, Sherman declares in his memoirs, he
would place that from Atlanta to the sea at one, and that from Savannah
through the Carolinas at ten. Leaving his army in charge of Schofield, Sherman went to City Point, in
Virginia, where he had a conference with General Grant and President
Lincoln, and plans for the final campaign were definitely arranged. He
returned to Goldsboro late in March, and, pursuing Johnston, received,
finally, on April 26th the surrender of his army. [Illustration: BEFORE THE MARCH TO THE SEA

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] These two photographs of General Sherman were taken in 1864--the year that
made him an international figure, before his march to the sea which
electrified the civilized world, and exposed once for all the crippled
condition of the Confederacy. After that autumn expedition, the problem of
the Union generals was merely to contend with detached armies, no longer
with the combined States of the Confederacy. The latter had no means of
extending further support to the dwindling troops in the field. Sherman
was the chief Union exponent of the tactical gift that makes marches count
as much as fighting. In the early part of 1864 he made his famous raid
across Mississippi from Jackson to Meridian and back again, destroying the
railroads, Confederate stores, and other property, and desolating the
country along the line of march. In May he set out from Chattanooga for
the invasion of Georgia. For his success in this campaign he was
appointed, on August 12th, a major-general in the regular army. On
November 12th, he started with the pick of his men on his march to the
sea. After the capture of Savannah, December 21st, Sherman's fame was
secure; yet he was one of the most heartily execrated leaders of the war. There is a hint of a smile in the right-hand picture. The left-hand
portrait reveals all the sternness and determination of a leader
surrounded by dangers, about to penetrate an enemy's country against the
advice of accepted military authorities. [Illustration: THE ATLANTA BANK BEFORE THE MARCH TO THE SEA

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] As this photograph was taken, the wagons stood in the street of Atlanta
ready to accompany the Federals in their impending march to the sea. The
most interesting thing is the bank building on the corner, completely
destroyed, although around it stand the stores of merchants entirely
untouched. Evidently there had been here faithful execution of Sherman's
orders to his engineers--to destroy all buildings and property of a public
nature, such as factories, foundries, railroad stations, and the like; but
to protect as far as possible strictly private dwellings and enterprises. Those of a later generation who witnessed the growth of Atlanta within
less than half a century after this photograph was taken, and saw tall
office-buildings and streets humming with industry around the location in
this photograph, will find in it an added fascination. [Illustration: "TUNING UP"--A DAILY DRILL IN THE CAPTURED FORT

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. Here Sherman's men are seen at daily drill in Atlanta. This photograph has
an interest beyond most war pictures, for it gives a clear idea of the
soldierly bearing of the men that were to march to the sea. There was an
easy carelessness in their appearance copied from their great commander,
but they were never allowed to become slouchy. Sherman was the antithesis
of a martinet, but he had, in the Atlanta campaign, molded his army into
the "mobile machine" that he desired it to be, and he was anxious to keep
the men up to this high pitch of efficiency for the performance of still
greater deeds. No better disciplined army existed in the world at the time
Sherman's "<DW15>s" set out for the sea. [Illustration: CUTTING LOOSE FROM THE BASE, NOVEMBER 12th

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. "On the 12th of November the railroad and telegraph communications with
the rear were broken and the army stood detached from all friends,
dependent on its own resources and supplies," writes Sherman. Meanwhile
all detachments were marching rapidly to Atlanta with orders to break up
the railroad en route and "generally to so damage the country as to make
it untenable to the enemy." Sherman, in
a home letter written from Grand Gulf, Mississippi, May 6, 1863, stated
clearly his views regarding the destruction of property. Speaking of the
wanton havoc wrought on a fine plantation in the path of the army, he
added: "It is done, of course, by the accursed stragglers who won't fight
but hang behind and disgrace our cause and country. Bowie had fled,
leaving everything on the approach of our troops. Of course, devastation
marked the whole path of the army, and I know all the principal officers
detest the infamous practice as much as I do. Of course, I expect and do
take corn, bacon, ham, mules, and everything to support an army, and don't
object much to the using of fences for firewood, but this universal
burning and wanton destruction of private property is not justified in
war." [Illustration: THE BUSTLE OF DEPARTURE FROM ATLANTA

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] Sherman's men worked like beavers during their last few days in Atlanta. There was no time to be lost; the army was gotten under way with that
precision which marked all Sherman's movements. In the upper picture,
finishing touches are being put to the railroad, and in the lower is seen
the short work that was made of such public buildings as might be of the
slightest use in case the Confederates should recapture the town. As far
back as Chattanooga, while plans for the Atlanta campaign were being
formed, Sherman had been revolving a subsequent march to the sea in case
he was successful. He had not then made up his mind whether it should be
in the direction of Mobile or Savannah, but his Meridian campaign, in
Mississippi, had convinced him that the march was entirely feasible, and
gradually he worked out in his mind its masterly details. At seven in the
morning on November 16th, Sherman rode out along the Decatur road, passed
his marching troops, and near the spot where his beloved McPherson had
fallen, paused for a last look at the city. "Behind us," he says, "lay
Atlanta, smouldering and in ruins, the black smoke rising high in air and
hanging like a pall over the ruined city." All about could be seen the
glistening gun-barrels and white-topped wagons, "and the men marching
steadily and rapidly with a cheery look and swinging pace." Some
regimental band struck up "John Brown," and the thousands of voices of the
vast army joined with a mighty chorus in song. A feeling of exhilaration
pervaded the troops. This marching into the unknown held for them the
allurement of adventure, as none but Sherman knew their destination. But
as he worked his way past them on the road, many a group called out,
"Uncle Billy, I guess Grant is waiting for us at Richmond." The
devil-may-care spirit of the troops brought to Sherman's mind grave
thoughts of his own responsibility. He knew that success would be regarded
as a matter of course, but should he fail the march would be set down as
"the wild adventure of a crazy fool." He had no intention of marching
directly to Richmond, but from the first his objective was the seacoast,
at Savannah or Port Royal, or even Pensacola, Florida. [Illustration: RUINS IN ATLANTA]


[Illustration: THE GUNS THAT SHERMAN TOOK ALONG

COPYRIGHT, 1911, REVIEW OF REVIEWS CO.] In Hood's hasty evacuation of Atlanta many of his guns were left behind. These 12-pounder Napoleon bronze field-pieces have been gathered by the
Federals from the abandoned fortifications, which had been equipped
entirely with field artillery, such as these. It was an extremely useful
capture for Sherman's army, whose supply of artillery had been somewhat
limited during the siege, and still further reduced by the necessity to
fortify Atlanta. On the march to the sea Sherman took with him only
sixty-five field-pieces. The <DW64> refugees in the lower picture recall an
embarrassment of the march to the sea. "<DW64>s of all sizes" flocked in
the army's path and stayed there, a picturesque procession, holding
tightly to the skirts of the army which they believed had come for the
sole purpose of setting them free. The cavalcade of <DW64>s soon became so
numerous that Sherman became anxious for his army's sustenance, and
finding an old gray-haired black at Covington, Sherman explained to him
carefully that if the <DW64>s continued to swarm after the army it would
fail in its purpose and they would not get their freedom. Sherman believed
that the old man spread this news to the slaves along the line of march,
and in part saved the army from being overwhelmed by the contrabands. [Illustration: <DW64>s FLOCKING IN THE ARMY'S PATH

COPYRIGHT, 1911, PATRIOT PUB. [Illustration: THE DEFENDER OF SAVANNAH]

The task of General Hardee in defending Savannah was one of peculiar
difficulty. He had only eighteen thousand men, and he was uncertain where
Sherman would strike. Some supposed that Sherman would move at once upon
Charleston, but Hardee argued that the Union army would have to establish
a new base of supplies on the seacoast before attempting to cross the
numerous deep rivers and swamps of South Carolina. Hardee's task therefore
was to hold Savannah just as long as possible, and then to withdraw
northward to unite with the troops which General Bragg was assembling, and
with the detachments scattered at this time over the Carol}